Wheteabouts Unknown 
A’ Mountainjoumeal 


ALSO BY ALAN WATTS 


The Spirit of Zen 
The Legacy of Asia and Western Man 
The Meaning of Happiness 
The Theologia Mystica of St. Dionysius 
Behold the Spirit 
Zen 
Easter—Its Story and Meaning 
The Supreme Identity 
The Wisdom of Insecurity 
Myth and Ritual in Christianity 
The Way of Liberation in Zen Buddhism 
The Way of Zen 
Nature, Man, and Woman 
This Is It 
Psychotherapy East and West 
The Joyous Cosmology 
The Two Hands of God 
Beyond Theology: The Art of Godmanship 
Nonsense 
The Book: On the Taboo Against Knowing 
Who You Are 
Does It Matter? Essays on Man’s Relation to Materiality 
Erotic Spirituality 
In My Own Way: An Autobiography 
The Art of Contemplation 


Cloud-hidden, 
Whereabouts Unknown 


A Mountain Journal 


ALAN WATTS 


VINTAGE BOOKS 
A Division of Random House, New York 


VINTAGE BOOKS EDITION, MARCH 1974 
Copyright © 1968, 1970, 1971, 1973 by Alan Watts 


All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright 
Conventions. Published in the United States by Random House, Inc., New York, 
and simultaneously in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. 
Originally published by Pantheon Books, a division of Random House, Inc., in 
1973. 


Portions of this book were first published in Mademoiselle, Playboy, and Earth. 
Grateful acknowledgment is made to the following: 


Lin Yutang, for permission to use his translation of Chia Tao’s poem “Searching 
for the Hermit in Vain,” from My Country and My People, published by John 
Day Company. Miss Dorothy E. Collins and Dodd, Mead & Company, for 
permission to quote from “The Song of Quoodle,” taken from The Collected 
Poems of G. K. Chesterton. (Published in Great Britain by Methuen and 
Company.) 


Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 


Watts, Alan Wilson, 1915- 
Cloud-hidden, whereabouts unknown. 


1. Religion—Addresses, essays, lectures. 
I. Title. 


[BL50.W32 1974] 200’.1 73-13747 
eISBN: 978-0-307-80786-1 


v3.1 


To Sandy Jacobs 


SEARCHING FOR THE HERMIT 
IN VAIN 


I asked the boy beneath the pines. 
He said, “The master’s gone alone 
Herb-picking somewhere on the mount, 
Cloud-hidden, whereabouts unknown.” 


Chia Tao (777-841) 
Trans. Lin Yutang 


Preface 


The poem on the preceding page, by Chia Tao of the T’ang 
dynasty, suits my mood and provides the title of this book. I live 
between two places—a ferryboat on the Sausalito waterfront and 
a lonely cottage in the foothills of Mount Tamalpais, just north of 
San Francisco; a mountain sacred to the Indians which wraps 
itself in an atmosphere of strange beneficence. During the past 
three years I have done almost all my writing in this cottage. This 
includes my recently published autobiography, In My Own Way, 
and a considerable number of short pieces written for my Journal 
(published for subscribers), and for such magazines as Playboy 
and Earth. Most of the latter are assembled here in the form of a 
journal with dated entries, though they are ordered by content 
rather than chronology because my thinking spirals: it does not 
go ahead in a straight line. 

Some critics will therefore call me repetitious, but I have 
found, in the process of teaching, that most students do not 
understand one’s ideas unless they are repeated—under differing 
analogies or in varying forms of words, as a musician constructs 
variations on a theme. Besides what I mean by understanding is 
not simply verbal comprehension: it is feeling it in your bones. 

The form of this book is therefore that of a “mountain journal” 
concerned with the philosophy of nature, ecology, aesthetics, 
religion, and metaphysics, and the entries are grouped more or 
less according to those topics. The dates will allow those who are 
chronologically oriented to rearrange them in their mind’s eye. 


ALAN WATTS 


Druid Heights, California 
Spring 1972 


Contents 


Cover 
Other Books by This Author 
Title Page 


Copyright 
Preface 


The Water 

And the Mountain 

The Watercourse Way 
Flowing with the Tao 

The Future of Ecstasy 

The Reality of Reincarnation 
Implications of Karma 
Spectrum of Love 

Black and/or White 

Consider the Lilies 

What on Earth Are We Doing? 
Incantation of the Stars 

Was Jesus a Freak? 

What Shall We Do with the Church? 
Do You Smell? 

On the Tantra 

The Art of Contemplation 

The Zero-One Amazement 
Protogenesis 


About the Author 


The Water 


April 1970 


Ever since I can remember anything at all, the light, the smell, 
the sound, and motion of the sea have been pure magic. Even the 
mere intimation of its presence—gulls flying a little way inland, 
the quality of light in the sky beyond hills which screen it from 
view, the lowing of foghorns in the night. If ever I have to get 
away from it all, and in the words of the Chinese poet “wash all 
the wrongs of life from my pores,” there is simply nothing better 
than to climb out onto a rock, and sit for hours with nothing in 
sight but sea and sky. Although the rhythm of the waves beats a 
kind of time, it is not clock or calendar time. It has no urgency. It 
happens to be timeless time. I know that I am listening to a 
rhythm which has been just the same for millions of years, and it 
takes me out of a world of relentlessly ticking clocks. Clocks for 
some reason or other always seem to be marching, and, as with 
armies, marching is never to anything but doom. But in the 
motion of waves there is no marching rhythm. It harmonizes with 
our very breathing. It does not count our days. Its pulse is not in 
the stingy spirit of measuring, of marking out how much still 
remains. It is the breathing of eternity, like the God Brahma of 
Indian mythology inhaling and exhaling, manifesting and 
dissolving the worlds, forever. As a mere conception this might 
sound appallingly monotonous, until you come to listen to the 
breaking and washing of waves. 

Thus, I have come to live right on the edge of the water. I have 
a studio, library, a place for writing on an old ferryboat tied up 
on the waterfront of Sausalito, north of San Francisco. I suppose 
this place is the nearest thing in America to a Mediterranean 


fishing village. Steep hills clustered with little houses, and below 
along the rim of the bay a forest of masts rocking almost 
imperceptibly against a background of water and wooded 
promontories. In some ways this is a rather messy waterfront, not 
just piers and boats, but junkyards, industrial buildings, and all 
the inevitable “litter-ature” of our culture. But somehow the land- 
and-seascape absorbs and pacifies the mess. Sheds and shacks 
thrown together out of old timbers and plywood, heaps of disused 
lumber, rusted machinery, and rotting hulls—all of this is 
transformed in the beneficent presence of the sea. 

Perhaps it is the quality of the light, especially early in the 
morning and towards evening, when the distinction between sky 
and water becomes uncertain, when the whole of space becomes 
opalescent in a sort of pearly luminous grey, and when the rising 
or setting moon is straw yellow. In this light all the rambling 
mess of sheds and junkyards is magical, blessed with the patterns 
of masts and ropes and boats at anchor. It all puts me in mind of 
landfalls a long way off, and all the voyages one has dreamed of. 

I look out now across a wide space of nothing but water and 
birds ending in a line of green slopes with clumps of trees. Right 
over the edge of the boat the water contains seemingly just under 
the surface a ceaselessly moving network of reflected sunlight 
through which a school of very tiny fish passes delightfully 
uncaught. Yet only a few yards from where we are moored, tackle 
shops sell the salmon and crabs with which this particular area 
abounds. 

This is the paradox of the ocean. Sand, flying spray, pebbles 
and shells, driftwood, sparkling water, space incredibly luminous 
with cloudbanks along horizons underlying skies into which one’s 
imagination can reach without end. But under the surface of both 
sky and water there is the grim business of preying. Men and 
birds against fish, fish against fish. The tortuous process of life 
continuing by the painful transformation of one form or body into 
another. To creatures who do not anticipate and reflect 
imaginatively on this holocaust of eating and being eaten, this is 
perhaps not so terrible. But poor man! Skillful beyond all other 
animals, by being able to think in time, and abstractly knowing 
the future, he dies before he is dead. He shrinks from the shark’s 
teeth before they bite him, and he dreads the alien germ long, 
long before its banquet begins. 


At this moment I see a gull that has picked a crab from a 
tidepool. Sprawled now upon the sand, the crab shrinks from the 
walls of its shell which is resounding to the tap, tap, tap of the 
gull’s beak. Who’s that knocking at my door? 

I suppose the shell of a crab, a clam, or a mussel is the 
boundary of its universe. To put ourselves into their position, we 
would have to imagine a knocking sound louder and louder, a 
sound which doesn’t come from anywhere in particular, from 
some door, the walls, the ceiling, the floor. No, instead think of a 
knocking which comes from everywhere, beating against all the 
boundaries of space and consciousness, intruding like some 
utterly unknown dimension into our known and familiar world. 

“Let me in! Let me in! I love you so much I could eat you. I 
love you to the very core, especially the soft, juicy parts, the 
vitals most tender and alive. Surrender to this agony, and you 
will be transformed into Me. Dying to yourself you will become 
alive as Me. We shall all be changed in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye, on the morning when the last trumpet 
sounds. For behold! I am He who stands at the door and knocks.” 

There is simply no way of getting around all this. The gull can’t 
really be said to be rapacious or greedy. It’s just that his being 
alive at all is the same thing as eating crabs. Sea birds are 
transformations of fish; men are transformations of wheat, steers, 
and chickens. A love for the food is the very agony of the food. 
To object to this inseparability of pleasure and pain, life and 
death, is to object to existence. But, of course, we cannot help 
objecting when our time comes. Objecting to pain is pain. So far as 
we know, the gull and the fish don’t philosophize. They appear 
instead to enjoy life when they are eating, and hate it when being 
eaten. But they don’t reflect upon the process as a whole and say, 
“How rough to have to work so hard for a living,” or, “It’s just 
hell having to watch out all the time for those damn gulls.” I’m 
sure that in their world this is all something that just goes along 
with life like having eyes or feet or wings. 

But man, with his astonishing ability to stand aside from 
himself and think about himself—in short, to comment on life, 
man has done something which confuses his own existence down 
to its roots. For the more sensitive he is, the more he finds the 
very act of living in conflict with his moral conscience. Upon 
reflection a universe so arranged that there is no way of living 


except by destroying other lives seems to be a hideous mistake, 
not a divine but a devilish creation. Of course, there is the myth 
that once upon a time things were quite otherwise, that there was 
no death, that the lion lay down with the lamb. But that since 
then there has been a fall, a vast error which has corrupted the 
whole of nature. But all that must have been eons ago, perhaps in 
some other galaxy where the conditions of life were quite 
different. Or perhaps the ghastly mistake was just that step in 
man’s evolution which made it possible for him to reflect, to 
comment upon life as a whole. For in being able to stand aside 
from life and think about it, he also put himself outside it and 
found it alien. Perhaps thinking about the world and objecting to 
its whole principle are simply two aspects of but one activity. The 
very words suggest, do they not, that we must object to everything 
that becomes an object? But aren’t there also times when we speak 
of something that we know as a subject—the subject of this book, 
the subject I am now studying. I wonder, then, would it be possible 
to subject to life instead of objecting to it? Is this merely playing 
with words, or does it possibly mean something? 

Now, if the gulls and the fish do not philosophize, they have no 
consciousness of life being good as a whole or bad as a whole. So 
when we philosophize and pity the poor fish, that really turns out 
to be just our own problem. From its own standpoint, the world 
of plants and animals and insects and birds does not find itself 
problematic at all. There isn’t the slightest evidence to suggest 
such dis-ease. On the contrary, I incline to feel that all these 
creatures really “swing” or “groove.” They go on living right up 
to the very moment when the game is no longer worth the 
candle. I’m quite sure that they don’t lecture each other about 
their duties or worry about where they are going after they die. 

Isn’t it, then, an enormous relief for us men to see that the 
plant and animal world is not a problem to itself, and that we are 
wasting intellectual energy in making moral judgments about it? 
But, of course, we can’t return to the unreflective consciousness 
of the animal world without becoming monstrous in a way that 
animals are not. To be human is precisely to have that extra 
circuit of consciousness which enables us to know that we know, 
and thus to take an attitude towards all that we experience. The 
mistake which we have made—and this, if anything, is the fall of 
man—is to suppose that that extra circuit, that ability to take an 


attitude toward the rest of life as a whole, is the same as actually 
standing aside and being separate from what we see. We seem to 
feel that the thing which knows that it knows is one’s essential 
self, that—in other words—our personal identity is entirely on 
the side of the commentator. We forget, because we learn to 
ignore so subtly, the larger organismic fact that self-consciousness 
is simply a subordinate part and an instrument of our whole 
being, a sort of mental counterpart of the finger-thumb 
opposition in the human hand. Now which is really you, the 
finger or the thumb? 

Observe the stages of this differentiation, the levels of 
abstraction: First, the organism from its environment, and with 
this knowledge of the environment. Second, the distinction of 
knowing knowledge from knowledge itself. But in concrete fact 
all this, like the finger-thumb opposition, is a difference which does 
not divide. The thumb is not floating in the air alongside the rest 
of the hand. At their roots both fingers and thumb are joined. 
And at our roots we are joined to the whole subject of nature. Of 
course, you might say that nature or the whole universe is 
nothing but a big abstraction. But tell me, is an orange nothing 
but an abstraction from its component molecules, skins, 
segments, fibers and fluids? 

I think that our difficulty is we have learned to feel our 
consciousness much too superficially, as if all our sensation were 
in the tips of the fingers and none in the palm. Our comments on 
life are insufficiently balanced by the clear sensation that what we 
are talking about is ourselves, and ourselves in a sense far more 
basic and real than that extra circuit which knows knowing. Are 
we misled by the fact that we move freely on the earth and are 
not rooted to it in the same way as trees to the ground or fingers 
to the hand? Were we as spatially distant from the earth as one 
atom of an orange from another, I suppose we might be 
somewhere out by the moon or Mars. Now we know that the 
atom, the molecule, the cell, or subordinate organ of any 
particular organism is what it is by virtue of its place and its 
membership in the pattern of the whole. But blood in a test tube 
rapidly ceases to be the same thing as blood in veins. In the same 
way, man must be beware (be + aware) lest in cutting himself 
off psychically from the world which he sees, and so isolating the 
subject from the object, lest in doing this he rapidly ceases to be 


man. 

So I think this is why I love the ocean. It is the most difficult 
part of nature to mess up with emblems and symptoms of man’s 
dissociated consciousness, though by no means impossible to 
nationalistic, industrial man. But the ocean is an environment in 
which the awareness of our roots can awaken, in which space so 
real because of the light and color can be seen as joining things 
instead of separating them. 

And, oh yes, I have just discovered that that knocking on the 
walls of all space and consciousness is my own heart beating. 


And the Mountain 


August 1970 


There is the water, and now there is also the mountain. (In 
Chinese the two characters for “mountain” and “water” mean 
“landscape.”) I have the use of a small one-room cottage on the 
slopes of the mountain—Tamalpais—which I can see from the 
ferryboat. It is hidden in a grove of high eucalyptus trees and 
overlooks a long valley whose far side is covered with a dense 
forest of bay, oak, and madrone so even in height that from a 
distance it looks like brush. No human dwelling is in view, and 
the principal inhabitant of the forest is a wild she-goat who has 
been there for at least nine years. Every now and then she comes 
out and dances upon the crown of an immense rock which rises 
far out of the forest. No one goes to this forest. I have been down 
to its edge, where there is a meadow, good for practicing archery, 
and I think that one of these days I will explore the forest. But 
then again I may not, for there are places which people should 
leave alone. 

In these days of overpopulation and social evils crying for 
concern it may seem wicked to withdraw from the crowd—even 
from the bohemian and hippie crowd of the Sausalito waterfront. 
But, to tell the truth, I have some—but little—faith in the 
historical idealism of “human progress.” Like the planet itself, 
human history goes round. There are dawns of hope and sunsets 
of sorrow, springs of aspiration and autumns of despair, even 
though one’s attitude can so be changed that one sees in autumn 
the beginning of a cycle whose end is spring. This is not saying, 


“To hell with people!”—as if I were somehow superior to the 
common man, a term which actually means the Man common to 
us all and thus (if I may be forgiven a pun in Sanskrit) the atman, 
our supra-individual Self. 

There are situations when one owes solitude to other people, if 
only not to bother them. But, more than this, the multitude needs 
solitaries as it needs postmen, doctors, and fishermen. They go 
out and they send, or bring, something back—even if they send 
no word and vanish finally from sight. The solitary is as necessary 
to our common sanity as wilderness, as the forest where no one 
goes, as the waterfall in a canyon which no one has ever seen or 
heard. We do not see our hearts. I do not expect to be all that 
solitary for, as a paradoxical person, I am also gregarious and 
favor the rhythm of withdrawal and return. But in the mountain I 
watch the Tao, the way of nonhuman nature (if there is really any 
such thing) and feel myself into it to discover that I was never 
outside, because nature “peoples” just as much as it “forests.” 

To realize this one must go beyond what both distinguishes and 
segregates us as human beings—our thoughts and ideas. To put it 
in a rather extreme way: We are misled when we believe that our 
ideas represent or mirror nature, because that sets us outside 
nature as mere observers. The tree does not represent the fish, 
though both use light and water. The point is rather that our 
thoughts and ideas are nature, just as much as waves on the 
ocean and clouds in the sky. The mind grows thoughts as the field 
grows grass. If I think about thoughts, as if there were some “I,” 
some thinker watching them from outside, there arises the 
infinite regression of thinking about thinking, etc., because this 
“J” is itself a thought, and thoughts, like trees, grow of 
themselves. In solitude it is easier for thoughts to leave 
themselves alone. It is, thus, a mistake to try to get rid of 
thoughts, for who will push them out? But when thoughts leave 
themselves alone the mind clears up. 


-—_ FZ 


AS SARIN a SS & = 


The Watercourse Way 


January 25, 1971 


After the rains, the mountain stream at the bottom of the valley 
can be heard all night. It is not pushed from behind, but falls with 
gravity. Heard from a distance, it sighs; close by, it burbles and 
chuckles, hisses and gurgles. Whirligigs stay in the same places 
with very slight variations of pattern, but the water goes on and 
on. 


The waters before, and the waters after, 
Now and forever flowing, follow each other. 


“Panta rhei,” said Heraclitus—everything flows, and you cannot 
step twice into the same stream. The flow of water, of wind, and 
of fire is obvious, as is also the flow of thought. The flow of earth 
and rock is less obvious, but in the long run the hard is as liquid 
as the soft. Streams and waves never stop moving, and yet they 
are at rest, and restful to hear, because they are in no hurry to 
reach any destination. Indeed, they are not going anywhere at all. 

When I stand by the stream and watch it, I am relatively still, 
and the flowing water makes a path across my memory so that I 
realize its transience in comparison with my stability. This is, of 
course, an illusion in the sense that I, too, am in flow and 
likewise have no final destination—for can anyone imagine 
finality as a form of life? My death will be the disappearance of a 
particular pattern in the water. 

Feeling all that I can possibly feel, aware of every level and 


dimension of experience, I find nothing but a streaming. If I ask 
myself what is streaming, I cannot imagine an answer even 
though I have the definite impression that “It”’—some energy, 
some basic gazoozle—is streaming in every kind of stream, 
streams of rock, streams of light, streams of air, streams of 
consciousness. This “It” is not different from the streaming and its 
patterns as clay is different from the shape of this or that 
particular vessel. It isn’t the stuff of which waves are made. There 
is simply no way of thinking or talking about It, and the 
significance of this is not so much that there is indeed some 
unthinkable and transcendental It, but that there is absolutely no 
way of standing outside It and getting hold of It. It could of 
course be myself, considered as the relatively enduring center of 
all my experiences. But if this is so, myself is beyond my reach, 
and the more I try to pin it down, the more it dissolves into the 
streaming—into various kinds of pulsing and textures of tensing 
only arbitrarily distinguishable from the sights and sounds of the 
world outside me. If this “I” should try to stop the streaming or to 
manage it all, there is only a futile state of tension without the 
intended result. 

But this particular kind of tension against the stream is 
habitual, and the frustration which it engenders is chronic. If I 
believe that I would like to break the habit, that very wish is 
another form of the same tension, and this in turn is a form of the 
basic un-get-at-ability of It. We are all lunatics trying to stick pins 
into their own points, and it is thus that our frantic efforts to set 
the world to rights and to extend our control over all happenings, 
inner and outer, are themselves the cause of most of our troubles. 
All force is tension against the stream. 

Everywhere there are now people absorbed in projects to 
change the world or to change themselves, and they will simply 
perpetuate, or merely change the form, of the very troubles they 
intend to avoid. This is not to say that human life and conduct is 
inevitably a tragic mess. It is to say that human life—and all life 
—does not work harmoniously when we try to force it to be other 
than what it is, for the very simple reason that this is based on 
the assumption that I, who would control things, am something 
apart from what I would control. This assumption is a 
hallucination supported by the force of almost universal social 
consensus. You, on the one hand, are responsible for what you 


do, on the other. To think or feel otherwise is taboo. It is called 
passivity, inertia, weakness, and spineless fatalism. But the most 
valuable insights come through questioning the most obvious 
forms of common sense. 

What happens with your stream of experience if you realize 
that no one is in control of it? If you see that it is just going along 
of itself, unpushed and unpulled? (This is what the Chinese 
writing on this page means: The Tao, the course of nature, flows 
of itself.) You can get the feel of it by breathing without doing 
anything to help your breath along. Let the breath out, and then 
let it come back by itself, when it feels like it. And then out again 
when it wants to go out. Keep this up until you are completely 
comfortable with letting it go its own way, and you will notice 
that the rhythm slows down without the least effort—and at the 
same time becomes a little stronger. This happens because you 
are now “with” the breath and no longer “outside” it as 
controller. Something similar happens when you let thoughts, 
feelings, and all other experiences follow their own course. They 
are doing this anyhow and you can’t really make it otherwise, so 
if some contrary tension arises see that it, too, is happening of 
itself—and watch to see what it wants to do. Just watch the 
stream going along, nothing more. If you find yourself asking 
who is watching and why, take it as simply another wiggle of the 


ED 
in 
6 


Our normal expectation is that in such a state as this the stream 
of events would run wild, and if we cling to this expectation, wild 


they will be, and this is especially so for those who hold the 
supposition that to act naturally and spontaneously is to do 
everything which social convention forbids. But by following the 
obverse of social convention one is still letting it determine one’s 
pattern of behavior, and the stream is not being asked how it 
would flow—which has nothing to do with accepting or rejecting 
conventional systems. The almost shocking surprise is that when 
the stream is not externally controlled it controls itself, 
automatically, and there is no anxious sensation that it is running 
away with you. For you are this stream, and it was never actually 
otherwise. Watch, however, how the mind will hatch reason after 
reason for not making this experiment. This is why so few people 
ever make it and why there are so few examples of how it works, 
and consequently so little trust in its feasibility. 

It is thus that no creative or constructive action can come to 
pass without one’s first realizing that every willful effort to 
improve the world or oneself is futile, and so long as one can be 
beguiled by any political or spiritual scheme for molding things 
nearer to the heart’s desire one will be frustrated, angry, or 
depressed—that is, unless the first step in any such scheme is to 
see that nothing can be done. This is not because you are a victim 
of fate, but because there is no “you” to be fated, no observing 
self apart from the stream. For when the illusion of the “you” 
outside and apart from the stream is dissipated, you are in a 
position of power to work with the stream and not against it. It is 
as if you had restored your balance in dancing or judo. Real 
freedom cannot exist alongside false freedom, but the 
abandonment of false freedom looks as if it would leave you as 
good as dead. But this is the secret of Goethe’s Stirb und werde, 
“Die and come to life.” For the job of compassion in a sick society 
only the dead need apply. 

Although we speak of clouds as drifting freely and of streams as 
flowing freely, this seems to be no more than poetic imagery, for 
do not clouds obey the wind and water the force of gravity? It is 
most important to give up our military way of seeing the world as 
a chain of command—as a handing down of infrangible laws and 
orders from before to after. It requires a still more startling 
breach of common sense to see that the present is not governed 
by the past, and that we shall seek in vain along the backward 
track of time to discover the determinative origin of the universe. 


Fine instruments and calculations may restore the track for 
billions of years, but in the end it will fade out. So there was once 
a Big Bang ... and before that? The child knows this intuitively 
when it asks, “But who made God?” Change the question a little, 
realizing that God is eternal, and ask, “Who makes God?” You do. 

If God is conceived as the superauthority who made the world 
at the distant beginning of time, he is as much your own 
fabrication as the notion that you yourself are something other 
than your stream of experiences. The idea may have been thought 
up by your remote ancestors, but you bought it. But if you realize 
that you are not this sad and silly abstract ego trying to run the 
world from outside, then God is made by quite another kind of 
“you.” This is the “you” that not only makes God but is God— 
although, to avoid the inevitable military and authoritarian 
associations of this name, it is better to speak of the Tao, since 
“the Tao which can be defined is not the eternal Tao.” 

From this altered standpoint it is easy to see the sense in which 
you are making the world, or rather, that the world is making 
itself. As trees evoke sound from the wind, your eyes evoke light 
from fire. The structure of your organism, of your senses and 
nerves, endows the world with all its sensible and measurable 
properties—for rocks cannot seem to be hard except in relation to 
soft skin. All knowledge, all experience could be said to be a 
neural situation inside the skull, and the brain is not merely a 
receiver and recorder of input through the senses: it also has 
output because the way in which it structures its senses and nerve 
patterns shapes the input in the same way that a harpist, by 
selective plucking, brings formal melody out of a row of 
uniformly scaled and otherwise silent strings. Thus the brain 
evokes the sensible world by sounding the strings of all those 
vibrations which we call the real, external world. Every brain 
plays its own world, but all brains of similar structure are playing 
similar worlds, and a brain of different structure would make a 
different selection of vibrations and so evoke from them a world 
quite different from ours. 

But the brain itself is in and of that external world, a particular 
pattern of vibrations, and the organism as a whole is functionally 
inseparable from that brain. And, in turn, the organism is 
functionally inseparable from the environment, from a system of 
vibrations from which it can make those particular selections 


which it calls being alive. Thus the subtle environment of this 
particular planet, solar system, and galaxy grows human 
organisms as a tree grows fruit. The fruit, in turn, contains the 
seed of another tree of the same genus. Which came the first, fruit 
or tree? Imagine the two processes as happening simultaneously 
—the tree growing the fruit, and the fruit growing the tree—and 
you will see, by analogy, the brain shaping the environment, and 
the environment shaping the brain. That is a clumsy way of 
saying that you are seeing a single process. (The organism differs 
from the environment as one side of a Mobius strip “differs” from 
the other. Because of a twist or flip in the strip, you can grasp one 
and the same side between two different fingers.) 

This mutual creation of the world, as between organism and 
environment, is happening now. True, there is evidence around— 
monumental evidence—of a past, of vibrations which have been 
evoked before, of age-old hills and ancient buildings. Yet these 
very remains and memories are being reiterated and structured 
from the vibrations in the present. The Creation, then, is not a 
unique event in the past, causing and determining all that 
follows. It is nowever, and the past trails behind it inactive and 
dead, influencing the present only to the extent that we keep on 
insisting that it does and should—for we keep reactivating the 
past in the hope that history is guiding us to where we should be 
going in the future, and this is driving the car with eyes glued to 
the rear-vision mirror. And history is the story of our consistent 
failures in trying to control the stream from without—a 
monotonous process of self-frustration that will go on and on 
until we stop trying to force the course and let it flow of itself. 

This is not to “look to the future” as that phrase is ordinarily 
understood, for any future that we know, or think we know, is an 
extrapolation from the past. The future is unknown. Prophecy 
contaminates it with the past, which is why liberated people do 
not bother with fortunetelling or astrology, and why the happy 
traveler wanders and does not let himself be the slave of maps, 
guidebooks, and schedules, using them but not being used by 
them. 

Obviously, there seems to be a paradox in all that I have said 
here. On the one hand, you do not and actually cannot do 
anything: it is all happening, as the stream flows of itself. On the 
other hand, you yourself are no other than this stream—however 


much you may feel yourself to be some distinct entity in the 
stream, occasionally controlling it, though mostly driven 
helplessly along. But the paradox is resolved when you realize 
that it would be impossible to experience the subjective and 
voluntary aspect of experience without the contrast of the 
objective and involuntary. Like all “pairs of opposites” these are 
two poles of a single process, and our mistake is to identify the 
reality of self with one only—with the voluntary. Surely it is easy 
to see that all voluntary action is based on processes that are not 
voluntary at all, on the circulation of blood and the operation of 
neural circuits. Nevertheless, if “self” actually comprises both 
poles, the voluntary and the involuntary are equally your karma, 
or “action.” 

Although this provides no specific directions as to how one 
should act, it changes the mood and feel of action, influencing it 
somewhat as a change in the tone of voice can alter the effect of 
one and the same set of words—say from a peremptory command 
to a polite request. This is the same kind of analogy for what I am 
trying to describe as that of recovering one’s balance in dancing 
or judo, for the voluntary and the involuntary aspects of 
experience are like the right and left legs, forming a triangle 
whose apex is close to the navel and which is the “moving center” 
of the body. This is why yoga is sometimes said to be 
contemplation of the navel—a figure of speech for shifting one’s 
center of gravity to a point which transcends the dualism of ego 
and nonego, since the one cannot exist without the other. 

There are many words here, and it is all put more succinctly 
and clearly by a Zen master who was asked, “How does one enter 
the Tao?” He answered, “Do you hear the sound of the 
stream?” ... “Why, yes.” ... “There is the way to enter.” 


At 
% 
® 


Flowing wit 


ba [Sys 


= 


the Tao 


July 10, 1970 


The Chinese characters which I have written on this page are the 
opening words of the Old Boy’s Book of The Way and Its Power, 
otherwise known as Lao-tzu’s Tao Te Ching. I do not write Chinese 
very well; an Oriental person looking at my writing knows at 
once that it was done by a Westerner. Still, they sometimes say 
that my brushwork is pretty good (for a Westerner), and the 
young Japanese who are now using ballpoint pens instead of 
brushes say I do it extraordinarily well. But they are a very polite 
people, and though I have played with the writing brush for 
many years I am well aware that my technique is nowhere near 
that of the great masters. 

Nevertheless, I have always been in love with Chinese writing. 
Each character, or ideogram, is an abstract picture of some 
feature of the process of nature—that is, of the Tao, the Way or 
Course of the universe. When translated very literally into 
English, Chinese reads like a telegram. “Tao can tao not eternal 
Tao,” or “Way can speak-about not eternal Way.” In contrast with 
English, and particularly German or Japanese, Chinese is the 
fastest and shortest way of saying things, both in speech and 
writing. If, as seems possible, Mao-tse Tung’s people shift to an 
alphabetic form of writing, they will be at a great disadvantage, 
for, as their own proverb says, “One picture is worth a thousand 
words.” 

The very mechanics of writing Chinese is an aesthetic delight. 


It requires a pointed brush with a bamboo handle, the hairs of the 
brush being lightly impregnated with glue, and brushes come in a 
delicious variety of sizes and designs—from tiny twigs for writing 
characters like the footprints of spiders to immense three-inch- 
wide swabbers for making posters. The ink comes in hard 
flattened sticks made, essentially, of carbon, glue and perfume, 
and is embossed with dragons in the clouds or bamboos by the 
water, or with its brand name in gold characters. A fine old stick 
of Chinese or Korean ink may fetch as much as $500 on the 
Japanese market, and I am speaking of a small black object never 
much more than 6" x 2" x 1". Why? Because of the aesthetic and 
meditative pleasure of rubbing a fine ink into liquid form upon an 
ink-stone, which is usually a black rectangular block with 
rounded corners like a small swimming pool, with a short deep 
end and a long shallow end. Water is poured upon the stone, and 
the ink-stick is then rubbed gently and lovingly upon the shallow 
end until the mixture has just the right viscosity and color, for, 
under reflected light, the black pigment has to look blue, and the 
ink-stick has to slide through the water with a certain amiable 
greasiness. The rubbing takes at least fifteen minutes, and, with 
the perfume of sandalwood or aloeswood, an artist or calligrapher 
gets himself in the proper frame of mind to begin his work. 
Rubbing ink is a form of za-zen, or Zen Buddhist meditation in 
which verbal and conceptual thinking is temporarily suspended. 
Inferior artists make their apprentices rub the ink. Truly vulgar 
and depraved artists use bottled ink. 

There is a street in Kyoto named Tera-machi (i.e., Temple 
Street) where, from very small shops, one may buy implements 
for the tea ceremony, ancient pottery, rosaries, mushrooms, 
second-hand books, and the most excellent tea in the world. 
There is also a British-style pub. But the largest shop on the street 
sells writing brushes, ink, fine paper, and incense. It is one of my 
paradises, and whenever I get to Kyoto I go there immediately to 
buy aloeswood (which has, as Dr. Suzuki told me, the essential 
smell of Buddhism), ink and writing brushes. I just can’t resist 
them. Last time I found a small stick of vermilion ink covered 
with gold leaf. It should be rubbed on a window sill, early in the 
morning, using a drop of dew for the water. 

It is said to be “difficult” to master the art of Chinese writing, 
but this means only that the art must grow on you over many 


years. We use the word “difficult” for tasks which require 
extreme force or effort, and over which we must perspire, grunt, 
and groan. But the difficulty of writing Chinese with the brush is 
to make the brush write by itself, and the Taoists call this the art 
of wu-wei—which may be translated variously as “easy does it,” 
“roll with the punch,” “go with the stream,” “don’t force it,” or, 
more literally, “not pushing.” I suppose the Taoist way of life is 
the polar opposite of Billy Graham’s muscular Christianity. Wu- 
wei is the understanding that energy is gravity, and thus that 
brush writing, or dancing, or judo, or sailing, or pottery, or even 
sculpture is following patterns in the flow of liquid. Lao-tzu was 
perhaps the contemporary of that marvelous and neglected Greek 
philosopher Heraclitus, and both taught exactly the same 
principles. Panta rhei—everything flows, and therefore the 
understanding of water is the understanding of life. Fire is water 
falling upwards. 

Thus another advantage of Chinese is that, although brief in 
form, it can say so many things at once. There must be at least 
eighty English translations of Lao-tzu’s book. All differ, and most 
are to some extent correct. Let us compare differing versions of 
these six first words: 


The Way that can be described is not the eternal Way. 
The Course that can be discoursed is not the eternal Course. 
The Way that can be weighed is not the regular Way. 


The Flow that can be followed is not the real Flow. 
Energy which is energetic is not true energy. 
Force forced isn’t force. 


The fourth and fifth characters appear, surprisingly, on planes 
and trains in the Far East followed by a character which is simply 
a square, signifying “mouth” or “door.” The three put together 
mean “Emergency exit.” Thus: 


The Go that can be gone is an emergency Go. 


Most scholars translate the second use of the ideogram tao as 


“to speak about,” although Duyvendak has argued that this is a 
late meaning of the word. But in my own feeling this kind of 
laconic and aphoristic Chinese is best translated by giving, in 
parallel, many of the different ways in which it may be 
understood: for it means all of them. Linear languages like 
English, German, and Sanskrit have to stretch out Chinese 
indefinitely. It has thus more or less come to the point where we 
have simply adopted the word tao into English (like karma and 
curry) and those who call it “tay-o” should realize that in Peking 
it is called “dow,” in Canton “toe,” and in Tokyo “daw,” and of 
course Tokyo itself is something like “Taw-kyaw.” 

Tao (which we shall therefore no longer print in different type 
as a foreign word) signifies the energy of the universe as a way, 
current, course, or flow which is at once intelligence and 
spontaneous, but not personal like a Western god. It would be 
absurd to worship or pray to the Tao because it’s your own true 
self, the very energy and patterning of your bones, muscles, and 
nerves. Lao-tzu’s first statement about it is that it cannot be 
defined—for the simple reason that you cannot make what is 
basically you and basically real an object of knowledge. You 
cannot stand aside from it and examine it as something out there. 
Although, then, we cannot define it, we must not assume that it is 
something bleary like the “blind energy” of nineteenth-century 
scientists. From our own points of view our heads themselves are 
blind spots, but were it otherwise we should be looking only at 
neurons and dendrites and would never see mountains and trees. 
(But, of course, when neurons and dendrites are seen from the 
inside they become mountains and trees.) 

Yet although Tao cannot be examined and pinned down, it has 
a characteristic atmosphere which may be sensed in the life-styles 
of various Far Eastern poets, artists, and sages, and which is 
indicated by the term feng-liu in Chinese and furyu in Japanese, 
and which means something like flowing with or following with 
the wind. It is also translated as elegance, which is not quite 
right, because in English an elegant person is refined and fussy, 
and perpetrates an atmosphere of haughty disdain—whereas the 
Chinese poet is sometimes amiably drunken, wandering aimlessly 
in the mountains, and laughing at falling leaves. One gathers that 
this sort of person is no longer allowed in China. But he is 
typified by Pu-tai, the fat, laughing tramp-buddha who carries a 


gnarled staff and a huge bag of interesting rubbish which he gives 
away to children. 

Poets like Su Tungp’o and Tu Fu were a little more on the side 
of elegance as we think of it, for they relished drinking fine tea 
on lazy afternoons, tea made with the best of clear waters from 
springs and wells, boiled over carefully chosen wood, and served 
in porcelain or in ceramic bowls with a glaze like jade. On the 
other hand, a young American Buddhist sought out an extremely 
holy and magical hermit in the mountains of Japan and, after 
finding him with extreme difficulty, was served hot water without 
tea. He had the sense to appreciate the high compliment which 
he had been offered. Frederic Spiegelberg, philosopher and 
Orientalist, visited a Taoist hermit like Pu-tai on an island near 
Hong Kong. When he was introduced as an American university 
professor traveling under a Rockefeller grant to find out whether 
Asian spirituality was still vital, the hermit began to chuckle very 
gently, and this gradually developed into uproarious laughter at 
which his whole glutaneous mass shook like jelly. That was the 
end of the interview. 

A more ancient Taoist sage, whose name I forget, was 
approached by a Chinese emperor to be an adviser to the 
government. He declined the offer with extreme courtesy, but 
when the emissary had departed he washed out his ears—and 
also those of the donkey on which he customarily rode. There 
was also a Chinese Zen priest famed as a great painter, but who, 
unlike other priests, grew his hair long. After getting sufficiently 
drunk, he would dip his hair into a bowl of ink and then slosh it 
over a scroll of paper. The next day he would give himself a 
Rorschach test on the splosh and see in it images of mountains, 
rivers, and forests which needed only a few touches of the brush 
to bring them out for all to see. When I was invited to the tea 
ceremony by the artist and printmaker Saburo Hasegawa he 
pointed out the subtle beauty of cigarette ash on a tile made by J. 
B. Blunk, which we were using for an ashtray. 

These are vignettes to give some suggestion of the atmosphere 
of flowing with the Tao. The principle of the thing is also 
recognized by our own surf riders, some of whom know very well 
that their sport is a form of yoga or Taoist meditation in which 
the whole art is to generate immense energy from going with 
your environment, from the principle of wu-wei, or following the 


gravity of water and so making yourself one with it. For, as Lao- 
tzu himself said, “Gravity is the root of lightness.” 


January 6, 1990 


It wasn’t until thirty years ago, in the 1960s, that there began to 
be any widespread realization that ecstasy is a legitimate human 
need—as essential for mental and physical health as proper 
nutrition, vitamins, rest, and recreation. Though the idea had 
been foreshadowed by Freud and stressed by Wilhelm Reich, 
there had never been anything particularly ecstatic about 
psychoanalysts, or their patients. They seemed, on the whole, 
emotionally catharticized and drearily mature. Ecstasy, in the 
form of mystical experience, had also been the objective of a 
growing minority that, since the beginning of the century, had 
been fascinated with yoga, Tibetan Buddhism, Zen, Vedanta, and 
other forms of Oriental meditation; and these people were always 
rather serious and demure. 

But in the sixties, everything blew up. Something almost like a 
mutation broke out among people from fifteen to twenty-five, to 
the utter consternation of the adult world. From San Francisco to 
Katmandu, there suddenly appeared multitudes of hippies with 
hair, beards, and costumes that disquietingly reminded their 
elders of Jesus Christ, the prophets, and the apostles—who were 
all at a safe historical distance. At the peak of our technological 
affluence, these young people renounced the cherished values of 
Western civilization—the values of property and status. Richness 
of experience, they maintained, was far more important than 


things and money, in pursuit of which their parents were 
miserably and dutifully trapped in squirrel cages. 

Scandalously, hippies did not adopt the ascetic and celibate 
ways of traditional holy men. They took drugs, held sexual orgies 
and substituted free-loving communities for the hallowed family 
circle. Those who hoped that all this was just an adolescent quest 
for kicks that would soon fade away were increasingly alarmed, 
for it appeared to be in lively earnest. The hippies moved on from 
marijuana and LSD to Hindu chants and yoga, hardly aware that 
mysticism, in the form of realizing that one’s true self is the 
Godhead, is something Western society would not tolerate. After 
all, look what happened to Jesus. Mysticism, or democracy in the 
kingdom of God, seemed arrant subversion and blasphemy to 
people whose official image of God had always been monarchical 
—the cosmic counterpart of the Pharaohs and Cyruses of the 
ancient world. Mysticism was therefore persecuted alike by 
church and state, and the taboo still continued—with assistance 
from the psychiatric inquisition. Admittedly, the hippies were 
credulous, undiscriminating, and immoderate in their spiritual 
explorations. But if the approach was fumbling, the goal was 
clear. I have before me a faded copy of the summer 1969 bulletin 
of what was then California’s revolutionary Midpeninsula Free 
University (now the world-respected Castalia University of Menlo 
Park), which bluntly affirms that “The natural state of man is 
ecstatic wonder; we should not settle for less.” 

Looking back from 1990, all this is very understandable, 
however inept. The flower-children knew what their parents 
hardly dared contemplate: that they had no future. At any 
moment, they might suffer instant cremation by the H-bomb or 
the slower and grislier dooms of chemical and biological warfare. 
The history of man’s behavior warned them that armaments 
which exist are almost invariably used and may even go off by 
themselves. By the end of 1970, their protests against the power 
structure of the West (which from their standpoint included 
Russia), combined with the Black-Power movement, had so 
infuriated the military-industrial-police-labor-union-Mafia 
complex known as the establishment that the United States was 
close to civil war. 

Happily, it was just then that the leading scientists, 
philosophers, and responsible statesmen of the world abruptly 


called factionists and politicians to their senses. They solemnly 
proclaimed an ecological crisis and put it so bluntly that the 
world almost went into panic. Ideological, national, and racial 
disputes were children’s tiffs in comparison with the many- 
headed menace of overpopulation, totally inadequate food 
production, shortage of water, erosion of soil, pollution of air and 
water, deforestation, poisoned food, and utter chemical 
imbalance of nature. By 1974, no one could refuse to see that all 
extravagant military and space projects must forthwith be 
canceled and every energy diverted to feeding and cleansing the 
world. Had this not happened, I could not be writing to you. 
Civilization would not have endured beyond 1980 and certainly 
would not have taken its present direction. For we have gone a 
long way in persuading people that “the natural state of man is 
ecstatic wonder.” 

Because ecstasy was rare, crude, and brief in your day, I should 
perhaps try to define it. Ecstasy is the sensation of surrendering to 
vibrations, and sometimes to insights, that take you out of your 
so-called self. By and large, “self” as a direct sensation is nothing 
more than chronic neuromuscular tension—a habitual resistance 
to the pulsing of life; which may explain why nonecstatic people 
are correctly described as uptight. They are what Freud called 
anal-retentive types and commonly suffer from impotence and 
frigidity, being afraid to let themselves go to the spontaneous 
rhythms of nature. They conceive man as something apart from 
and even against nature, and civilization as an architecture of 
resistance to spontaneity. It was, of course, this attitude, aided by 
a powerful technology, that brought about the ecological crisis of 
the early seventies and, having seen the mistake, we now 
cultivate ecstasy as we once cultivated literacy or morality. 

Do not suppose, however, that we are merely a society of lotus- 
eaters, lolling on divans and cuddling lovely women. Ecstasy is 
something higher, or further out, than ordinary pleasure, and few 
hippies realized that its achievement requires a_ particular 
discipline and skill that is comparable to the art of sailing. We do 
not resist the vibrations, pulses, and rhythms of nature, just as the 
yachtsman does not resist the wind. But he knows how to manage 
his sails and, therefore, can use the wind to go wherever he 
wishes. The art of life, as we see it, is navigation. 

Ecstasy is beyond pleasure. Ordinarily, one thinks of the 


rainbow spectrum of light as a band having red at one end and 
violet at the other, thus not seeing that violet is the mixture of 
red and blue. The spectrum could therefore be displayed as a ring 
of concentric circles instead of a band, but its eye-striking central 
circle would be where pale, bright yellow comes nearest to white 
light. This would represent ecstasy. But it can be approached in 
two ways, starting from violet: through the blues and greens of 
pleasure or the reds and oranges of pain. This explains why 
ecstasy can be achieved in battle, by ascetic self-torture, and 
through the many variations of sadomasochistic sexuality. This 
we call the left-hand, or negative, approach. The right-hand, or 
positive, approach is through activities that are loving and life- 
affirming. Since both approaches reach the same point, it must be 
noted that ecstasy is always a pleasure/pain experience, as when 
one weeps for joy or as when there is a certain hurt in intense 
sexual orgasm. 

Pure ecstasy cannot, therefore, be long endured, for, as the 
Bible says, “No man can see God and live.” But frequent plunges 
into ecstasy transform one’s normal consciousness. The everyday 
world becomes luminous and transparent. The chronic 
neuromuscular tension against the world disappears, and thus 
one loses the sensation of carrying one’s body around like a load. 
You feel light, almost weightless, realizing that you are one with 
a planet that is just falling at ease through space. It’s something 
like the happy, released, energetic feeling one gets after a 
splendid experience of love-making in the middle of the day. 

Continuing the story, you will remember that even as early as 
1968, the hippie style of life was, in a superficial form, becoming 
fashionable in society at large. Beards and longish hair were 
increasingly noted upon stockbrokers, doctors, professors, and 
advertising men. Men and women alike began to sport sensuous 
and psychedelic fabrics and free-form new styles were observed 
in the highest levels of society. Less publicized was the fact that 
in these same circles, there was a great deal of experimentation 
with marijuana and LSD, and a surprising number of successful 
businessmen became dropouts, fed up with the strain and the 
dubious rewards of maintaining the uptight posture. 

At the same time, various aspects of hippie life and the vaguer, 
more generalized revolution of youth against the uptight culture 
began to interest a new generation of film makers and dramatists 


—young men and women who had already acquired mastery of 
the techniques of camera and stage and, therefore, brought 
imaginative discipline into the quest for ecstasy. Fully realizing 
that their ever-growing market was a population under thirty, 
they gave a rich and precise articulation to the ambiguous 
aspirations of the young. They began to replace the old-fashioned, 
leering style of bawdy film with elegant masterpieces of erotic 
art. Studying all the new disciplines of sensitivity training and 
encounter groups (which, by the beginning of 1969, had spread 
from California and New York to some forty centers all over the 
United States and Canada), they distinguished truly spontaneous 
behavior from merely forced imitation of how people might be 
expected to behave when relieved of all inhibitions. 

This point needs some expansion. The encounter group, as it 
evolved in your time, was a situation in which the participants 
were encouraged to express their genuine feelings about 
themselves and one another, barring only physical violence. A 
variation was the encounter marathon, in which the group stayed 
together for forty-eight hours, sometimes in the nude to 
encourage the act of total exposure of oneself to others. But in 
early experiments, it was soon realized that certain people would 
fake openness and naturalness, often affecting hostility as the 
sure sign of being genuine. The problem was that, because very 
few people really knew how they felt naturally, they would act 
out their preconceptions of natural and unrestricted behavior, 
and act merely crudely and lewdly. The encounter group was 
therefore augmented by sensitivity training, which is the art of 
abandoning all conceptions of how one should feel in order to 
discover how one actually does feel—to get down to pure 
experience, free from all prejudices and preconceptions of what it 
is “supposed” to be. The focus is simply on what is now. This is, 
of course, extremely disconcerting to the habitual role player 
whose social intercourse is restricted to a finite repertoire of well- 
rehearsed acts. 

The new generation of film makers and dramatists took the 
experiences of sensitivity training and encounter out onto screen 
and stage, broke down the barrier of the proscenium arch, made 
the theater less and less a spectacle and more and more a 
participatory experience. In film, they produced highly 
sophisticated versions of the primitive light shows of the sixties, 


so that audiences became totally immersed in pulsations of 
sound, light, and pattern. In the early eighties, they used geodesic 
domes to cover the audience with the screen and get them to 
dancing with and in paradisiacal films that surrounded the 
spectator with patterns of iridescent bubbles, animations of 
Persian miniatures and arabesques, vast enlargments of diatoms 
and Radiolaria, interior views of intricately cut jewels with 
landscapes beyond, tapestries of ferns, flowers and foliage, 
gigantic butterfly wings, Tibetan mandalas, visions of the world 
as seen by flies, and fantasies of their own which, though 
anything but vague in form or wishy-washy in color, escaped all 
possible identification. Such involving presentations were 
hypnotic and irresistible; even the solidest squares became like 
those Ukrainian peasants of the ninth century who, on visiting 
the cathedral of St. Sophia in Byzantium, thought they had 
arrived in heaven. 

The new theater, above all, had everyone rocking with laughter 
at the attitudes and postures of the uptight world—so much so 
that, quite outside the theater, it became totally impossible to 
preach, orate, moralize, or platitudinize before any young 
audience. One was met with derision or, even more unsettling, 
with smiling eyes that said, “You’ve got to be putting us on.” 
These developments of screen and stage had much to do with a 
subsequent advance in psychotherapy; it became the real 
foundation of an art-science of ecstasy which—not that I like the 
word—we now call Ecstatics. 

Early in 1974, two psychiatrists—Roseman of Los Angeles and 
Kotowari of Tokyo, then working at UCLA—came up with what 
we now know as Vibration Training. Like most honest 
psychiatrists, they felt that their techniques were only scratching 
the surface and that they were burdened with obsolete maps, 
assumptions, and procedures based largely on the scientific 
world-view of the late nineteenth century, which looked at the 
mind in terms of Newtonian mechanics. Roseman and Kotowari 
reasoned that the foundation of all experience is a complex of 
interwoven vibrations of many wave-lengths, dimensions, and 
qualities. As white light manifests the seven-hued spectrum, so 
the total spectrum of vibrations has behind it the mysterious E 
(which = MC2). In their view, a child emerging into the world is 
the vibration spectrum becoming aware of itself in a particular 


and partial way, since human senses are by no means responsive 
to all known vibrations. (We do not see infrared or gamma rays.) 
To the baby, these vibrations make neither sense nor nonsense 
They are simply what is there. He has no problem about giggling 
at some or crying at others, since no one has yet taught him 
which vibrations are good and which are bad. He just goes along 
uncritically with the whole buzz, without the slightest notion that 
it is one thing and he another. 

But as time goes on, his mother and father, brothers, and sisters 
teach him how to make sense of the show. By gestures, attitudes 
and words, they point out what is baby and what is kitty. When 
he throws up or soils his diapers, they say, “Ugh!” When he sucks 
on his bottle or swallows Pablum, they say, “Good baby!” They 
show delight if he smiles, annoyance if he cries and anxiety if he 
runs a fever or bleeds from a cut. In due course, he has learned 
all the rudiments of their interpretation of what the vibrations are 
doing and has taken note of their extreme resistance to 
interpreting them in any other way. Thus, when he asks the name 
for what is, to him, a clearly shaped area of dry space in a puddle 
of milk on the table, they say, “Oh, that’s nothing.” They are very 
insistent upon what is worth noticing and what isn’t, upon 
wiggles allowed and wiggles forbidden, upon good smells and 
bad smells (most are bad). The baby has no basis for arguing with 
this interpretation of the vibrations, and as he grows up, he 
becomes as fixated on the system of interpretation as his 
instructors. 

But have they given him the correct, or the only possible, 
interpretation of the system? After all, they got it from their 
parents, and so on down the line, and who has seriously bothered 
to check it? We might ask such basic questions as whether the 
past or the future really exists, whether it’s really all that 
important to go on living, whether voluntary and involuntary 
behavior are genuinely different (what about breathing?) or 
whether male and female behavior, in gesture and speech, are 
necessarily distinct in the ways that we suppose. To what extent 
is the real world simply our own projection upon the vibrations? 
You have lain in bed looking at some chintz drapes adorned with 
dauby roses and, all at once, a face appears in the design. As you 
go on looking, the area surrounding the face begins, if you don’t 
force the process, to form a logical pattern; and the longer you 


look, the more the whole scene becomes as clear as a photograph. 
Could we, then, through all our senses, be making some collective 
projection upon the vibrations, passing it on to our children as 
the sober truth? 

Roseman and Kotowari did not carry their ideas quite that far. 
Their point was simply that our conceptions of the world are 
much too rigid and our neuromuscular responses to the vibrations 
extremely inelastic; that, in other words, we are exhausting and 
frustrating ourselves with unnecessary defensiveness. They 
constructed an electronic laboratory where vibrations of all kinds 
could be simulated, then began to expose themselves and some 
selected volunteers to various forms of low-energy vibration that 
would ordinarily be annoying. They tried tickling sensations on 
various sensitive areas of the skin, the rocking motion of a ship in 
rough weather, slowly dripping water on the forehead, sounds of 
fingernails scratching on a blackboard and of squeaky wheels, 
discordant combinations of musical tones, irritating and 
incomprehensible melodies, toilet noises, rasping voices with 
terrible accents, voices that were unctuously insincere, going on 
to groans, weeping, screams, and maniacal laughter, and finally, 
all kinds of electronically produced shudders, needles and pins, 
and nameless sounds. At the beginning of each session, the 
subject was put into a mild hypnotic state with the one 
suggestion that he simply give in to whatever vibration is 
aroused, letting his organism respond freely in whatever way 
seemed natural. If, for example, a stimulus made him feel like 
squirming, he was encouraged to squirm as much as he liked and 
really get with it. 

As might be expected, people began to acquire a taste for these 
formerly taboo vibrations and their new uninhibited and often 
convulsive responses began to take on an erotic and sometimes 
ecstatic quality. The doctors supplemented sonic and tactile 
vibrations with video: strobe lights, vivid color movies of falling 
through space, of revolting messes accompanied by appropriate 
smells, of explosions, approaching tornadoes, monstrous spiders, 
hideous human faces, and of people running through endless 
crystalline corridors as if totally lost in the mazes of the brain. 
They then tried low degrees of electronically induced pain, 
following Grantly Dick-Reid’s discovery that labor pains could be 
reinterpreted as orgiastic tensions, and found that, with a little 


practice, subjects could tolerate relatively intense degrees of this 
stimulus—even though writhing and _ screaming quite 
unashamedly, yet without giving the doctor any signal to stop. 

The researchers also worked with a twenty-four-speaker, 360- 
degree sound system that surrounded the subject with stereo 
music of the strongest emotional impact played from twenty-four- 
track tapes. They had mechanisms for atomizing all kinds of 
perfume, incense, natural flower scents, and the beneficent 
aromas of gardens, fields, and forests. They used exquisite and 
innocently performed erotic movies, filmed kaleidoscopic patterns 
of jewels and of iridescent whorls of weaving smoke, and mock- 
ups of unbelievably vast temples and palaces rich with fretted 
screens and polychrome sculpture. The subject would be visually, 
aurally, olfactorily, and kinesthetically led through their 
enormous courtyards, gardens, galleries, naves, and sanctuaries to 
the accompaniment of angelic choirs, sonorous trumpets, double- 
bass-throated bells and gongs, and unearthly chants and hymns, 
until the journey reached its climax in a holy of holies where he 
might be confronted with a remarkably beautiful goddess or a 
colossal aureole of rich and brilliant light into which he would be 
finally absorbed—to find himself soaring bodilessly in clear-blue 
sky, like a seagull. Sometimes they accompanied this climax with 
electrical stimulation of the pleasure centers of the brain. 

It should be noted that, through all this, the gadgetry was, as 
far as possible, installed in a separate room, away from the 
subject, who lay in a spacious neutral chamber with walls that 
could be decorated in any way desired by light projection. Those 
who volunteered for a course of this treatment discovered that 
their responses to the ordinary, everyday vibration system were 
radically changed. Almost all uptightness had disappeared, for 
they had learned how to reinterpret and actually dig the 
vibratory sensations hitherto called anxiety, fear, grief, 
depression, shame, guilt, and a considerable degree of what they 
had known as pain. 

It was as if the science of electronics had thus far just been 
waiting for something important to do. From every continent, 
electronic buffs got in touch with Roseman and Kotowari with 
suggestions and requests for information, and it was only a few 
months before similar laboratories were set up in cities all over 
the world. Shortly afterward, such corporations as Bell Telephone 


and Varian Associates began to design miniaturized versions of 
the equipment, which could be mass-produced, so that by 1979 it 
had become the major technique for psychotherapy, and a large 
research center for the two doctors was established at Castalia 
University. 

The general effect was that uptightness came to be recognized 
as a sickness, like alcoholism or paranoia, so that more and more 
people began to be increasingly comfortable in a world where 
truth and reality were far less rigidly defined. They stopped 
looking for rocks on which to stand and foundations for building 
their lives, dropping all such metaphors of fortification and stony 
solidity. They realized that the world, the vibration system, is 
more airy and liquid than solid and they reacted to it as 
swimmers, sailors, and airmen rather than as landlubbers. They 
found security in letting go rather than in holding on and, in so 
doing, developed an attitude toward life that might be called 
psychophysical judo. Nearly twenty-five centuries ago, the 
Chinese sages Lao-tzu and Chuang-tzu had called it wu-wei, which 
is perhaps best translated as “action without forcing.” It is sailing 
in the stream of the Tao, or course of nature, and navigating the 
currents of li (organic pattern)—a word that originally signified 
the natural markings in jade or the grain in wood. 

As this attitude spread and prevailed in the wake of Vibration 
Training, people became more and more indulgent about 
eccentricity in life-style, tolerant of racial and_ religious 
differences, and adventurous in exploring unusual ways of loving. 
Present time became more important than future time, on the 
reasoning that there is no point in making plans for the future if 
you can’t fully enjoy their results when they, in turn, become part 
of the present. By and large, we stopped rushing and found that 
with less haste, we had more speed, since rushing sets up a whole 
multitude of antagonistic vibrations. We got out of uptight 
clothes—trousers, girdles, neckties, hard shoes, and other 
contraptions for trussing and binding the body, as if to say, “Now 
you really exist and will not fall apart.” We shifted into every 
variety of colorful sarong, kimono, sari, caftan, burnous, and 
poncho and wore them on the streets and for business. We 
equipped our homes with spacious Japanese bathtubs or saunas, 
where we all sat and relaxed after the day’s work. These tubs 
were made so that six people could sit with hot water up to their 


necks; and, of course, one did not wash in the tub itself but took a 
shower first. Several of my friends in California had them back in 
the sixties, but now they’re everywhere. 

Absence of rush gave us a very new and different approach to 
sexual relations. You must understand that despite the ecological 
crisis of the seventies, technology gave us an enormous amount of 
leisure. By 1985, there were no longer nine-to-five jobs. The 
whole world began to run on Greenwich mean time, and work 
hours today are staggered throughout each twenty-four-hour 
period, amounting in all to about ten hours a week—unless, of 
course, one is an enthusiast for doctoring, engineering, scientific 
research, or carpentry, in which case he can work as long as he 
likes. Under these circumstances, we no longer speak of sexual 
relations as sleeping or going to bed with someone. After all, why 
wait until you’re tired? Furthermore, late-night or early-morning 
sex in bed tends to restrict the relationship to simple fucking, so 
that the whole thing is over in from two to twenty minutes. Men 
in a hurry to prove—what? 

We take our time. The man and the woman take turns to 
manage the occasion, the one acting as servant of the other 
(although this is no rigid pattern and the arrangement may also 
be mutual). One begins by serving his beloved a light but 
exquisite meal, which is usually eaten from a low table 
surrounded with large floor cushions. It should be explained that 
today most men know how to cook and that for many years 
people have been keeping their legs limber by sitting on the floor. 
For the meal, the couple wear loose and luscious clothes, and 
often the cooking is done at the table over an electric Permacoal 
or ordinary charcoal fire. As is now customary (and, I should add, 
quite legal), a water pipe is brought to the table after the meal for 
the smoking of marijuana or hashish, since it is now recognized 
that any alcohol other than light wine or beer is not conducive to 
sexual ecstasy. 

So as not to interfere with conversation during the meal, music 
is not played until the pipe is brought. Vibration Training has 
abolished mere background music, and it is now considered 
extremely bad taste not to listen whenever music is played. The 
music may be recorded, but sometimes one or two friends, or 
even the children of the couple, come in at this time with 
instruments and play for an hour or so while the pipe is smoked; 


and, after the serving partner clears the table, the couple adjourn 
to the bath for showers and a half-hour soak in the big tub. The 
serving partner then gives his or her companion a complete 
massage on a special pad provided in the bathroom. (Toilet 
facilities, I should note, are always in a separate room.) While the 
one who has received the massage takes a short rest, the other 
lays out a thick, fold-up floor pad by the table, setting beside it a 
basket of flowers, a box of jewels, and a make-up kit. Sometimes 
a pair of tall candlesticks is placed at each end of the pad, and 
incense, in a burner with a long wooden handle, is set on the 
table. 

The other person is then escorted, naked, from the bathroom 
and seated on the pad, and he or she is then adorned with jewels 
—usually an elaborate (but nonscratchy) necklace with matching 
wrist and ankle bracelets. The incense burner is lifted by its 
handle and used to perfume the hair and, thereafter, make-up is 
applied decoratively and imaginatively to the eyes, lips, and 
forehead, and often to other parts of the body. The forehead, for 
example, is usually adorned with a small “third eye” design such 
as is used among Hindu dancers. Flowers are then set in the hair 
and, perhaps, hung around the neck in the from of a lei. The 
serving partner usually puts on his or her own adornments 
immediately after the massage, during the rest. 

Both are now seated on the pad, facing each other. One of the 
benefits of Vibration Training is that it allows almost everyone to 
have a good singing voice, for the blocks against producing a 
clear tone have been removed. Therefore, it is now quite usual for 
lovers to sing to each other, with a hummed chant or with 
articulate words, sometimes using a guitar or a lute. It is thus 
that, before bodily contact begins, they caress each other with 
their eyes while singing. Some people prefer, at this time, to play 
such games as checkers, dominoes or ten-second chess, the 
winner having the privilege of proposing any form of sex-play 
desired. From this point on, almost anything goes, though the 
mood established by the preparations is often conducive to a 
long, slow form of sexual intercourse wherein the couple remain 
joined for an hour or more with very little motion, keeping the 
preorgasmic tension as high as possible without aiming at the 
release of climax. I realize that, back in the seventies, most men 
would consider this ritual affected and ridiculous and term the 


whole business a good honest fuck spoiled. Looking back, it is 
amazing to realize how unconscious we were of our barbarity, 
our atrocious manners, our slipshod cooking, our uncomfortable 
clothes, and our absurdly graceless and limited sex acts. 

Something more should be said about our use of psychedelics. 
Today these substances are given the same kind of respect that 
has always been accorded to the very finest French wines. 
Anyone, for example, who smokes them throughout the day is 
regarded as a crude guzzler incapable of appreciating their 
benefits. They are not used at ordinary parties amid chitchat and 
gossip, but only under circumstances in which the fullest 
attention may be given to the changes in consciousness that they 
confer. Thus, they are taken more as religious sacraments than as 
kicks, though today our religious attitudes are not pious or 
sanctimonious, since only very ignorant people now think of God 
as the cosmic stuffed shirt in whose presence no laughter is 
allowed. 

I well remember the first great hemp shop that was opened in 
San Francisco around 1976. It was essentially a long wooden bar 
with stools for the customers. On the bar itself were a few large 
crocks containing the basic and cheaper forms of the weed— 
Panama Red, Acapulco Gold, Indian Ganja, and Domestic Green. 
But against the wall behind the bar stood a long cabinet furnished 
with hundreds of small drawers that a local guitar maker had 
decorated with intricate ivory inlays in the Italian style. Each 
drawer carried a label indicating the precise field and year of the 
product, so that one could purchase all the different varieties 
from Mexico, Lebanon, Morocco, Egypt, India, and Vietnam, as 
well as the carefully tended plants of devout cannabinologists 
here at home. Business was conducted with leisure and courtesy, 
and the salesmen offered small samples for testing at the bar, 
along with sensitive and expert discussion of their special effects. 
I might add that the stronger psychedelics, such as LSD, were 
coming to be used only rarely—for psychotherapy, for retreats in 
religious institutions, and in our special hospitals for the dying. 

These latter became common after about 1978, when some of 
the students of Roseman and Kotowari realized that the sensation 
of dying could be reinterpreted ecstatically as total self-release. 
As a result, death became an occasion for congratulations and 
rejoicing. After all, “You only die once” (as the slogan went), and 


if death is as proper and natural as birth, it is absurd not to make 
the most of it. Even today, the science of geriatrics is far from 
conferring physical immortality, though it is increasingly 
common for people to pass their 100th or even 150th birthdays. 
Our hospitals for the dying are the work of our most imaginative 
architects and are set about with orchards and flower gardens, 
fountains and spas, and we have utterly forsaken the grisly and 
hollow rituals of mid-century morticians. Even the young have 
been taught to contemplate without creeps and shudders the 
prospect of their annihilation, by means of exposure—in the 
course of Vibration Training—to intense light and sound, 
followed by total darkness and silence. 

And we now have something completely new. You will 
remember that, in 1969, Dr. Joseph Weber of the University of 
Maryland discovered and measured gravity waves. This led, in 
1982, to a method for polarizing the force of gravity that has 
revolutionized transportation, abolished smog, and_ so 
redistributed population that densely crowded cities no longer 
exist. Three physicists—Conrad, Schermann, and Grodzinski— 
found a way of polarizing a material similar to lead so as to give 
it a negative weight in proportion to its positive, or normal, 
weight. This material can be attached to the back of a strong, 
wide belt, carrying also the requisite electronic equipment, plus 
directional and volume controls, thus enabling the wearer to float 
off the ground or shoot high into the air. At low volume, one can 
take enormous strides, a mile long and fifty feet high at the peak, 
or float gently through valleys and over the tops of trees without 
rush or noise. At high volume and dressed in a space suit, one can 
soar into outer space or travel easily at three hundred miles an 
hour at four thousand feet. Needless to say, every such outfit is 
equipped with a radar device that brings one to a hovering halt 
the moment there is any danger of collision. Much larger units of 
the leadlike material are attached to freight and passenger 
aircraft, and the silent ease of vertical ascent and descent has 
freed us from all the hassle and inconvenience of the old airports. 

But we are not in a hurry. As a result, negative gravitation has 
given us everything for which we envied the birds, and it is much 
used for the sport of lolling about in the air, for skydiving and 
dancing, for “sitting” on clouds, and for reaching homes now 
built on otherwise inaccessible mountaintops and in secluded 


valleys. You will remember the reports of the ecstasy of 
weightlessness given long ago by spacemen, skydivers, and 
skindivers. Now this is available to everyone, and we literally 
float about our business. As Toynbee foresaw, civilization has 
become etherealized; grass grows on the highways, and earth has 
been relieved of all its concrete belts and patches. 

Of course, the main problem of the ecstatic life is comparable 
to fatigue in metals: it is impossible to remain at a peak of ecstasy 
for a long time, even when the types of ecstasy are frequently 
varied. Furthermore, consciousness tends to repress or ignore a 
perpetual stimulus—such as the sea-level pressure of air on the 
skin. This has given us a new respect for mild asceticism. Since 
the ecological crisis, enormous numbers of people have taken to 
gardening, and cultivate fruits and vegetables on every scrap of 
arable land, using large Fuller domes as hothouses in winter, 
which itself is much milder than it used to be, thanks to 
worldwide climate control. Millions are therefore up by six in the 
morning (your time), digging, hoeing, weeding and pruning. At 
the same time, we eat much less in bulk and no longer expect 
disgustingly overloaded plates in restaurants. Not only is our food 
more nutritive but we also find our stamina and muscle tone 
much better for lack of stuffing ourselves. Despite the advantages 
of negative gravitation, we walk and hike almost religiously, for 
with our wealth of gardens, the landscape is worth seeing and the 
unpaved ground is easy on the feet. Ample time and absence of 
rush likewise encourage patient and highly skilled work in all 
types of art and craft. You would, I suppose, call us fanatical 
hobbyists—a world of experts in whatever one loves to do, from 
athletics to zoology. 

We are much aware of little ecstasies—the sensation of carving 
wood with a really sharp chisel, timeless absorption in making 
carpets as glowing as the finest Orientals, laying down and 
polishing parquet floors in various natural colors of wood, 
bottling dried herbs from the garden, unraveling tangled string, 
listening to wind bells made of sonor (a new and marvelously 
resonant metal), selecting and arranging painted tiles for a 
chessboard, expertly boning a fish, roasting chestnuts over 
charcoal in the evening, combing a woman’s hair, or washing and 
massaging a friend’s feet. As soon as we freed ourselves from the 
mirage of hurrying time—which was nothing more than the 


projection of our own impatience—we were alive again, as in 
childhood, to the miracles and ecstasies of ordinary life. You 
would be astounded at the beauty of our homes, our furniture, 
our clothes, and even our pots and pans, for we have the time to 
make most of these things ourselves, and the sense of reality to 
see that they—rather than money—constitute genuine wealth. 

We also cultivate something oddly known as the ecstasy of 
ordinary consciousness—related, it would seem, to the Zen 
principle that “Your usual consciousness is Buddha,” meaning 
here the basic reality of life. We have become accustomed to 
living simultaneously on several levels of reality, some of which 
appear to be in mutual contradiction—as your physicists could 
regard the nucleus as both particle and wave. In your time, the 
overwhelmingly orthodox view of the world was objective; you 
took things to be just as scientists described them, and we still 
give due weight to this point of view. Taken by itself, however, it 
degrades man to a mere object: it defines him as he is seen from 
outside and so screens out his own inside vision of things. 
Therefore we also take into account the subjective, naive, and 
childlike way of seeing life and give it at least equal status. It 
was, I think, first shown by a British architect, Douglas Harding, 
writing in the early sixties, that from this point of view, one has 
no head. The only directly perceptual content of the head, he 
wrote, especially through the eyes and ears—which are directed 
outward from the head—is everything except the head. Once this 
obvious but overlooked fact becomes clear, you no longer regard 
your head as the center of consciousness; you cease to be a 
central thing upon which experience is banging, scratching, and 
being recorded. Thus, the center of awareness becomes one with 
all it perceives. You and the world become identical, and this 
disappearance of oneself is, to say the least, a blissful release. 

This way of interpreting reality does not contradict the 
scientific way any more than the colorlessness of a lens rejects the 
colors of flowers. On the contrary, it restores a whole dimension 
of value to life which your passion for objectivity neglected, and, 
by comparison, your exclusively scientific universe seems a 
desiccated, rattling, and senseless mechanism. Though it was self- 
centered, in the largest sense, it left out man himself. We have 
put him back—not as a definable object but as the basic and 
supreme mystery. And as the Dutch philosopher Aart van der 


Leeuw once put it, “The mystery of life is not a problem to be 
solved but a reality to be experienced.” 


The Reality of Reincarnation 


January 1972 


As far back as I can remember, I have always been fascinated by 
the idea of death. I think most children are. “If I should die before 
I wake ...” The prospect of going to sleep and never waking up is 
unthinkable but compellingly fascinating. One must agree, then, 
with Albert Camus that the only really serious philosophical 
question is whether or not to commit suicide. Because this is not 
just a matter of going forever into a state of darkness, like being 
buried alive or going blind. It is not only to have no future, to 
pass into a state of total blankness; it is also to be as if one had 
never been at all, to have neither present nor past. It would be as 
if, not only myself, but also the whole universe had never existed. 
And there would be no one to miss, regret, or object to the loss. 
No problems at all. 

At least, this would be the commonsense of the matter, 
abandoning all ideas of personal survival as wishful thinking 
without basis in any reliable evidence. Most intelligent and 
skeptical people take this to be the way things are, realize that 
nothingness is inconceivable, shrug their shoulders, and think no 
more of it. But I have never been able to be content with letting it 
go at that. I continue, as one spellbound, to contemplate, to try to 
imagine the state (or is it the nonstate?) of nothingness. 

When I ask myself the seemingly meaningless question what it 
is like to be nothing and never to have been, I think first of the 
way my own head looks to my eyes. For, going by the sense of 


sight alone, there is not, right behind my eyes, a dark place, or a 
hazy place. There is a positive sensation of nothing—which is 
quite different from saying that there isn’t anything, because, 
after all, I see out of this nothingness. 

The second idea that comes to mind is that when I am dead I 
will be (or “it” will be) just as I was before I was born. In both 
states, after death and before birth, it is as if I—and all else—had 
never been at all. Most people, again, shrug their shoulders and 
say, “We come from nothing and we return to nothing—and 
that’s the end of it.” But I demur. For it strikes me as utterly 
amazing that I did in fact come from this nothing. If I came from 
it once, I see no reason why I could not come from it again; for if, 
as is indeed the case, I did come from it once, this nothingness is, 
to say the least, unexplainably frisky. 

Now let me put together these two ideas of what nothingness is 
like. I try to go back and back in memory to how it was before I 
was born, and find a blank. I try to turn about and see what is 
immediately behind my eyes and also find a blank. But in both 
cases I have other evidence for knowing that something is there. 
Before I was born, there were my father and mother, the earth, 
the sun, moon, and stars, the galaxy, and the whole energy of the 
universe—and then space, another seeming blank. All this is 
blank because I have no memory or sensation of it as it was 
before I was born. 

In the same way I know that behind my eyes is my invisible 
brain. I do not understand it or remember how I grew it, or how 
my father and mother grew it, and I have no direct sensation of 
it. Therefore it is blank. But my seeing comes out of it in just the 
same sort of way that my being comes out of my father and 
mother, and the whole universe behind them, and the space 
“behind” it. As my unseen brain sees with my eyes, my 
unremembered past (which is the still continuing world) feels 
with my body. 

So, if I go back to the “nothing” before I was born and out of 
which I came, I find this very real and active universe. I have also 
the best evidence for believing that this same universe will be just 
as real and active after I am dead, for I have seen others die and 
then others born, and it still goes on. 

Now where in all this am I to locate my self? Most of us would 
agree without much argument that the unseen brain is more 


essentially me than the eyes, since a blind person still feels that he 
exists. But where am I to locate my self when I consider that, just 
as my brain sees with my eyes, the universe feels with my body? 
In other words, my body and all bodies come forth from this 
whirl of energy as leaves come from trees and fish from the ocean 
and, most remarkably, stars from space. 

If, then, I identify my self exclusively with my body, I separate 
it from the whirl of energy which “grew” me and, for that matter, 
is still growing me with its light, heat, air, and water. Yet if I 
identify my self with the whole whirl (which would be perfectly 
reasonable) people would say, “Who the hell do you think you 
are? You don’t run this universe.” To which I reply, “Who the hell 
do you think you are? You don’t know how your brain works. You 
haven’t the faintest idea how you shaped your skeleton.” It is, 
then, just as reasonable to say that my self is the whole whirl as 
to say that it is just this particular body, for I don’t consciously 
manage either. I don’t warm up the galaxy. I don’t design my 
nervous system. It happens, and I happen. My self does not 
manage itself as if it were something outside itself like an 
automobile or a typewriter. So if I don’t manage my self—if only 
defined as this body—there is no reason why I shouldn’t define 
my self as the whole universe. Considering all, the latter 
definition is far more reasonable. 

Furthermore, it seems obvious that the universe is a system 
which, by means of living bodies, becomes aware of itself—up to 
a point. Just as there is a blank behind the eyes, and just as you 
can’t kiss your own lips, the universe cannot know itself 
completely. If it could, there would be no surprises, and that 
would spoil the fun. Existence would be like making love to a 
plastic woman. 

With all this in mind, we can take a reasonable approach to the 
problem of death. By that I mean that we can clarify the problems 
without recourse to spookery—to divine revelations, to other 
people’s alleged psychic experiences, to spiritual teachers of 
questionable authority, or to any kind of unverifiable hocus- 
pocus. Without resorting to anything beyond what we all know; 
without supposing the existence of anything like an immortal 
soul, it can, for example, be shown that the ancient and popular 
idea of reincarnation is completely rational. I will not go so far as 
to say that I can prove it; but I can come close to that, and with 


better evidence than is available for many things that are taken as 
a matter of course. 

To explain myself I will have to invent the verb “to I,” which, 
with a convenient pun, has the same kind of sense as “to eye”— 
and I will spell it that way to avoid clumsy typography. So the 
universe “eyes” in the same way that a tree “apples” and space 
“stars.” (You can always turn a noun into a verb because every 
thing is also an event, a happening. Houses are “housing.”) 

My body, your body, everybody is the universe eyeing. 
Presumably to go beyond partiality and prejudice, it eyes with 
myriads of different bodies and keeps changing them. Variety is 
the spice of life. And because each body is the universe eyeing, 
everyone feels that he or she is “I.” Obviously, after the death of 
any one body, other bodies come into being, and in every case 
they have just the same experience of coming out of nothing as 
you and I had when we were born. So when the universe stops 
eyeing with my body, this body, it goes on with others, and all 
these others feel themselves as much “myself” as I do now. 

I know, then, that after I die other bodies, other eyeings, will 
be born. But this is really the same thing as saying that after I die 
I will again awake as a baby—any baby, but only one—just as I 
did before but without remembering the previous trip. For 
anyone who argues that after death there will be nothingness 
forever is really saying that when he dies the universe will cease 
to be. But we know that it goes on after people die, and that 
because it does the eyeing it is really more my self than this 
particular body. If any apple could become fully aware it would 
say, “I am what the tree is doing.” Thus if the universe has eyed 
me once it can eye me again. For effect I have put the word “me” 
in that sentence; if you doubt its truth, cross it out, and the 
sentence will be unquestionably true. And it will mean almost the 
same thing—because eye = me. 

But to believe in reincarnation we must show that there can be 
some particular connection between two distinct eyeings that do 
not overlap in time, as do father and son. If I talk about the 
universe “eyeing” me again, I am supposing that it will again 
produce another body, another life, so close to mine in style and 
character that it could be recognized as a return of Alan Watts. 
“Cold comfort,” you may object, “because that will still be 
someone else, even if your very double.” Nevertheless, I can show 


that there could be just as much connection between that other 
Alan Watts and myself as there is between myself today and 
myself tomorrow. 

It all depends on what we mean by connection. Look at any 
magazine photograph with a magnifying glass. Firm and 
continuous lines will dissolve into disconnected dots. Or go in the 
other direction. From close by, our galaxy appears to be a 
dispersal of disconnected stars, but from far off we would see the 
form of a spiral nebula. There are no “strings” connecting these 
stars. What connects them is that they form a pattern, in the same 
way as the dots in the magazine photograph. Patterns are not 
only configurations in space but also rhythms in time and, as 
such, are things, forms, and events just as real and solid as 
anything else that we can experience. Solid steel is a pulsating 
gyration of electrons and positrons separated by relatively 
colossal spaces, and physicists cannot quite make up their minds 
whether they are particles or waves. 

Continuous time-patterns are also revealed by fast-motion 
pictures of growing plants, or by speeding up the projector in a 
planetarium to such a pace that the planets seem to trace 
continuous lines across the dome. In the motion picture the plant 
is seen to be making a definite, formal gesture—like opening 
one’s hand—which is not ordinarily seen. In the planetarium the 
actual course or orbit of the planets becomes visible. Indeed, 
whatever we experience as existing, as continuing in time, is not 
so much persistent stuff as repetitive rhythm or vibration. 

Although it would be technically impossible to show a fast- 
motion picture of the courses of myriads of human lives between, 
say, 10,000 B.c. and the present, it would not be unreasonable to 
think that, if it could be done, we would recognize connections of 
pattern between separate courses. We could see a series of lives 
running from 10,000 to 9,930, from 8,500 to 8,430, and from 
8,300 to 8,240, in which three different individuals were tracing 
out a coherent pattern of behavior. At that speed they would 
seem just as much three appearances of one individual as 
someone you met successively at perhaps seven-year intervals. 
For the coherent continuity of any one individual is much like a 
whirlpool in a river; it is “there” day after day, although the 
water itself never stays put. You could even say that there is no 
such thing as a whirlpool, but that the river is whirlpooling in the 


same way that the universe eyes and the plant flowers. 

You could argue that no such connections or continuities would 
exist without someone or something, like an observer or a 
camera, to record them. But then, to be consistent, you would 
have to say that the spiral pattern of a galaxy doesn’t really exist 
until it is observed. It would be the same argument to say that 
there could be no real continuity between one life and another 
unless it had been “photographed” on one’s memory. But this will 
force you into arguing that a tree in a lonely valley isn’t there 
until someone sees it, and if you insist on following that line of 
reasoning you will at last be forced to claim that you are God 
imagining the universe. That might be true, but it isn’t the sort of 
position that scientific and skeptical people want to adopt. 

You might also argue that, given an observer, no such 
connections would be seen. This is utterly unlikely, because even 
among things so randomly distributed as the heavenly bodies we 
see galaxies, constellations, and the solar system; we find beauty 
in clouds and spray, and music in the sound of water. That we do 
so may have much to do with the structure of our senses and 
nerves, but they are, in turn, part of the system. It makes sense of 
itself in the act of eyeing, of sensing. 

If you have followed me this far you will have stopped 
worrying about death. You will have realized that to be or not to 
be is not the question, because you are a repeatable act of eyeing 
on the part of a system, a universe, that has perfectly well been 
able to take care of itself for at least 10,000 million years. And 
considering that, by means of death, it provides itself with a 
periodic forgettory as well as a memory, and also that it beholds 
itself in such improbable forms as giraffes and toucans, you may 
well be assured that it (i.e., you) will never be bored. 

I have been trying, then, to show the extreme likelihood of a 
reincarnation process without resorting to any evidence from the 
field of parapsychology and psychic research, in which such 
responsible investigators as Ian Stevenson have studied large 
numbers of people who claim vivid memories of former lives. (Dr. 
Stevenson is chairman of the Department of Neurology and 
Psychiatry at the University of Virginia School of Medicine and 
author of Twenty Cases Suggestive of Reincarnation, published in 
1966 by the American Society for Psychical Research.) To most 
scientists this evidence is still suspect because, for one thing, the 


human mind is a fertile field for hallucinations and, for another, 
there has been no scientifically acceptable and respectable theory 
to support it. But if Dr. Stevenson can establish, in one case alone, 
that a person remembers details of a former life which he cannot 
have discovered by ordinary means (and I think he has 
established it in more than one case), all we need is an 
intellectually respectable theory to account for it. 

But it should be noted as an amusing aside that what is 
intellectually respectable is often a matter of academic fashion. 
When the great Austrian entomologist Von Fritsch proved beyond 
all doubt that bees use language, an entomologist at the 
University of California expressed “passionate reluctance” to 
accept the evidence. Why the emotional reaction? Because in 
much of the academic and scientific community it is a point of 
honor, a rubric of ritual, and a requirement of intellectual 
etiquette that one abstain from saying anything that might 
remind one’s colleagues of religion, mysticism, magic, or the 
supernatural—or anything to suggest that forms of life other than 
human are truly intelligent. Up to a point this is a healthy 
attitude with which I am not arguing, except to remind such 
academicians of their overly heavy emotional investment in 
maintaining it. In the meantime I prefer to play the game by their 
rules. 

I have been explaining a theory of connection between bodies 
or forms that are separate in space, such as electrons and 
positrons or stars, or distinct in time, such as the individual 
pulses of a musical tone or of cosmic rays. I have also suggested 
that still more widely separated events, such as individual life- 
courses and the appearance and disappearance of stellar systems, 
can also be considered as pulses in a continuing rhythm or time- 
pattern. This is akin to the proposal of the British biophysicist 
Launcelot L. Whyte that the unitary principle of all systems be 
considered as their form (or pattern). This simple and elegant 
idea is extremely hard to explain to people who have had it 
rubbed into their minds that the world operates like a game of 
billiards wherein solid balls of stuff shove each other around, and 
must therefore be explained on the basis of Who Pushed Whom? 
There is nothing in the least unscientific about Whyte’s idea 
because forms can be measured, counted, and described, whereas 
pure and undifferentiated stuff is utterly inconceivable. 


Right here is the main reason why any memory of former lives 
cannot be explained “scientifically.” For scientists—especially 
engineers, and even some physicists—still have it in the back of 
their minds (though many of them know better) that all physical 
processes must be inscribed and transmitted on basic stuff. It 
seems, then, that to explain remembrance of past lives there 
would have to be some sort of imperishable stuff or substance to 
carry the memories, like a photographic film. But that would be 
just exactly what was meant by the crude sense of the old- 
fashioned soul or spirit, which neither I nor the scientific 
community wants to drag in. 

If, however, we won’t allow ourselves to drag it in to explain 
memories of former lives, we can’t use it to explain memories of 
last Tuesday. There seems to be no problem about remembering 
last Tuesday because we have all been tacitly assuming that its 
events have been imprinted on the stuff of our brains and bodies. 
Yet there is no such stuff, just as there are no strings connecting 
the stars of the galaxy or electrons of the atom. Just as the 
physicists have never been able to detect any spiritual stuff, they 
have never found any material stuff. They have found measurable 
shapes, structures, patterns, and pulses—all with lots of space 
between them—but no undifferentiated goo out of which these 
forms are “made,” like pots from clay. If you ever did find this 
basic stuff, how would you talk about it? It would entirely elude 
formal and structural description. All along the whole notion of 
material stuff has been a superstition as gross as werewolves and 
banshees. What we really experience as stuff is nothing more than 
form seen out of focus, for you can’t see the detailed structure of 
kapok or clay until you look at it with a microscope. Then it is no 
longer fuzzy or gooey stuff; it is crystal clear. 

Thus when a scientist like Ian Stevenson finds someone who 
remembers a former life, what can he do except check out the 
story in just the same way as he would verify someone’s account 
of what happened last Tuesday? A small boy in Thailand, or 
Japan, takes us to a village where he has never been, shows us 
the way around, and introduces us to all his old friends. So he 
remembers. We don’t like to admit it (we say because we can’t 
explain it) but the truth is that while there is some evidence for 
reincarnation, we have a theory against it. We don’t rule out the 
stars as hallucinations on the theory that light cannot pulse across 


empty space where there is no ether, no stuff to carry its waves. 
We don’t make the initial supposition that all tales are lies or 
fantasies until it is proved otherwise, or until we know more 
about the nervous system, or about the relation of mind to brain. 
But in a cultural situation where reincarnation has been both 
theologically and scientifically heretical, we are not likely to 
encourage or listen to little children when they speak of it. 

In sum, then, I have tried to show that reincarnation has very 
strong theoretical probability, without resorting to the 
paranormal evidence and even without being able to explain the 
transmission of memories. I have carefully avoided bringing in 
the moral and retributive arguments, since they have little force, 
and I do not find a person’s fortunes or misfortunes explained by 
a former life. I find the explanation postponed, as in all attempts 
to explain the present by the past. But it is basically an 
intellectual block to find it incredible that you have more than 
one life. It is just as incredible that we have this one. It is still 
more incredible to suppose that what has happened once cannot 
happen again. 


Implications of Karma 


February 25, 1971 


The Hindu-Buddhist theory of karma is at once simpler and more 
complex than is generally supposed. Popularly, karma is viewed 
as an almost mechanical system of retribution whereby evil 
action bears evil consequences, and good action good 
consequences, to the doer—in this present life, or in some life to 
come. Evil action towards another being is, at the same time, his 
own karma and the result of his own evil action, and also brings 
evil to the offender. Good action is the karmic merit of the 
recipient, and brings merit to the doer. Karma is not popularly 
understood as fate, for at any time one may freely initiate good or 
evil karma regardless of karma accumulated from the past. Karma 
is therefore seen as a moral law of cause and effect built into the 
structure of the universe. 

Actually, the word karma means simply “action” or “doing” 
and does not imply that the universe involves an impersonal 
system of moral justice which recognizes and weighs human 
conventions of good and evil. Thus if we say of someone killed in 
an airplane crash that it was his karma, it means just that the 
apparent accident was his own doing, and the doing of all those 
involved. Furthermore, Buddhist philosophy does not admit the 
real existence of any nuclear ego which could cause or be the 
recipient of karma. The apparent identity of an enduring being by 
whom deeds are done and to whom they happen is understood as 
nothing more than a continuing pattern in and of the stream of 


deeds, as when a stone is tossed into a pool, no body of water, 
called “a wave,” moves outwards from the point of impact. The 
water moves up and down, perpendicularly, and the horizontal 
movement of the wave is through the water, but not of it. The 
horizontally moving ridge of the wave is not the same water at 
the circumference as it was at the center, as may easily be seen 
by throwing a dollop of dye into its path—for the dyed water will 
stay in the same lateral position. Buddhists therefore regard a 
“self? who goes through life like a passenger in a train as an 
illusion, as is also the vertical motion of a laterally revolving 
barber’s pole. 

My karma is thus the action or behavior of an enduring pattern, 
like the crest-trough formation of a wave, which is recognized in 
1971 as in 1950 as Alan Watts or, better, as Alan Wattsing. But 
this pattern consists equally of what the pattern is said to do and 
of what is said to happen to it. Both constitute its behavior or 
motion, for I could not walk if the sun were not keeping me 
warm. My physical shape is as much produced by the expansive 
strength of my bones and muscles as by the pressure of air around 
and upon them. Or, in other words, the way my pattern works 
derives as much from heredity as from environment. So too, the 
pattern of a river comes equally from the gravity of the water and 
the lay of the land. 

What, then, is the point of saying that what happens to me, 
involuntarily or accidentally, is my own karma or doing? It is to 
say, first, that there would be nothing recognizable as me unless 
there were also something recognizable as not-me, and that we 
cannot identify what someone does voluntarily unless we can at 
the same time identify what happens to him involuntarily. We 
can then go on to say, second, that because the Alan Watts 
pattern or doing or karma involves both it is both. If my karma is 
both what I do and what happens to me then I am not, as I 
imagined, just one aspect of the process. I am not just the giving- 
and-receiving aspect, but also the happening which goes on 
outside anything usually recognized as me. But we are one-sided 
in our thinking and attention and, as Gestalt psychology has long 
pointed out, notice the figure and ignore the background. But the 
new totality or self, recognized when both the voluntary and the 
involuntary aspects of one’s karma are taken into consideration, 
goes far beyond anything that can be narrowly and one-sidedly 


defined as Alan Watts or John Doe. If I cannot be my particular 
“self” except in relation to the particular “other,” or environment, 
which surrounds me, then we have a situation in which every 
identifiable pattern in the universe implies all the others. In 
Mahayana Buddhist philosophy this is call the dharmadhatu, the 
mutual interpenetration and interdependence of all things and 
events—one in all, and all in one. 

The same conclusion is reached from those viewpoints of Hindu 
philosophy which accord at least some reality to the ego as the 
purusha or jivatman which is the witness or knower behind all 
that I experience. But the point will be expressed in a different 
way. If I realize that everything which happens to me, i.e., the 
rest of the universe, is my karma or doing, I will then realize that 
my particular jivatman is actually the atman, the supra-individual 
Self, which is identical with Brahman, the Self of the universe. If 
central “self”? and peripheral “other” are, however different 
explicitly, mutually interdependent, they are implicitly one. What 
is explicitly dual, or dvaita, is implicitly nondual, or advaita. 
Whether the point of departure is Buddhist or Hindu, the 
conclusion is the same realization of “cosmic consciousness” in 
which consciousness is not restricted to its fixation on the 
voluntary, central, and individualized aspect of karma. 

So long as this restriction continues we take side with the 
voluntary aspect and thus try to extend it indefinitely. We own 
what we do and disown what happens, and go on to expand the 
area which we can own and control. Technology, as now 
practiced, is one of the principal means of this expansion, but we 
are just beginning to see that this extension of the voluntary is 
also extension of the involuntary, because our behavior is 
increasingly controlled by the nature and structure of our 
machinery. Our food, clothing, housing, traveling, and general 
behavior must increasingly be dictated by mechanical efficiency 
to the point—already passed—where we cannot live without it. It 
is even conceivable that machinery is creating an environment in 
which only machines can live, that it will capture the voluntary 
aspect of karma and eliminate the biological world by 
regimentation and asphyxiation. Its operations are not restrained 
or confused by emotions or tender feelings. But, on the other 
hand, our very strength is in the possibility of feeling for, or 
owning, what is other than ourselves—and if machines cannot 


accomplish this transcendence of self and other they will destroy 
themselves faster than people have done the same. 

Overstressing the voluntary aspect of karma is ignore-ance 
(avidya) of the other, which is in turn that craving or grasping 
(trishna) of control described by the Buddha as the root of 
suffering. His dharma or method of life was, instead, the Middle 
Way of compassion—that is, of feeling for both sides, of allowing, 
respecting, and owning the apparently random and involuntary 
aspect of our karma. This means increasing tolerance for 
surprising and unscheduled events, for life-forms and life-styles 
other than our own, and for all things sinuous, slippery, 
wayward, and wiggly as distinct from straight, square, boxed, and 
classified in defiance of the curvaceous forms of the natural 
world. Perhaps the music of Handel has made us blind to the real 
horror of Isaiah’s words— 


The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, 
“Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the 
desert a highway for our God.” Every valley shall be 
exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made 
low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the 
rough places plain. 


It is happening all over California. 

When we fight the environment and disown it, our methods 
and weapons become part of it, part of the involuntary and 
uncontrollable component of karma. This, as in the tale of the 
Sorcerer’s Apprentice, is the fate of all power games, not only in 
the areas of material power but also in those of psychic and 
spiritual power. This is why one should not be misled by the 
many forms of mental and psychic discipline which promise 
greater and greater control over thought and emotion, and even 
magical powers. All such methods—unless specifically designed 
to be self-defeating and so to reduce the ambition for power to 
absurdity—are simply “ego trips” of a refined and highbrow 
order, but often they produce such sensational short-run results 
that people are easily beguiled by the pseudo-gurus who tout 
them. Even Tibetan Buddhists, upon whom romanticists project 
their wildest fantasies of spiritual magic, make a clear distinction 


between the Way of Powers and the Way of Wisdom, insisting 
that the former, however far pursued, can never lead to 
Buddhahood. 

The way of Wisdom lies, therefore, in recognizing things which 
happen to you as your own karma—not as punishments for 
misdeeds or rewards for virtue (for there really is no “bad” or 
“good” karma), but as your own doing. For in this way you come 
to see that the real “you” includes both the controlled and the 
uncontrolled aspects of your experience. Much as we despise 
“primitives” for their animistic beliefs which regard mountains, 
rivers, trees, and animals as if they were people, they are on the 
right track because the animation of nature (rather than 
machinery) is a step in the direction of owning it as we own our 
brains and bodies, our appetites and dreams, for nature is our 
own unconscious activity. But almost every educated person has 
been trained to believe that everything outside the human skin is 
stupid and that air, water, earth, and fire are simply dead and 
witless substances. At the same time he has been trained to feel 
this whole dimension of “things that happen” as entirely 
disconnected from his own inner workings. 

I am not, of course, suggesting that nature is purposeful in the 
same way as our conscious attention, with its verbal and 
numerical methods of calculation. Nature is purposeful only in 
and as man, just as it is yellow, long-necked, and spotted only in 
the giraffe. Otherwise, it has no more need of purposeful 
calculation than a snake needs legs. Nevertheless, it is undeniably 
intelligent. We ourselves did not get born on purpose; we do not 
plan our breath, nor calculate the circuitry of our brains, yet it is 
amazing how little we seem to realize that we would be incapable 
of purpose without these marvels of purposeless and involuntary 
construction. We are simply not used to the idea that there are 
forms of intelligence which do not use the linear, timebound 
methods of conscious attention and scanning. Just as we do not 
confuse a televised image of the president with the president 
himself, we should not confuse our linear models of the world (in 
terms of words, numbers, or other strung-out signs) with the 
world itself. 

I—and others—have been saying for years that destruction of 
the environment is based on contempt for everything outside the 
human skin, failure to see that as a field flowers, the planet 


peoples, and ignorance of the fact that the oceans, the air, and 
even the solar system are as much our vital organs as heart and 
stomach. We are not in nature; we are nature. But as masters of 
technical weapons we are fighting the environment as if we still 
believed ourselves to be strangers on the earth, sent down into 
this world from a purely abstract, ideational, and spiritual 
heaven. Oddly enough, people who call themselves naturalists 
and materialists are, when judged by their actions, the most 
devout abstractionists and the most dedicated violators of 
material. 

What this comes to is that the spiritualist (or mentalist) and 
materialist (or mechanistic) philosophies are both on the same 
side. They represent opposed concepts of reality, and reality— 
nature—is not a concept. It is not material, if “material” means 
unspiritual, and not spiritual, if “spiritual” means nonmaterial. 
One could, perhaps, say that the sound of the waves is a spiritual 
experience and that pure mathematics is a physical operation of 
the nervous system. But the point is that our ideas about reality 
represent it but do not embrace it, since all conceptual views— 
spiritualism, materialism, voluntarism, determinism, vitalism, 
mechanism, etc.—are one-sided deviations from the Middle Way, 
where the wind is your own breath and your private thoughts are 
clouds in the sky. 


Spectrum of Love 


November 1969 (transcription of a lecture) 


We know that from time to time there arise among human beings 
people who seem to exude love as naturally as the sun gives out 
heat. These people, usually of enormous creative power, are the 
envy of us all, and, by and large, man’s religions are attempts to 
cultivate that same power in ordinary people. Unfortunately, they 
often go about this task as one would attempt to make the tail 
wag the dog. I remember that when I was a small boy in school, I 
was enormously interested in being able to do my schoolwork 
properly. Everyone told me that I did not work hard enough, that 
I ought to work, but when I asked, “How do you work?” 
everybody shut up. 

I was extremely puzzled. There were teachers who apparently 
knew how to work and who had attained considerable heights of 
scholarship. I thought that maybe I could learn “the secret” by 
copying their mannerisms. I would imitate the style of 
handwriting they used. I would use the same kind of pen. I would 
affect the same speech and gestures and, insofar as I could get 
around the school uniform, even clothing. (This was a private 
school in England, not a public school in America.) 

None of this revealed the secret. I was, as it were, copying the 
outward symptoms and knew nothing of the inner fountain of 
being able to work. Exactly the same thing is true in the case of 
people who love. When we study the behavior of people who 
have the power of love within them, we can catalogue how they 
behave in various situations, and out of this catalogue formulate 


certain rules. 

One of the peculiar things we notice about people who have 
this astonishing universal love is that they are often apt to play it 
rather cool on sexual love. The reason is that for them an erotic 
relationship with the external world operates between that world 
and every single nerve ending. Their whole organism—physical, 
psychological, and spiritual—is an erogenous zone. Their flow of 
love is not channeled as exclusively in the genital system as is 
most other people’s. This is especially true in a culture such as 
ours, where for so many centuries that particular expression of 
love has been so marvelously repressed as to make it seem the 
most desirable. We have, as a result of two thousand years of 
repression, “sex on the brain.” It’s not always the right place for 
it. 

People who exude love are in every way like rivers—they 
stream. And when they collect possessions and things that they 
like, they are apt to give them to other people. (Did you ever 
notice that when you give things away, you keep getting more? 
That, as you create a vacuum, more flows in?) 

Having noticed this, the codifiers of loving behavior write that 
you should give to tax-deductible institutions and to the poor, 
and should be nice to people, that you should act towards your 
relatives and friends and indeed even enemies as if you loved 
them (even if you don’t). For Christians and Jews and believers in 
God, there is a peculiarly difficult task enjoined upon us: namely, 
that “thou shalt love the Lord thy God,” not only going through 
the motions externally, but with all your heart, with all your soul, 
and with all your mind. And that is of course very demanding 
indeed. 

It is as if, for example, we admired the music of a certain 
composer and, having studied his style very thoroughly, we drew 
up rules of musical composition based upon the behavior of this 
composer. We then send our children to music school where they 
learn these rules in the hope that if they apply them, they will 
turn into first-class musicians, which they usually fail to do. 
Because what might be called the technique of music—as the 
technique of morals, as well as the technique of speech, of 
language—is very valuable because it gives you something to 
express. If you don’t have anything to say, not even the greatest 
mastery of English will long stand you in good stead. 


So the question and the puzzle remain: You cannot imitate this 
thing ... mere is no way of “getting” it, and yet it is absolutely 
essential that we have it. Obviously, the human race is not going 
to flourish harmoniously unless we are able to love each other. 
The question becomes: How do you get it? Is it something that 
you simply have to contract, like measles? Or, as theologians say, 
is it “a gift of divine grace” which somehow is dished out to some 
but not to others? And if there is no way of getting divine grace 
by anything you do, as the Calvinists aver, then hadn’t we better 
just sit around and wait until something happens? 

Surely, we can’t be left in that sort of hopeless situation. There 
must be some way of getting “grace” or “divine charity” or 
“divine love’—some sort of way in which we can, as it were, 
open ourselves so as to become conduit pipes for the flow. 

The more subtle preachers try to see if we can open ourselves 
and thus teach methods of meditation and spiritual discipline in 
the hope that we can contact this power. Less subtle preachers 
simply say you don’t have enough faith or guts or will power: “If 
you only put your shoulder to the wheel and shoved, you would 
be an exemplar and a saint.” 

Actually, you may only be an extremely clever hypocrite. The 
whole history of religion is the history of the failure of preaching. 
Preaching is moral violence. When you deal with the so-called 
practical world, and people don’t behave the way you wish they 
would, you get out the army or police force or “the big stick.” 
And if those strike you as somewhat crude, you resort to giving 
lectures—“lectures” in the sense of solemn adjuration and 
exhortation to “behave better next time.” 

Many a parent says to the child, “Nice children love their 
mothers. And I’m sure you’re a nice child. You ought to love your 
mother, not because I, your mother, say so, but because you 
really want to do so.” One of the difficulties here is that none of 
us, in our heart of hearts, respects love which is not freely given. 
For example, you have an ailing parent, and you are a son or 
daughter who feels dutifully that he should look after his parents 
because they’ve done so much for him. But somehow, your living 
with your father or mother prevents you from having a home and 
a life of your own, and naturally you resent it. Your parents are 
well aware that you resent this, even if they pretend to ignore it. 
They therefore feel guilty that they have imposed upon your 


loyalty. You in turn can’t really admit the fact that you resent 
them for getting sick, even though they couldn’t help it. And 
therefore no one enjoys the relationship. It becomes a painful 
duty to be carried out. 

The same thing would naturally happen if, a number of years 
after having (at the altar) made a solemn and terrible promise 
that you would love your wife or husband come what may 
forever and ever “until death do you part,” suddenly you find that 
you really haven’t the heart to do it any more. Then you feel 
guilty, and that you ought to love your wife and family. 

The difficulty is this: You cannot, by any means, teach a selfish 
person to be unselfish. Whatever a selfish person does, whether it 
be giving his body to be burned, or giving all that he possesses to 
the poor, he will still do it in a selfish way of feeling, and with 
extreme cunning, marvelous self-deception, and deception of 
others. But the consequences of fake love are almost invariably 
destructive, because they build up resentment on the part of the 
person who does the fake loving, as well as on the part of those 
who are its recipients. (This may be why our foreign-aid program 
has been such a dismal failure.) 

Now, of course, you may say that I am being impractical and 
might ask, “Well, do we just have to sit around and wait until we 
become inwardly converted and learn, through the grace of God 
or some other magic, how to love? In the meantime, do we do 
nothing about it, and conduct ourselves as selfishly as we feel?” 

The first problem raised here is honesty. The Lord God says, at 
the beginning of things, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.” What 
appears to be a commandment is actually a challenge, or what in 
Zen Buddhism is called a koan, a spiritual problem. If you exercise 
yourself resolutely, and try to love God or your neighbor, you will 
find that you get more tangled up. You will realize increasingly 
that the reason you are attempting to obey this as a 
commandment is that you want to be the right kind of person. 

But love is not a sort of rare commodity—everybody has it. 
Existence is love. Everybody has the force running. Perhaps the 
way in which you find the force of love operating in you is as a 
passionate like for booze or ice cream or automobiles or good- 
looking members of the opposite sex, or even of the same sex. But 
love is operating there. People, of course, tend to distinguish 


between various kinds of love. There are “good” kinds, such as 
divine charity, and there are allegedly “bad” kinds, such as 
“animal lust.” But they are all forms of the same thing. They 
relate in much the same way as the colors of the spectrum 
produced by passing light through a prism. We might say that the 
red end of the spectrum of love is Dr. Freud’s libido, and the 
violet end of the spectrum of love is agape, the divine love or 
divine charity. In the middle, the various yellows, blues, and 
greens are as friendship, human endearment, consideration. 

Now it’s said that selfish people “love themselves.” I would say 
that that belies a misunderstanding of the whole thing: “yourself” 
is really something that is impossible to love. One obvious reason 
for this is that one’s self, when you try to focus on it to love it or 
know it, is oddly elusive. 

Let me illustrate why. Once there was a fish who lived in the 
great ocean, and because the water was transparent, and always 
conveniently got out of the way of his nose when he moved 
along, he didn’t know he was in the ocean. Well, one day the fish 
did a very dangerous thing, he began to think: “Surely I am a 
most remarkable being, since I can move around like this in the 
middle of empty space.” Then the fish became confused because 
of thinking about moving and swimming, and he suddenly had an 
anxiety paroxysm and thought he had forgotten how. At that 
moment he looked down and saw the yawning chasm of the 
ocean depths, and he was terrified that he would drop. Then he 
thought: “If I could catch hold of my tail in my mouth, I could 
hold myself up.” And so he curled himself up and snapped at his 
tail. Unfortunately, his spine wasn’t quite supple enough, so he 
missed. As he went on trying to catch hold of his tail, the 
yawning black abyss below became ever more terrible, and he 
was brought to the edge of total nervous breakdown. 

The fish was about to give up, when the ocean, which had been 
watching with mixed feelings of pity and amusement, said, “What 
are you doing?” “Oh,” said the fish, “I’m terrified of falling into 
the deep dark abyss, and I’m trying to catch hold of my tail in my 
mouth to hold myself up.” So the ocean said, “Well, you’ve been 
trying that for a long time now, and still you haven’t fallen down. 
How come?” “Oh, of course, I haven’t fallen down yet,” said the 
fish, “because, because—I’m swimming!” “Well,” came the reply, 
“T am the Great Ocean, in which you live and move and are able 


to be a fish, and I have given all of myself to you in which to 
swim, and I support you all the time you swim. But here you, 
instead of exploring the length, breadth, depth, and height of my 
expanse, are wasting your time pursuing your own end.” From 
then on, the fish put his own end behind him (where it belonged) 
and set out to explore the ocean. 

Well, that shows one of the reasons it’s difficult to love 
yourself: Your “spine isn’t quite supple enough.” 

Another reason is that “oneself,” in the ordinary sense of one’s 
ego, doesn’t exist. It seems to exist, in a way, in the sense that the 
equator exists as an abstraction. The ego is not a psychological or 
physical organ, it’s a social convention, like the equator, like the 
clock or the calendar, or like the dollar bill. These social 
conventions are abstractions which we agree to treat as if they 
did exist. We live in relation to the external world in just exactly 
the same way that one end of the stick exists in relation to the 
other end. The ends are indeed different, but they’re of the same 
stick. 

Likewise, there is a polar relationship between what you call 
your “self” and what you call “other.” You couldn’t experience 
your “self” unless you could experience “other,” nor could you 
experience “other” unless you also had the experience of “self.” 
We might say that we feel that one’s “self” and the “other” are 
poles apart. Oddly, we use that phrase, “poles apart,” to express 
extreme difference. But things that are “poles apart” are poles of 
something, as of a magnet, or a globe, and so are actually 
inseparable. What happens if you saw the south pole off a magnet 
with a hacksaw? The new end, opposite the original north pole, 
becomes the south pole, and the piece that was chopped off 
develops its own north pole. The poles are inseparable and 
generate each other. 

So it is in the relationship between the “self” and the “other.” 
Now, if you explore what you mean when you say you “love 
yourself,” you will make the startling discovery that everything 
that you love is something that you thought was other than 
yourself, even if it be very ordinary things such as ice cream or 
booze. In the conventional sense, booze is not you. Nor is ice 
cream. It becomes “you,” in a manner of speaking, when you 
consume it, but then you don’t “have it” any more, so you look 
around for more in order to love it once again. But so long as you 


love it, it’s never you. When you love people, however selfishly 
you love them (because of the pleasant sensations they give you), 
still, it is somebody else that you love. And as you inquire into 
this and follow honestly your own selfishness, many interesting 
transformations begin to occur in you. 

One of the most interesting of these transformations is being 
directly and honestly “selfish.” You stop deceiving people. A great 
deal of damage is done in practical human relations by saying 
that you love people, when what you mean is that you ought to 
(and don’t). You give the impression, and people begin to expect 
things of you which you are never going to come through with. 

You know of people to whom you say, “I like so-and-so, 
because with him or her, you always know where you are.” It’s 
impossible to impose on people like that. On the other hand, if 
you say, “Can I come and stay overnight with you?” and they 
don’t want you, they’ll reply, “I’m sorry, but I’m tired this 
weekend, and I’d rather not have you.” Or “Some other time.” 
Well, that’s very refreshing. If I feel the person hasn’t been quite 
honest with me, and I accept their hospitality, ’'m always 
wondering if they would really prefer that I wasn’t there. 

But one doesn’t always listen to one’s inner voice: we often 
pretend that it’s not there. That’s unfortunate, because if you 
don’t listen to your inner voice, you are not listening to your own 
wisdom and to your own love. You are becoming insensitive to it 
just as your hosts are trying to suppress the fact that, for the time 
being, they don’t want your presence. Likewise, let’s suppose that 
you are married and have an unwanted baby. It is profoundly 
disturbing to a child to have false love pretended to it. To begin 
with, the milk tastes wrong. The smell isn’t right. The outward 
gesture is “Darling, I love you,” but the smell is “You're a little 
bastard and a nuisance.” 

Very few of us can accept the idea that we don’t love our 
children, because it seems to be unnatural. We say that mother- 
love is the most beautiful and natural thing in the world. But it 
isn’t. It’s relatively rare, and if you don’t love your child, you 
confuse him or her. The child will respect you much more if you 
say, “Darling, you’re a perfect nuisance, but I will look after you 
because I have to.” Well, at least then everything is quite clear! 

I found in personal relations of this kind a very wonderful rule: 
that you never, never show false emotions. You don’t have to tell 


people exactly what you think “in no uncertain terms,” as they 
say. But to fake emotions is destructive, especially in family 
matters and between husbands and wives or between lovers. It 
always comes to a bad end. Thus, on the occasions when, for 
personal friends, I perform marriage ceremonies, instead of 
saying, “I require and charge you both that you shall answer in 
the dreadful Day of Judgment, etc.,” I say, “I require and charge 
you both that you shall never pretend to love one another when 
you don’t.” This is a gamble. It is likewise a gamble to trust 
yourself to come through with love. 

But there is really no alternative. 

Now to trust oneself to be capable of love or to bring up love— 
in other words, to function in a sociable way and in a creative 
way—is to take a risk, a gamble. You may not come through with 
it. In the same way, when you fall in love with somebody else, or 
form an association with someone else, and you trust them, they 
may as a matter of fact not fulfill your expectations. But that risk 
has to be taken. The alternative to taking that risk is much worse 
than trusting and being deceived. 

When you say, “I will not trust other people, and I will not 
trust myself,” what course remains? You have to resort to force. 
You have to employ stacks of policemen to protect you, and have 
to hold a club over yourself all the time, and say, “No, no. My 
nature is wayward, animal, perverse, fallen, grounded in sin.” 
What then happens? When you refuse to take the gamble of 
trusting yourself to be capable of love, you become, if you will 
excuse this extremely graphic but nevertheless relevant simile, 
like a person who cannot trust himself to have bowel movements. 
Many children learn this from parents who do not trust them, and 
think they ought to have these movements in rhythm with the 
clock, which is a different kind of rhythm from that of the 
organism. People who cannot trust themselves to do even this 
take laxatives endlessly, as a result of which their whole system 
gets fouled up. 

Exactly the same thing happens with people who can’t trust 
themselves to go to sleep. They have to take all kinds of pills. And 
so also with people who can’t trust themselves to love, and have 
to take all sorts of artificial and surgical measures to produce the 
effect of love for saving face. They become progressively more 
incapable of loving at all, and they create turmoil and 


misunderstanding and chaos in themselves and others and 
society. 

In other words, to live, and to love, you have to take risks. 
There will be disappointments and failures and disasters as a 
result of taking these risks. But in the long run it will work out. 

My point is that if you don’t take these risks the results will be 
much worse than any imaginable kind of anarchy. 

In tying up love in knots or in becoming incapable of it, you 
can’t destroy this energy. When you won’t love, or won’t let it 
out, it emerges anyway in the form of self-destruction. The 
alternative to self-love, in other words, is self-destruction. Because 
you won't take the risk of loving yourself properly, you will be 
compelled instead to destroy yourself. 

So, which would you rather have? Would you rather have a 
human race which isn’t always very well controlled, and 
sometimes runs amok a little bit, but on the whole continues to 
exist, with a good deal of honesty and delight, when delight is 
available? Or would you rather have the whole human race 
blown to pieces and cleaned off the planet, reducing the whole 
thing to a nice, sterile rock with no dirty disease on it called life? 

The essential point is to consider love as a spectrum. There is 
not, as it were, just nice love and nasty love, spiritual love and 
material love, mature affection on the one hand and infatuation 
on the other. These are all forms of the same energy. And you 
have to take it and let it grow where you find it. When you find 
only one of these forms existing, if at least you will water it, the 
rest will blossom as well. But the effectual prerequisite from the 
beginning is to let it have its way. 


Black and/or White 


September 1969 


Day by day the tragic “crisis of color” between black and white 
peoples (or should we say colored and discolored?) moves 
towards a terrifying showdown. Remote and lofty as such matters 
may seem (though I would call them basic), it is always 
important to look into the religious and metaphysical background 
of social disturbances which, in this case, looms rather large. 
Through Christianity, and to a lesser extent Judaism, the West 
has inherited certain associations of ideas and symbols as unique 
among world religions as they are absurd. Consider these two 
columns: 


White Black 
Light Darkness 
Life Death 
Good Evil 

God Devil 


“For anyone who holds that ‘God made the world,’ the 
question, Why did He permit the existence in it of any evil, 
or that of the Evil One in whom all evil is personified, is 


altogether meaningless; one might as well enquire why He 
did not make a world without dimensions or one without 
temporal succession.” 


Ananda Coomaraswamy 


The avowed aim of popular Western religion is to retain column 1 
and to get rid of column 2. Most other religions would transcend 
both. We, however, have been persuaded that the white aspect of 
the universe can be experienced and enjoyed with the contrast of 
the black. 

Strictly speaking, Africans are no more black than Caucasians 
are white, but first the Caucasians and now the Africans have 
adopted “white” and “black” as proud and belligerent labels, 
implying an opposition cruder and more irreconcilable than 
greyish pink versus brown. Yet if you are proud and happy to be 
white, how do you know you are white? But for the existence of 
colored people, we would never have thought of ourselves as 
white, for in an all-white world being white carries no 
distinction, and we surely like to be “people of distinction.” 

A necessary part of having an effective personality seems to be 
membership in some elite in-group of religion, class, or race, 
some sect, coterie, club, gang, or secret society. Even one’s own 
body looks—deceptively—like an isolated in-group of cells. But 
just about the most basic metaphysical principle that I know is 
simply that every inside involves an outside, and every outside an 
inside. They are different, yes, but quite inseparable. The only 
exceptions to this principle are such topological gimmicks as the 
Mobius strip and the Klein bottle, though here there is neither 
front nor back, inside nor outside. Thus the principle is 
transcended, not annulled. 


“Superior virtue is not conscious of itself as virtue, and so 
really is virtue. Inferior virtue cannot let go of being 
virtuous, and so is not virtue. Superior virtue does not seem 
to be busy, and yet there is nothing which it does not 


accomplish. Inferior virtue is always busy, and yet in the 
end leaves things undone.” 


Lao-tzu 


”? 


If then, I am to be “in,” someone else must be “out,” and 
consequently I owe him a debt of gratitude for the realization 
that I am “in.” To congratulate myself, if I must, on being a 
white, saved Protestant, a hard-working, family-minded and solid 
citizen, what is more convenient than the peripheral presence of 
a class of black, thinly disguised heathens, of  shiftless, 
philandering, and irresponsible fellaheen? If the description 
doesn’t fit, it must be made to fit. Otherwise, no congratulations. 
If I must, at all costs, be right I cannot discover myself in that 
position unless someone else is wrong, or left. 

But the debt of gratitude is seldom, if ever, recognized—just as 
it would hardly occur to us to thank the darkness for light, 
sinners for saints, or the open air for being indoors. We think of 
the “in” situation as more energetic and even more real than the 
“out,” for everyone who is not right inside is left outside by 
default. Yet when certain outsiders “want in” by virtue of equal 
energy and intelligence, they are not so much left out as pushed 
out. However, the lack of recognition here goes much deeper 
than racial prejudice. 


From an IQ test: fill in the appropriate word in the 


following sentence, “Up is to down as ____ is to left.” My 
answer is “taken.” 


As you read these lines, it seems obvious that the black print is 
more significant, more worthy of attention, and thus somehow 
more real, more “the thing,” than the white paper, and the same 
would be true if it were white print on black paper. The Gestalt 
theory of perception explains that in any figure/background 
situation, the figure captures our attention to the extent that it is 
relatively small and enclosed, or that it is moving against a still 
background. The figure is then “the thing,” and the background is 
more or less ignored—even though the figure would be invisible 
without its contrast. Yet, in the accompanying picture of a 
Mexican blanket, do we have a black design on a white ground, 
or a white design on a black? And what about a zebra? Does it 
remind you of a yellow horse with black stripes, or a black horse 


with yellow stripes? 


Correct solution: The zebra is an invisible horse, striped 
black and yellow so you can see it coming. 


As the fish doesn’t know water, man is ignorant of space. 
Consciousness is concerned only with changing and varying 
details; it ignores constants—especially constant 
backgrounds. Thus only very exceptional people are aware 
of what is basic to everything. 


In the case of printed words on a page, it is clear that the words 
and not the page are what one is supposed to notice. But when 
two contrasting colors are equally distributed we seem to have a 
choice. On the other hand, what about stars in space? Although 
our modern common-sense view is that the stars are “the things,” 
and space just inert nothingness, some of the ancients saw the sky 
as a firmament pierced with apertures into the light of heaven, 
and for a long time now astrophysicists have considered space as 
having “properties,” such as curvature and_ expansion. 
Furthermore, the nuclear exploration of solids suggests that even 
a rock contains far more space than “matter,” while “matter” 
itself seems to dissolve more and more into energy patterns. 
Suppose, for example, that space is in the same sort of relation to 
solids as the diaphragm of a loudspeaker to the various sounds 
which it produces. We attend to the sounds as such, hearing 
voices, instruments, or footsteps, ignoring their common source 
and background—the vibration of the diaphragm, which is, in 
this instance, the active principle, translating electrical impulses 


into sound. 

Though one must be careful of analogizing too much in these 
matters, I am convinced that switching attention back and forth 
from figure to ground, regarding each in turn as “the thing,” is a 
fruitful heuristic method, especially if one wants to understand 
the relation of contexts to individual events, of environmental 
processes to organisms, and of fields of force to the patterns 
which they contain. L. von Bertalanffy, in his “systems theory” of 
biology, has argued very strongly that every biological process 
must be understood both by microscopic analysis and in context 
with the physical situation in which it occurs. This should, 
perhaps, be obvious, but scientific method has hitherto been 
overbalanced toward the analytic approach to nature. 

When we consider energy itself, the mutual interdependence of 
positive and negative, of “white” ons and “black” offs, is still 
more obvious because all energy is a vibration or pulsation, or a 
propagation of waves. Unless plus and minus, on and off, wave- 
crest and wave-trough alternate, there simply is no energy. It is 
therefore tempting to assume that all negative aspects of the 
universe imply and involve the positive, and vice versa, in such a 
way that the notion of final and absolute blackness is as absurd as 
its opposite. But when the white/positive is seen as “the real 
thing” there is always the fear that light and life may at last be 
overcome by darkness and death. However, the notion of plus 
and minus as generating one another in an eternal rhythm is far 
less a strain on my credulity and imagination than the idea of a 
brief and mysterious firing of energy occurring once, and once 
only, in the black waste of the void. 


Must you see this image as either (white) a chalice, or as 
(black) two faces in profile about to kiss? Are the two 
interpretations mutually exclusive, or can you see them 


simultaneously with the idea that this is a loving-cup? 


“The precious ... uniqueness which the human individual 
claims is conferred on him not by possession of an immortal 
soul but by possession of a mortal body.... If death gives life 
individuality and if man is the organism which represses 
death, then man is the organism which represses his own 
individuality.” 


Norman O. Brown, Life Against Death 


But the assumption that the black or negative aspect of the 
world is as essential to life as the white or positive is against the 
common-sense of Western man. He believes, in general, that life 
is, and should be, a relentless effort of mind and muscle against 
all forces of decay, dissolution, and death. “Fight the good fight 
with all thy might.” “Accentuate the positive.” Life is therefore 
seen as an intrusion into the dark emptiness of space—a darkness 
with which light has nothing in common, and which will engulf it 
forever if effort and total vigilance are not maintained. In one 
sense, this is a philosophy of nihilism in that it sees darkness and 
nonbeing as the truly basic and enduring reality—against which 
life is a magnificent though ultimately futile gesture. Unless, of 
course, there is some kind of God who exists necessarily and 
therefore effortlessly for all eternity. But if such a God is not 
merely the dark void, which is supremely effortless, He (or It) 
must somehow comprise or transcend the dark/light polarity. It 
would then be impossible to engulf or annihilate God, for He/She 
would be the black/white whole with no opposition. 

My own feeling is that the universe is just that sort of 
arrangement, and that it is not actually chopped up into a 
multitude of separate bits. It is an arrangement, or pattern, in 
which every so-called part is a function of the whole. Thus the 
Western attitude of being alive by virtue of being against death 
and darkness is not only naive but also destructive and violent. Its 
major technological achievement is the equipment for destroying 
the planet. It knows nothing of judo, the gentle way of getting 


where you want to go by going along with the movements of 
nature, using, say, gravity as a sailor uses the wind. 


“Considered in its physical, concrete reality, the stuff of 
the universe cannot divide itself but, as a kind of gigantic 
‘atom,’ it forms in its totality ... the only real indivisible. 
The farther and more deeply we penetrate into matter by 
means of increasingly powerful methods, the more we are 


confounded by the interdependence of its parts.... It is 
impossible to cut into this network, to isolate a portion 
without it becoming frayed and unravelled at all its edges.” 


Teilhard de Chardin, The Phenomenon of Man 


Every object in this universe is falling, gravitationally, but 
there is no concrete floor under the system upon which it can 
crash! The expert in judo gets the feeling that all his actions are 
“falling,” and when he uses muscle he never strains. When he 
climbs a hill, he has the feeling that it is lifting him, for he takes 
it one step at a time and does not fight with it. He is never 
uptight because he is not afraid of the negative aspect of the 
world. He knows that it cannot destroy existence, because 
existence-energy is being/nothing, on/off, now you see it, now 
you don’t. And—since the world has no truly separate parts—the 
only final and fundamental “I” or “Self” that we have is the whole 
thing. 

The WASP attitude to the black world is, then, only a symptom 
of a state of consciousness which does not see the universe as a 
whole, which feels, quite one-sidedly, that the white design is the 
figure, “the thing,” the reality, and the black background the evil, 
the nothing, the denial of life. So, too, it feels the individual 
person as isolated and disconnected from that essential 
background which we call “the other” or the external world. As 
the in-group does not acknowledge its dependence on the out- 
group, the life inside the skin has no sensation of being one with 
the life outside the skin.... But I have no self except everything 
which is happening, and it sees itself from all the different 


standpoints called sentient beings. 


“When everyone recognizes beauty as beautiful, then 
there is ugliness. When everyone recognizes goodness as 
good, then there is evil. Thus being and nonbeing arise 
mutually. Easy and difficult are mutually implied. Short and 


long are mutually contrasted. High and low are mutually 
posited.” 


Lao-tzu 


We must go to the roots of a problem and not invest too much 
energy fiddling with the symptoms. We shall never get whites 
and blacks, or Orientals and Occidentals, to unite by trying to tie 
the different branches of the human tree together with string. 
Attention must instead be shifted to the stem and the root, where, 
under the surface, we are one. It will take much less time. 


Consider the Lilies 


May 1971 


Whatever happened to the hippies? During the late sixties one 
had the impression that the ordinarily drab scene of American life 
was about to blossom into an easygoing colorful exuberance. Men 
seemed sure enough of their masculinity to abandon their 
customarily uptight machismo styles of dress and bearing, to let 
their hair down, to sing and wear jewelry, and to dress with 
imaginative elegance. It seemed that a positive lifestyle was being 
proposed as a less hectic and less expensive alternative to 
suburbia’s conspicuous consumption of uniformly slick plastic 
hardware. The various forms of rock music showed possibilities of 
a legitimate development of the Western tradition which had 
come to a halt in the silences of John Cage and the electronic 
howls of musique concréte. Articulate glory seemed to be returning 
to Western art through the psychedelic painters. There were even 
prospects of a truly swinging religion with meditation, chanting, 
and joyous rituals, unorganized and set free from the 
unproductive guilt hangups of the Judeo-Christian conscience. 
But judging from Sausalito, California, as one of the hearts of 
the Movement, the hippies and flower-children have turned back 
into something even scruffier than beatniks. The long hair is 


tangled and snarled, and the blue denims patched and frayed. 
The beads and jewelry have been pawned, and the kapok is 
coming out of the pads. The attitude is silent—even surly—and 
the music has just turned up the volume. Hardly anyone dances 
at the Fillmore; they just sit. The rich verve of the San Francisco 
Oracle has disappeared from the ever more paranoid, violent, and 
funky underground press. “Love” has become “fuck.” ... But who 
needs it when personal style is contrived ugliness, and the girls 
manage to look like peasant women from some depressed area of 
Russia. 

This sagging of spirits may reflect simple depression at the 
endless and sickening war, at the realization that it may be too 
late to do anything about ecological catastrophe, and at the 
difficulty of finding employment even in the sterile busywork of 
government and the big corporations. The temptation to free 
enterprise in dope is almost irresistible, but there can be too 
much pot—like too much booze or too much religion—and the 
result is not profound mystical contemplation but the most 
ordinary lethargy. (If the government wants to keep the people 
docile and avoid violence in the streets, it might note that lawn 
order follows from legalized grass.) 

Furthermore, the exuberant “psychedelic” style went 
commercial and invaded the Establishment, but somehow this 
very success was taken as a failure. One wonders, therefore, 
whether the Movement, the Consciousness III people, want to 
woo the squares or simply to be their obedient reverse-image, just 
doing their opposite. Isn’t it yet clear that originality and 
spontaneity are not being merely anticonventional? 

More and more, however, the professed philosophy is 
ecological concern, and there has indeed been an appreciable 
migration of hippies from the streets to the countryside in an 
attempt to love and cultivate the earth at first hand. Yet “charity 
begins at home” with love of one’s own psychophysical organism 
(as distinct from conceptual ego) and of ordinary physical things. 
If the earth is man’s extended body, to be loved and respected as 
one’s own body, those who do no greening of themselves will 
hardly bring about the greening of America. 

The idea of “greening” involves color, flowering, freshness of 
spring, and—above all—respect for what is organic and 
vegetative as distinct from the mechanical and metallic. As things 


are now going there is a real possibility that intelligence may 
survive on this planet only in the form of self-maintaining and 
self-reproducing steady-state electronic mechanisms, having no 
need for atmosphere and no feeling or emotions to obstruct their 
relentless efficiency. In such forms, abstract thought, logic, 
mathematics, and physics could continue to flourish on the 
planet, and some would see in this a triumph of purely spiritual 
principles over the trammels of the flesh. This would be a 
consistent direction of evolution for a species which confuses the 
world as described, in terms of linearly arranged word and 
number symbols, with the world itself; which goes on to value 
the symbolic more than the real (e.g., money more than real 
wealth and nations more than people), and which would compel 
the wiggly, lilting, and curvaceous forms of nature to get 
straightened out, squared away, and cleaned up. 

I could make a strong, if not conclusive, case for the idea that 
plants are more intelligent than people—more beautiful, more 
pacific, more ingenious in their ways of reproduction, more at 
home in their surroundings, and even more sensitive. Why, we 
even use flower-forms as our symbols of the divine when the 
human face reminds us too much of ourselves—the Hindu- 
Buddhist mandala, the golden lotus, and the Mystic Rose in 
Dante’s vision of Paradise. Nothing else reminds us so much of a 
star with a living heart. 

I wish, then, that hippies would once again consider the lilies— 
for the very reason that they are frail and frivolous, gentle and 
inconsequential, and thus have those very qualities of vegetative 
wisdom so despised by those who have wills of iron and nerves of 
steel to fight the good fight and run the straight race. As Lao-tzu 
put it two thousand years ago: 


Man at his birth is supple and tender, but in death he is rigid and 
hard. 

Plants when young are sinuous and moist, but when old are 
brittle and dry. 

Thus suppleness and tenderness are signs of life, 

While rigidity and hardness are signs of death. 


For I feel that we would go better with this wiggly world if we 


thought in terms of roots and branches, vines and creepers, 
fronds and fiber, rather than in sterile angularities of metal and 
quartz in which the genius of life has not yet arisen, and in which 
energy may stutter and hum but has not yet learned to feel. 

At least then let me hope—dear children—that there are seeds 
in your dirty fingernails, and that you will again come out with 
flowers. 


4 
oe! 


~ “e 
=P = 
Cry 


we, Ca 
Sacnuae-*~ 


What on Earth Are We Doing? 


October 1970 


“To come down to earth” is, in ordinary speech, to get to reality, 
to face the facts, and to be practical. On the other hand, “to have 
your head in the clouds” is to be a dreamer and a fantast, though 
oddly and curiously, the Christian notion of heaven, the abode of 
God and therefore the seat of ultimate reality, is traditionally 
symbolized as a situation where everyone floats in the sky. As a 
child, I remember singing a religious ditty, or hymn, which ran— 


A charge to keep I have, 
A God to glorify, 

A never-dying soul to save, 
And fit it for the sky. 


Hardly anyone seems to realize that Earth has always been in the 
sky and that space is just as real as anything solid. Density and 
expansion are two poles of the same spectrum, like red and 
purple. 

For a long time—of all the civilizations of the West—the United 
States has both prided itself and has been accused by others of 
being materialistic, although we ourselves call it being practical. 
When it really “comes down to earth,” to the nitty-gritty, being 
practical is making money, and yet nothing could be more 
abstract, gaseous, and insubstantial than the banking- 
bookkeeping system known as money. Gold, silver, dollar bills, 
and credit cards are useless in the wilderness—as compared with 
knowing how to use a bow for hunting, how to make fire and 


cook, how to cultivate plants and herbs, or how to fish and sail a 
ship. Should Con Edison fail, P.G.&E. collapse, and Standard Oil 
explode or gas itself to death, most of us would be helpless—and 
all that could rather easily happen. What is real, if you have 
decided to live in the dimension of space and time, is muscle and 
nerve. 

So we down-to-earth, gutsy, tough, realistic, and practical types 
have just been squandering billions of dollars and unimaginable 
amounts of energy, nerve-work, and materials in whizzing off to 
the moon to discover, as astronomers knew before, that it was 
just a dreary slag heap. This is the true, original and scientifically 
etymological meaning of being lunatics. Crying for the moon. 

I have imagined a speech to be made by the president of the 
United States, perhaps by Richard Nixon, in which he reports that 
he has made a very careful survey of the desires and goals of his 
“silent majority,” since this is his duty as their representative. He 
finds that they would like to return the Negroes to virtual slavery, 
to repeal the Bill of Rights, to confine all long-haired youths and 
obstreperous college students to concentration camps, to reduce 
taxation, to reaffirm states’ rights and diminish the authority of 
federal government, to wipe all “gooks” in Southeast Asia off the 
map, and to subdue or annihiliate the entire populations of China 
and Russia. Naturally, therefore, he goes on to say, as a good 
businessman and your humble servant I have had to make an 
estimate of the cost of this enterprise, not only in terms of money, 
but also in terms of time, trouble, energy, and nuclear fallout. I 
am sorry to say, he remarks, that if you want your government to 
control China, I will have to send you there to do it, and you will 
have to put up with chop suey instead of sirloin steaks and apple 
pie. Something will also have to be done about the amazing piles 
of rotting and stinking corpses, lest diseases should be spread all 
over the earth. The statistics, he goes on to say, are showing us 
that the boys we are sending to Vietnam are 75 percent nutty on 
marijuana and have contracted a brand of gonorrhea which 
doesn’t get spiflicated by our antibiotics. Also, since the air 
currents of the upper atmosphere drift generally eastwards, the 
fallout of nuclear bombs dropped on China will eventually reach 
us, and poison our American mothers’ milk with strontium-90 as 
it is already poisoned with DDT. I have also, he would say, had 
my accountants going over the figures on what it would involve 


to put the niggers in gas chambers or jails, and I am extremely 
sorry to say, my dear and loyal people, that you would have some 
embarrassment in paying the bills. 

So what is the matter with us? The basic problem of 
civilization, whether it is American, German, British, Chinese, or 
Japanese, is that we confuse our systems of symbols and 
descriptions with the real, or natural, world, the universe 
represented with the universe present, the money with the 
wealth, the figures with the facts, the thoughts with the things, 
the ideas with the events, the ego with the organism, and the 
map with the territory. It is actually impossible to explain this 
verbally because, in writing or talking, one is still in the 
dimension of symbols, even though using physical noises and 
marks on paper—and the very notion that such energy forms are 
“physical,” material, and real is in turn merely a philosophical 
concept which is, again, a symbol. Thus the word “water” is itself 
undrinkable, and the formula H20 will not float a ship. 

Consider the difference between the two types of globemaps of 
planet Earth, the physical and the political. The first is a 
marvelous wiggly affair, blue, green, brown, yellow, and 
occasionally white. The second, especially on the North American 
continent, is angrily scratched across with straight lines, and the 
one earth (and we should not forget the one air) covered with 
patches of contrasting colors to identify the domains of differing 
bands of gangsters. Which of the two more closely resembles 
Earth as seen from outer space? 

Civilized human beings, and Westerners in particular, are 
always trying to straighten things out and put them in rectilinear 
boxes. This arises from the Greek superstition that there are three 
dimensions of space and from Euclid’s brutally oversimplified 
fantasies of a world consisting of points, lines, surfaces, circles, 
and cubes. It is hard to persuade an educated Westerner that 
Euclid was simply a fantast and that his so-called geometry had 
nothing to do with measuring the earth, but only with working 
out the rules of his own rather rigid and simple mind. Earth 
wiggles, water streams and waves, and nature in general dances 
and swings, but Euclid’s mind never reached the biological level. 
It stopped at the primitively crystalline stage of evolution. This is 
why generation after generation of schoolchildren have been 
bamboozled into the notion that a straight line is simpler, and 


thus more intelligible, than a wiggle. Ever after, we have been 
trying to subjugate all experience, knowledge, and action to the 
supposed clarity and intelligibility of straight lines. 

Water, even light, and indeed all forms of energy follow 
gravity, the line of least resistance, and this is why space itself is 
said to be curved. E = MC2 really means that energy is gravity. 
Newton, Einstein, and even many physicists today cannot 
understand this because they think of energy as a force busting 
through obstacles in an attempt to follow a straight line. Under 
some circumstances a straight line may be the shortest, and least 
fatiguing, distance between two points. But it’s no fun to follow 
the “straight and narrow way.” Is the River of Life itself a mere 
canal? In San Francisco we have built roads going straight up 
Hills, though no experienced mountaineer would dream of 
climbing to the summit of Everest along a straight line. 

The combination of Euclidean geometry, Roman law (and 
roads), and Protestant ethics gives us the impression that it is 
quite definitely immoral to follow the line of least resistance. Be a 
man. Stand up. But can you will an erection? Personally, I go on 
all fours when I cross a fallen tree high above a stream—not 
being afraid to sully my hands (that is, to soil them) nor to 
exercise the power of humility, of humus—the earth. I have no 
faith in the fetish of being perpetually and compulsively upright, 
because it is an Euclidean illusion to think that heaven is up and 
hell is down, and that all evils began with the fall of man. After 
all, one falls in love—and thereby continues the stream of life. A 
great mind is also considered “profound” because it plumbs the 
depths of things. 

Furthermore, especially in philosophy and the sciences, we use 
words as a way of putting everything in boxes, or classes. Is you 
is or is you ain’t? Animal, vegetable, or mineral? True or false? 
Why, to answer those tests they even print boxes on the 
questionnaire! The whole virtue of tidiness is to have things put 
away in boxes, and thus have them conformed in Euclidean 
principles, and this compulsion lies at the root of interminable 
fights between parents and children. My wife and I have a super- 
intelligent Siamese cat, named Solstice, with whom I 
communicate in fake declamatory Japanese, yet his intelligence 
operates without the least attention to Euclid. We have never 
trained him to do anything except use a sandbox and to stay off 


tables, but he will accompany us on a hike in the hills, leaping 
and whizzing back and forth, and coming when called as well as 
a dog. It is just that the organism, the whole pattern of nerve and 
muscle, is more complex and intelligent than logical systems of 
arithmetic, geometry and grammar—which are in fact nothing 
but inferior ritual. 

Life itself dances, for what else are trees, ferns, butterflies, and 
snakes but elaborate forms of dancing? Even wood and bones 
show, in their structure, the characteristic patterns of flowing 
water, which (as Lao-tzu pointed out in 400 zc.) derives its 
incredible power by following gravity and seeking that “lowest 
level which all men abhor.” When I dance I do not think-count 
my steps, and some women say I have no sense of rhythm, but I 
have a daughter who (without ever having taken lessons in 
dancing) can follow me as if she were my shadow or I were hers. 
The whole secret of life and of creative energy consists in flowing 
with gravity. Even when he leaps and bounces our cat is going 
with it. This is the way the whole earth and everything in the 
universe beehives.* 

But man is making a mess of the earth because he is using his 
Euclidean intellect instead of his organic brain. He is symbolizing 
and describing nature along the straight or by the curve of the 
simplistic circle, and though such mathematicians as topologists 
and matrix theorists are capable of much more sophisticated 
operations, the averagely civilized Western person still figures the 
world according to Euclid and to the arithmetic of decimation. In 
this time of ecological crisis we are therefore into a big fight. On 
the one hand, there are people known as straight, regular, square 
(and there are also cubes and tesseracts), classified, degreed, 
graduated, and moneyed, who live in little boxes made of ticky- 
tacky, cultivate lawn order, and want to get things ironed out in 
nothing flat. On the other, there are bohemians, nuts, bums, 
freaks, eccentrics, beatifics, whollymen, courtesans, vagrants, and 
hippies (a name which ought to have something to do with the 
dangerous curves of women’s hips), who want to experience the 
universe in a groovy, swinging, ecstatic, syncopated, rock-and- 
rolling, mind-blown, turned-on, and far-out way. 

The first group emulate and admire the behavior of machines; 
they think like machines, and thus have made the machines in 
their own image. It has conquered them and taken them over. 


The second go for the more wiggly and squishy organization of 
plants and animals, and it is thus that, in the eyes of the first, 
they are unclean, sloppy, feckless, messy, bestial, and even shitty 
—because their way of life is not mechanical but biological. Thus 
they refuse absolutely to be regimented—and in this connection it 
should be pointed out to the first group that their regimental 
military tactics have thus far failed against those unspeakable 
guerrilla “gooks” of North Vietnam. The only way of getting a 
military victory in Vietnam would be to send in Mr. Clean with 
nuclear weapons and bulldozers and scour the place down to 
good old rock-of-ages. But that would hardly be fighting fair, in 
the ancient and honorable traditions of chivalry. (Remember, 
incidentally, the tactics used by the American revolutionaries 
against the redcoats.) 

Let us look, now, at some of the things which the Euclidean 
mind has done to our everyday life. It is increasingly difficult to 
buy real food. We are beginning to eat machinery. Most bread is 
plastic froth. Chickens taste of papier-maché, because they are fed 
on chemicals and bred in immense penitentiaries. Milk is 
homogenized, and real cream is hardly to be found. More and 
more, cheese is a processed and textureless glob. There are 
projects now for growing cubic tomatoes, to be more easily 
packed in cubic boxes, to be stored in cubic warehouses; for 
featherless chickens, to eliminate the nuisance of plucking; for 
shell-less eggs, sold in pocketed plastic bags; and for branchless 
trees, chemically stained from birth, from which to make straight 
lumber without knots or wiggles. 

Although we all realize that monotony is boring, almost every 
form of industrial work—banking, accounting, mass-producing— 
is monotonous, and most people are paid simply for putting up 
with monotony, for arranging things in boxes, for recording these 
arrangements on squared and columned sheets of paper, or for 
welding and drilling innumerable I-beams together for making 
colossal concrete or glass-walled boxes wherein myriads of others 
can pursue these dreary routines. For what? For absolutely 
necessary but abstract and inedible money, wherewith to 
purchase a box in which to live, another box in which to go about 
(look at almost any brand of car from above), and to acquire 
boxed food which tastes more and more as if its constituent 
particles were boxes instead of cells. 


The tycoons, politicians, and gangsters who manage this 
operation, whether in Russia, China, West Germany, or the 
United States, are not happy. By and large they are vulgar men 
who do not know chalk from cheese, who know very well what 
they hate and fear, but haven’t the least idea of what they love— 
except statistical records called money. Some of them have 
celebrated libraries of pornography. Some have plush harems of 
frigid girls. Some have yachts and jet planes in which to go 
somewhere just like the place from which they began. Some have 
great stables of horses for the merely mathematical purpose of 
betting on races. They live in constant terror of thievery, 
revolution, competition, impotence, cancer, and rising taxation. 

If I sound like a preacher or biblical prophet, let us take a look 
at regular religion, whose ministry makes at least ritual murmurs 
against the rich and the powerful—for the wrong reasons. For the 
trouble with our rich and powerful people is not so much that 
they are wicked, but that they do not enjoy themselves. A square 
can’t have a ball, and the great problem of philosophy is not so 
much to square the circle as circle the square. For our religions 
are uptight and anal-retentive, and even Freud thought of the 
“reality-principle,” as distinct from the “pleasure-principle,” as a 
form of Euclidean order. Oddly, on the other hand, it is said of 
Jesus that when confronted with human suffering “the bowels of 
his compassion” were moved. 

Our religious observances consist almost entirely of talk 
—‘“about it and about”—about obeying commandments and 
about believing in verbalized statements or creeds presuming to 
define the ineffable. Virtually nothing is done to encourage any 
form of silent, nonverbal meditation or yoga wherein the eternal 
is experienced and not merely discussed. Many Christians will 
even assert that, save under the most extraordinary 
circumstances, you cannot experience God until you are dead, 
and thus are terrified of “cosmic consciousness” or mystical 
experience as something close to madness. Because, then, the 
religion is verbal the opposition is also just verbal, and our 
atheists are as phony as our believers. It is a terrible and 
notorious truth of history that no one has ever been taught how 
to love by a sermon, for all sermonically based love is simply 
disguised guilt, which arouses resentment in the recipient. If love 
can be inspired by anything symbolic, it has to be brought out by 


poetry—that is, by words used as music. 

Real religion has nothing to do with words. It is a silent, 
effortless, and fascinated concentration on the basic energy, the 
fundamental and musical vibration of the world—which, as Saint 
Thomas Aquinas might have said, “is what all men call God.” You 
do religion as you breathe easily, slowly, and delightedly, or 
listen intently to a bird singing at dawn, or ride a surfboard on 
the exact dynamic center of an immense wave. Ali Akbar Khan, a 
splendid rollicking man who is the acknowledged master of 
Indian music—along with his noble and gentle peer Ravi Shankar 
—has said that the whole art of music consists in understanding 
one tone. That is religion in its supreme form, and that is why 
yogis will chant or hum the syllable OM or AUM (or Zen 
Buddhists the sound MU) because it comprises the entire range of 
voice from the throat to the lips. You can do it just as well with 
AMEN (meaning “Let It Be”) if you have to disguise yourself as a 
Christian or Jew, or ALLAH if you are a Muslim. By such means 
we experience life as it actually is, as beyond the ways in which it 
is merely measured and described and calculated (reduced to 
stones) in our various systems of symbols. In the end you find out 
that you yourself are nothing other than that basic and timeless 
energy. And, by the way, when Saint Thomas was an old man he 
had such an experience in the midst of celebrating the Mass, 
whereas he said that all the theology he had written was mere 
straw. 

When you find that out, you don’t give a damn about status, 
fancy possessions, hoards of money, being embalmed and buried 
in a bronze casket, and living a neatly geometrized life. Enough is 
as good as a feast. You don’t even quake with anxiety about 
survival. As Confucius put it, “A man who understands the Tao 
[the Course of Nature] in the morning may die without regret in 
the evening.” When I explain this to Americans they invariably 
ask, “But doesn’t this imply a merely passive attitude to life?” 
That is because they have been brought up on such hymns as 


Awake, my soul, stretch ev’ry nerve, 
And press with vigor on; 

A heav’nly race demands thy zeal, 
And an immortal crown. 


And also “Onward Christian soldiers, marching as to war.” 
Besides, who wants an immortal crown? I can’t imagine anything 
more like hell than having to wear a golden ring of spikes and 
being flattered by angels forever. 

I simply do not understand the goals and rewards of the 
Western Way of Life, apart from such side-effects of the project as 
anesthesia for dentistry (which can just as well be effected by 
hypnosis). What is the point of Progress if the food is tasteless, 
the housing absurd, the clothing uncomfortable, the religion just 
talk, the air poisoned by Cadillacs, the work boring, the sex 
uptight and mechanical, the earth clobbered with concrete, and 
the water so chemicalized that even the fish are abandoning 
existence? Recently, I have been asking questions that really need 
no answer. Who wants to serve in a police vice squad, spending 
hours peeking into men’s johns to detect acts of homosexuality? 
Who wants a job as a debt-collection agent, spending his whole 
day being nasty to people? What sort of person voluntarily serves 
as a prison guard or hangman? Also, alas, one might ask what 
kind of individual would want to spend millions of dollars to 
become president of the United States, never away from the 
telephone, guarded around the clock by agents of the Secret 
Service, reading tomes of amazingly uninteresting documents, 
and being accompanied day and night by a warrant officer 
carrying a black bag containing the mechanisms to set off the 
atomic bomb? 

We believe that all such occupations, dreary or dangerous as 
they may be, are exercises of high responsibility and even of 
glory, despite the maxim that “the paths of glory lead but to the 
grave.” But what is their actual end and purpose? Towards what 
is Progress? In fact, what on Earth are we doing? No one has even 
the ghost of a notion, save perhaps a few simple-minded people 
who live to smell flowers, to listen to the sea, to watch trees in 
the wind, to climb mountains, to eat pdté de veau en crotite, to 
drink the Malvasia wine from Ruby Hill, and to cuddle up with a 
lovely woman—and such pursuits are not really expensive, as 
compared with the trillions spent on the Kingdom, the Power, 
and the Glory. 

Warfare is, and has been for many centuries, the major waste 
of Earth’s resources, and, as time goes on, people fight with each 
other for less and less sensible reasons. Although I have a very 


slight suspicion that we are fighting in Vietnam to gain control of 
the world’s best supply of opium, no competent strategist would 
completely obliterate the flora, fauna, and women of a country 
which he intends to possess. He might, indeed, be greedy—but he 
should not compound this vice with stupidity. The energy and 
material which we have all squandered on making war since even 
1914 could have warmed, fed, and clothed everyone on Earth, 
but we go about this atrocious squandering in the name of such 
immaterial and irrelevant fantasies as religion, honor, ideology, 
progress, racial purity, and patriotism—the last being not love of 
one’s country but of the idea of one’s country, of the mere image, 
the flag, the crown, the icon of Lenin, Mao’s little red book, the 
cross, the crescent, the swastika, and other such absurd baubles. 

Much of the trouble is that we confuse peoples, as living 
organisms, with their different ways of babbling or gesturing— 
and how monotonous Earth would be if we all did it the same 
way. And thus we imagine that there are really such creatures as 
Americans and Russians, Greeks and Romans, Indians and 
Chinese, Easterners and Westerners, Jews and Arabs, Christians 
and heathens. There are not. All this is babble, though babble is 
great fun when taken as such and not confused with a High, 
Solemn, Pompous, and Serious Something. It is not well known 
that all the best angels wear their haloes jauntily, over one ear. 
Even the fascinating investigations of science have become a pest 
since academic scientists have taken themselves seriously, like 
theologians, humming and hawing, bumbling and rumbling, 
about whether so-and-so’s hypotheses are really, truly, and 
absolutely sound. 

Which is often all that they are. Vox, et praeterea nihil. 

It is an old proverb that “travel broadens the mind,” which 
used to be true insofar as it revealed the vast lands and waters of 
Earth and the variety of its cultures, languages, animals, and 
plants. But now travel is narrowing the world, because we can 
proceed almost instantly in sealed tubes from one “place” to 
another—in such a way that all these places are swiftly becoming 
the same place—New York, Los Angeles, Tokyo, New Delhi, Tel 
Aviv, Paris, London, each with identical Hilton-type boxes—and 
all the aborigines fouling their air with gasoline fumes and 
making themselves uncomfortable in business suits, presumably 
to imitate our own symbolism of success and status in life. By the 


time we get supersonic airlines we shall just go bang, bang, bang 
from one Euclidean point to another, living in a state of position 
without magnitude. When I was last in Kyoto I ran into some 
leggy and raucous blondes from Texas who were in there for four 
hours, off a plane landed in Osaka, and wanted to know “what to 
see”—though their state of mind prevented them from seeing 
anything except the American bar of the International Hotel, 
where they sat boasting that just at any time l’il ole Tayaxass 
could abdicate from the United States. (There are people in that 
State who believe so fervently in lawn order that they spray their 
sun-browned grass with green paint.) 

Obviously, one of the major confusions of symbol with reality 
lies in a dimension of human relations called Sex—as pointed out 
long ago by Marshall McLuhan in a witty commentary on 
advertising, The Mechanical Bride, in which he showed that 
women were being reduced to machines like those inflatable or 
hot-water-bottle life-size girls made of rubber or plastic which 
can be obtained in Kobe or Marseilles, and are said to be used by 
merchant seamen on long and lonely voyages. He showed how 
women had been chopped into detachable and even replaceable 
parts, like cars—the coiffure, the lips, the bosoms, the waist, the 
hips, the buttocks, or the legs—each being a point of fetishistic 
concentration. The current ideal of feminine beauty is a skinny 
lass with long, straight hair, overblown bosoms, a narrow waist, 
and a moderately protrusive bottom. But the girls of Renoir and 
Ingres were pleasingly plump, and the prehistoric Venus-images 
of Western Europe had such exaggeratedly female figures that we 
would now think of them as having elephantiasis. Get yourself a 
new model. 

For the life-ideal of power-crazy men is (and the word is not 
insignificant) screwing a plastic woman. She doesn’t talk back. 
She lies perfectly still. She will assume any position you want and 
be treated in any way. In fact, when it comes down to it, the 
whole enterprise of technology is to turn all nature into a plastic 
woman—a mass of completely obedient and predictable stuff. 
She’s a dame, a broad, a bag, a chick, a cunt, an old lady, or a 
piece of ass. 

Now the political world is very largely ruled by men who, like 
Julius Caesar, cannot make up their minds whether to be 
heterosexual or homosexual. Somehow they are ashamed to be 


frankly both, and therefore to be truly sure that they are men put 
on an immense show of masculinity. Western Europe and North 
America are highly overpopulated with such males. They screw 
dames galore and count the numbers as an ace fighter pilot puts 
symbols of enemy aircraft shot down on his fuselage. But their 
real sexual kick is in spearing, shooting, or torturing other males, 
whom they secretly love—because they lust over the convulsions 
of men dying, for the sadomasochistic type has his neurological 
wires crossed and mixes the convulsions of orgasm with those of 
agony (a useful trick if, and only if, you run into inevitable pain). 
Thus the merely symbolic necessity of being a real Man is 
manifested, not only in warfare, but also in pseudo-athletics (such 
as boxing, as distinct from judo), in American football, and in 
bullfighting. In all such pretentious activities force is used to go 
against gravity, the wind, and the grain. 

Why not, instead, lust over the syncopated convulsions of your 
wife or girlfriend in bed, when you get her into the genuine 
ecstasy of the witch riding on the broom? To me, this is far more 
manly than smashing and destroying other people and their 
property, killing wild animals that you neither need nor use for 
food, or thundering along racetracks in four-wheeled phalluses. 
Why not go in for something like gliding, sailing, swimming, or 
even dancing? Incidentally, I have noticed that these Caesar 
fellows cannot dance, except in the most stilted and formal way, 
because they will not permit their hips to swing freely— 
imagining this to be a strictly feminine gesture. As boys they were 
taught to stand at attention, to form fours, to march in columns 
(stamping or goose-stepping), to handle rifles with grotesque 
jerks, and, in short, to practice the most inefficient form of 
military discipline ever invented. Indeed, they win battles (at 
immense cost of life and material, as in the holocausts of World 
War I) but they lose wars, and today almost all wars are lost. 

Thus the traditional military style is merely symbolic manhood. 
A marching column is easily enfiladed or bombed. American 
soldiers in Vietnam jungles are immediately scented out by their 
soapy smell, and spotted by their shiny white faces. Likewise, 
military people wear trussed-up uniforms and boots which make 
it impossible to run with any speed, or to slide, wiggle, and 
wangle. Note that all such undulative motions are considered a 
sort of cheating—as devious, as not standing up to the enemy out 


there in front like a man—where you make a splendid target. 
Remember those absurd Japanese banzai charges of World War II, 
which were simply suicidal displays of samurai machismo, 
because they were nothing more than running straight into the 
immense firepower of American industry. 

Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori—sweet and decorous it is to 
die for one’s country—echoed by that very articulate and 
pompous Lord Macaulay: 


Then out spake brave Horatius, 
The Captain of the Gate: 
“To every man upon this earth 
Death cometh soon or late. 
And how can man die better 
Than by facing fearful odds, 
For the ashes of his fathers 
And the temples of his Gods?” 


So one gives one’s life for cremated bodies in columbaria and for 
symbolic structures of stone. If I were asked to preach a sermon 
at the laying of a foundation stone for a church, I would take as 
my text the words of Jesus, “If a man’s son ask him bread, will he 
give him a stone?” Of course. It is now called the generation gap. 

Amerindians know that stones are live, but in our culture the 
stone, the tombstone, represents death—and thus supreme 
manliness consists in getting dramatically killed on a point of 
honor, which is for a merely verbal and symbolic issue. And, 
ironically, Bob Dylan mocks it all with his marvelous double-talk, 
“Ever’body’s gotta get stoned.” We therefore come back to the 
point that what we call manliness, valor, heroism, and courage 
consist in a fascination for death. If you pass the test they will put 
your name on a big stone war memorial, so that you can be hard 
and erect forever—as was not always so easy in life. 

Wasn’t it Voltaire who said, “Il faut cultiver notre jardin”—it is 
necessary that we cultivate our gardens? But here we pay farmers 
not to work, or to destroy or merely hoard their crops. For our 
problem is that we do not truly love the vegetable, lush, and 
wiggly world—and deem it beneath dignity to play with it, 


because we are fascinated and hypnotized with the mass erection 
of boxes and with straightening things out. Much of this began 
because our farming people had a rigid, antisexual religion, based 
on an elegantly mistranslated book, The Bible, so that their 
children fled for relief to the bright lights and distractions of the 
cities where they could find girls who would play games. But lack 
of love for the vegetative, subtle, cthonic, pagan, and sexy aspect 
of the world means death. The cry, “Back to Nature!” used to be 
derided as unrealistic sentimentality, but I am wondering if it is 
not becoming an urgent necessity. In a.v. 40 the wise emperor of 
Rome, Augustus, was worried about the migration of people to 
the cities, and persuaded Virgil to write the celebrated verse: 


O fortunatos nimium, sua si bona norint, agricolas!... 


Blest, aye, blest to excess: knew they how goodly the portion 
Earth giveth her farmers, who, afield where war’s din is heard 
not, 


Find ready there the pleasures which nature most justly affords 
them. 


After long practice of something between yoga and the Zen 
Buddhist style of meditation, I have at last come to see that there 
is nothing degrading or boring in soiling my hands. As a writer, 
intellectual, and sedentary worker, I am not as strong as I should 
be for the work of gardening—though I don’t really know what 
this means, because my beautifully frail-looking and seventy- 
year-old neighbor, the poet Elsa Gidlow, cultivates a garden 
which supplies our whole community with vegetables. Come to 
think of it, what is more mystically and erotically pleasurable 
than apple trees, rows of lettuce, patches of herbs, vines of runner 
beans, or plantations of potatoes? 

But mankind of the twentieth century is actually feeding on the 
production of crash and trash—of superweapons, vast slabs of 
cement, untold miles of wire, and billions of “objects” to be sold 
in shops which I haven’t the slightest wish to own. Almost 
everyone who works in a city is producing rubbish and symbols 
of rubbish. This is not to condemn technical skill in the use of 
fire, metals, electricity, and even computers, but only to ask what 
on Earth are we doing with it. I repeat the question, wHaT DO WE 


want? I repeat it again and again wherever I go. I have suggested 
that the college entrance examination be the requirement that 
every student has to write a detailed paper of his idea of heaven, 
and that his professor or tutor criticize it for consistency, 
imagination, and feasibility. I have even suggested to an 
encounter group that we discuss what might be, here and now, 
the most delightful forms of relationship between each other, but 
people seem to want, instead, to worry over their discords. 

We do not know what we want because we are only dimly 
aware of anything wantable. We have taught ourselves to pursue 
such abstract and weakly perceived goals as happiness, love, 
goodness, service to others, fun, fame, fortune, power, peace, or 
God—but we have more words than experience for what we 
mean. 

Therefore I am going to finish off this essay by saying what I 
myself want, and which, to a satisfactory degree, I already have. I 
want to spend time sitting still, or walking slowly, wondering at 
and feeling the basic sense of existence, of being alive-dead, of 
watching my breath, of hearing all sounds in the air, and of 
letting clouds and stars caress my eyes. I want to let go of anxiety 
and turn it into laughter, and realize absolutely that life and 
death are two sides of the same coin. I want a female companion 
who will, alternatively, melt into me and wrestle with me, obey 
me and object to me, admire me and then suddenly show that she 
can do so many things much better than I. I want to write and 
talk for interested audiences, to charm them, and play with their 
questions, but also to listen to people who can tell me things I 
don’t know without being bores. I want to watch water which 
reflects many changing qualities of light and wind, and is visited 
by seagulls, pelicans, terns, grebes, and wild duck. I want to sit 
on some far-out rock or a lonely beach and listen to the waves 
and look at the Western sky at dawn. I want to shoot arrows so 
high into the sky that they seem to turn into birds. I want to see 
mountains and prowl through their foothills and forests, listening, 
at dusk, to unseen waterfalls. 

I want to sit at a typewriter, at certain times, carefully and 
meticulously putting into words what I feel—the challenge being 
that it cannot really be put into words at all. I want to go off to a 
colorful and spacious kitchen to experiment with some new kind 
of soup or stew, or method of steaming fish, or to see if I can 


cook with a wok (that is, a stir-fry pan) in the manner of the 
Chinese. Reminding me that I also want to play with the finest 
Chinese writing brushes and sticks of incensed ink, which you rub 
into water, and then try out the various ways of dancing on paper 
which are their form of ideographic writing. I want to be able to 
allay pain and sickness with the touch of my hands. I want to 
make a fire of charcoal and burn cedar leaves or sandalwood, late 
in the evening, while listening or dancing to classical or rock 
music. 

I want to see the reflection of light in glass and crystal, and, 
lying on the ground, to look up at trees patterning a vivid blue 
sky. At night to go to sleep beneath them, and to wake just before 
dawn when the stars can still be seen through their branches. I 
want to hear the bell of Nanzenji, a temple in Kyoto, at four in 
the morning—more of a gong than a bell. I want to go to Sikkim 
and Nepal to see the Himalayas, but not to climb them. I want to 
enjoy the company of certain friends, to eat Stilton cheese, 
melons, heavy black bread, and prosciutto, and to drink Gardner’s 
Old Strong, a British ale which is no longer available. 

Earthy as it may be, that is a glimpse of my idea of heaven. 


* Harrumph! Excuse the pun, but it is important, because bees live in 
hexagonal as distinct from quadrilateral structures, and this is the natural 
way in which all things, such as bubbles and pebbles, congregate, nestling 
into each other by gravity. It will follow, because 2 x 6 is 12, that—as 
Buckminster Fuller has pointed out—a number-system to the base 12 
(duodecimal) is closer to nature than one to the base 10 (decimal). For 12 is 
divisible by both 2 and 3, whereas 10 is not. After all, we use the base 12 for 
measuring circles and spheres and time, and so can “think circles” around 
people who use only meters. The world is better duo-decimalized than 
decimated. 


: ey seancaN 
Incantation of the Stars 


June 1971 


I am looking at things so far away 
that I’m seeing them as they were 
a million years ago, not today. 


Out, out beyond our own flat helix of lights 
which, by sheer distance, condense as the Milky Way— 
that horizon towards which our planet tumbles eastwards all 
night— 
they have only numbers, no names. 


But the magician, his voice reverberating without echo in the 
dark imaginary dome, tells me the names of lights nearer home— 
names whose strangeness to our tongue 

measures the far immensity 

of Aldebaran, bright horn of the Bull, 

Arcturus, the Plowman’s spear, 

Betelgeuse and Rigel, the Hunter’s jewels, 


Vega, playing the Lyre, and Deneb, head of the Swan. 


See Rasalhague and Sabik, where the Snake is grasped, 
Alphecca in the Northern Crown, 
Eltamin, ball for the Dragon, 


Hadar and Menkent, where the Horseman prances, 
Fomalhaut with the Fish swimming south, 


and Altair, where the Eagle hangs. 


We look not up but down into our galaxy, 
rolling above a floor of stars 


whose center unseen, where the Archer points his arrow, 


lies between Shaula and the Shield. 

O Algol, Almach, Elnath, and Alpheratz, 
Hamal, Mirfak, Antares, and Caph— 
with the music of your far-out names 
the magician casts a spell upon the sky. 


That poem came out of a night spent in the desert, at Joshua Tree 
National Monument in southern California, where the air is so 
clear that it seems to act as a lens. We had also a Questar 
telescope. This was the first time that I had ever really 
experienced and understood our relationship to the whole galaxy, 
and the stars ceased to be merely a confused display of fireworks 
over my head. Now I understand why a psychiatrist friend of 
mine, Dr. Leonard Miller, uses astronomy for treating his patients. 

Earth is in heaven. It spins, falls, and floats in a spiral nebula. 
Earth is not opposed to heaven: it belongs in it as a member of 
the whole company of the stars. Each of the three parts of Dante’s 
epic, The Divine Comedy, ends with the word “stars.” And anyone 
who has read Austin Farrer’s commentary on the Apocalypse, A 
Rebirth of Images, will realize that a preoccupation with astrology 
and astronomy underlies the whole notion of heaven as conceived 
in the Hebrew, Christian, and Islamic traditions. The authors of 
the four Gospels are associated with the four “fixed” signs of the 
Zodiac: Matthew with Aquarius, Mark with the Lion, Luke with 
the Bull, and John with the Phoenix-Scorpion, and are often 
represented thus on the four arms of the Crucifix. What is all this 
about? 

Heaven is always associated with happiness and bliss, as when 
we say, “It was simply heavenly.” Why do the Christians pray to 
“Our Father, who art in heaven,” and believe that Jesus ascended 
into heaven, and why did the Greeks immortalize their heroes by 
giving their names to constellations? 

We civilized human beings are psychically and sensually 


myopic. We concentrate on trivial details. We ignore the constant 
and eternal, and are therefore “ignore-ant” of our real identity as 
members, functions, expressions, and manifestations of 
everything that is to be seen in the sky, and much more. We hide 
ourselves in architectural boxes, fix our attention on scraps of- 
paper, and upon the sundry symbolic noises which we make to 
each other in representation of things that go on in shops, offices, 
parlors, and bedrooms. 

But when your cat goes out at night, it isn’t solely intent on a 
sexual adventure. It sits and watches the sky; it becomes as 
familiar with the patterns of the stars as you are with your 
hometown streets, and therefore can find its way back from (and 
this has actually been done) Minneapolis to Tucson. The 
European whitethroat and other birds have also been shown to 
navigate by the stars on their periodic migrations. Unlike people, 
they are aware of their cosmic context. They therefore have no 
need for the quarrelsome artificialities of religions, which 
substitute words, ideas, and symbols for what can be seen by the 
naked eye. 

How many of us now realize that space is the same thing as 
mind, or consciousness? That when you look out into infinity you 
are looking at yourself? That your inside goes with your entire 
outside as your front with your back? That this galaxy, and all 
other galaxies, are just as much you as your heart or your brain? 
That your coming and going, your waking and sleeping, your 
birth and your death, are exactly the same kind of rhythmic 
phenomena as the stars and their surrounding darkness? To be 
afraid of life is to be afraid of yourself. 

Of course, we have tried to organize the stars by giving them 
places in an imaginary celestial sphere with 360 degrees of 
latitude, and then, as if the whole sky were a public Rorschach 
blot, projecting upon them patterned constellations. (I wonder if 
cats and whitethroats do this.) But I prefer to look at star-patterns 
as I look at formations of spray and foam, mountains and clouds, 
marble and smoke. For such things have a peculiar non- 
symmetrical order—an incalculable order—which the Chinese call 
li and represent with the character 32 which has the original 
meaning of markings in jade and grain in wood. We recognize 
instinctively an order in such formations which is quite distinct 
from the mere chaos of scattered garbage. At the same time it is 


not an order that is measurable or calculable in terms of our 
linear systems of words and numbers, which can represent life 
only in caricature and which, if they could ever be made 
sufficiently exact to predict the future in full detail, would render 
that future already known, past, and dead. The order of li and of 
the stars is the order of surprises, of order recognizable as order 
only because it is playing with randomness. 

This is why the enlightenment-wisdom, or satori, embodied in 
Zen Buddhism is said to be: 


A direct transmission outside scriptures; 
Not dependent on words and letters; 
Direct pointing to the heart ... 


that is, to use the most clumsy words, to reality as some no-thing, 
nonverbal, nonmeasurable, and nonconceptual—where every 
“non” implies an affirmation rather than a negation, a plus rather 
than a minus. 

And having said that I feel like a fool! More and more—perhaps 
just because I am growing older—it seems to me that the 
utterances of sociologists, psychologists, and_ especially 
philosophers and theologians are completely meaningless, 
including also the tart and crusty writings of those who call 
themselves logical positivists or scientific empiricists. Often they 
are redeemed by a certain poetic verve or flair of expression 
which transforms them into music rather than logic, so that one 
may read such philosophy with the same pleasure as listening to 
the song of birds just after dawn. Yet most academic philosophers 
now deride the babblings of mystics and metaphysicians as mere 
poetry, whereas I feel increasingly with R. H. Blyth and Paul Reps 
that reality is poetry. 

Thus, as it becomes increasingly mathematical and linear, the 
science of astronomy dries up into a merely pompous and 
officious attitude to the stars. So also astrology, as it becomes 
concerned with predicting the future, becomes entirely 
insensitive to the actual heavens to such an extent that most 
astrologers are so preoccupied with ephemeris tables that they 
hardly look at the stars—just as those who play the stock market 
are generally unconscious of what the technologies of business 


are doing to the real and natural world. (They do not realize, for 
example, that most of the wealth and energy of the United States 
is being used to employ a huge team of destruction workers to 
obliterate the flora and fauna of Indochina.) 

G. K. Chesterton once said that whereas the philosopher tries to 
get the heavens into his head, the poet asks only to get his head 
into the heavens. So when one asks, in today’s lingo, “Where’s 
your head at?” it would be ideal to answer that it’s in heaven. 
The problem is that most of us now live in cities where the view 
of heaven is blocked by ceilings and smog. People don’t even 
realize that every home can be a home with a view—the view of 
the sky—since we are living on the side of the planet and look 
not up but out. 

This is a way of saying that our deepest spiritual, religious, and 
psychological problems are extremely simple. Just go out and 
look at the sky. Get to know where you are. Heaven is there for 
all to see. It’s like the story of the fellow who had chronic 
“singing in the ears.” He went to his family doctor, who could 
find nothing wrong, and sent him to a otorhinolaryngologist, who 
could find nothing wrong and sent him to a psychoanalyst, with 
whom he worked twice a week for a whole year on the 
symbolism of the ear. But still the singing didn’t go away. One 
day he went to buy some shirts, and when the salesman asked 
what size he wore he said, “I always take a fourteen.” The 
salesman, who was one of those elderly British-butler types, 
replied, “Excuse me, sir, but as one used to observing men’s 
necks, I think you should be wearing a fifteen.” So the neck was 
measured, and fifteen it was; and with the new shirts the singing 
went away. 

Now of course I know, in a theoretical way, that the names of 
most of the stars are Arabic and could be translated into 
meaningful English words. Happily, I don’t understand Arabic, 
and so the names have magic. Chinese characters on signs in 
Hong Kong and Tokyo likewise have magic for those who can’t 
read them, and so don’t realize that they are merely saying BARBER 
SHOP OR FRESH FISH ToDAY. (And of course this isn’t so boring if you’ve 
only just succeeded in reading Chinese, or if the characters are 
written with fine calligraphic style.) But what happens when, at 
an immense cost, we actually get to the moon to find out that, as 
we actually suspected, it’s only a slag heap? That most of the 


stars are merely radioactive gas-balls surrounded by dead 
planets? That existence itself is “nothing but” an intensely stupid 
electronic mechanism? This is like losing one’s appetite, or 
feeling that “all women are the same in the dark.” Our 
technological culture prides itself on having no appetite—on 
discovering that the universe contains neither magic nor mystery, 
that Mother Nature is just a common slut. Accordingly, therefore, 
the food actually tastes of plastic, the wine of chemicals, the 
water of chlorine, and the air of carbon monoxide. 

Invariably and inevitably we see nature in our own image. 
What we think about it is what we think about ourselves, and I 
suppose one can just as well hate one’s neighbor as oneself as 
love him as oneself. So then: to the degree that you have reduced 
yourself to a formula, to a specific personality or definable ego, to 
a miserably sinful creature (with sins all listed for confession), or 
to a regular psychological type (with dreams all analyzed), you 
will have put yourself omnipotently in charge of nothing. The 
trick explained. The magician exposed as a charlatan. 


Was Jesus a Freak? 


July 1971 


A few days ago I gave a ride to a rather pleasant hippie couple 
who seemed to have no particular destination. I asked, “What trip 
are you on?” He said, “Like spiritual trip?” I said, “Yes.” He said, 
“We’re on the Jesus trip.” “Whose Jesus?” I asked, “Billy 
Graham’s or mine?” “Well, it’s all sort of the same, isn’t it?” 

It is not. For Billy Graham follows a long tradition, both 
Catholic and Protestant, wherein the gospel (or “good news”) of 
Jesus has been eclipsed and perverted by pedestalization, by 
kicking him upstairs so as to get him out of the way, and by 
following a religion about Jesus instead of the religion of Jesus. 
Obviously, Jesus was not the man he was as a result of making 
Jesus Christ his personal savior. The religion of Jesus was that he 
knew he was a son of God, and the phrase “son of” means “of the 
nature of,” so that a son of God is an individual who realizes that 
he is, and always has been, one with God. “I and the Father are 
one.” 

When Jesus spoke those words the crowd took up stones to 
stone him. He said, “I have shown you many good works from the 
Father, and for which of them do you stone me?” They answered, 
“We’re not stoning you for a good work but for blasphemy, 
because you, being a man, make yourself God.” And he replied, 
“TIsn’t it written in your Law that ‘I have said: you are gods’? If he 
addressed those to whom he gave his words as gods (and you 
can’t contradict the Scriptures), how can you say that I 


blaspheme because I said ‘I am a son of God’?” But the self-styled 
Christians, and especially the fundamentalist bibliolaters, always 
insist that Jesus was the only son of woman who was also the son 
of God, and thus call upon all the rest of us to follow the example 
of the one human freak who had the unique advantage of being 
the Boss’s son. This is not a gospel: it is a chronic hangup, a self- 
frustrating guilt trip. It isolates the career of Jesus as an exhibit in 
a glass case—for worship but not for use. 

It is obvious to any informed student of the history and 
psychology of religion that Jesus was one, of many, who had an 
intense experience of cosmic consciousness—of the vivid 
realization that oneself is a manifestation of the eternal energy of 
the universe, the basic “I am.” But it is very hard to express this 
experience when the only religious imagery at your disposal 
conceives that “I am” as an all-knowing and _ all-powerful 
monarch, autocrat, and beneficent tyrant enthroned in a court of 
adoring subjects. In such a cultural context, you cannot say “I am 
God” without being accused of subversion, insubordination, 
megalomania, arrogance, and blasphemy. Yet that was why Jesus 
was crucified. In India people would have laughed and rejoiced 
with him, because Hindus know that we are all God in disguise— 
playing hide-and-seek with himself. Their model of the universe 
is not based on the political states of the Egyptians, Chaldeans, 
and Persians, whose awesome dictatorships still hold sway 
through the Jewish, Christian, and Islamic religions, even in the 
Republic of the United States. In Hinduism the whole universe is 
like the Holy Trinity—one as many, and many as one. (And, of 
course, the Hindus are the despised of the earth, having been 
reduced to utter poverty by Muslims and Christians.) 

But Jesus had to speak through a public-address system—the 
only one available—which distorted his words, so that they came 
forth as the bombastic claim to be the one and only appearance 
of the Christ, of the incarnation of God as man. This is not good 
news. The good news is that if Jesus could realize his identity 
with God, you can also—but this God does not have to be 
idolized as an imperious monarch with a royal court of angels 
and ministers. God, as “the love which moves the sun and other 
stars,” is something much more inward, intimate, and mysterious 
—in the sense of being too close to be seen as an object. 

So it turns out, alas, that our new breed of Jesus freaks are 


following the old nongospel of the freaky Jesus—of the bizarre 
man who was unnaturally born and whose corpse was weirdly 
reanimated for a space trip into heaven. (One can, of course, 
interpret these ancient images in a more profound and nonliteral 
way, as I tried to show in my book Beyond Theology.) But to 
identity Jesus the man as the one and only historical incarnation 
of a divinity considered as the royal, imperial, and militant 
Jehovah, is only to reinforce the pestiferous arrogance of “white” 
Christianity—with all the cruel self-righteousness of its 
missionary zeal. They may perhaps be forgiven for their 
ignorance, but today, when we are exposed to all the riches of 
Earth’s varying cultures and religions, there is no further excuse 
for the parochial fanaticism of spiritual in-groups. 

Jesus freaks are still in a state of enthusiastic innocence, as yet 
unaware of the frightful implications of their claims. But they 
must realize that Christianity would seem ever so much more 
valid if it would stop insisting on being an oddity. Christianity 
has universality, or catholicity, only in recognizing that Jesus is 
one particular instance and expression of a wisdom which was 
also, if differently, realized in the Buddha, in Lao-tzu, and in such 
modern avatars as Ramana Maharshi, Ramakrishna, and, perhaps, 
Aurobindo and Inayat Khan. (I could make a very long list.) This 
wisdom is that none of us are brief island existences, but forms 
and expressions of one and the same eternal “I am” waving in 
different ways, such that, whenever this is realized to be the case, 
we wave more harmoniously with other waves. 

Christians, who so often affect prickly and astringent attitudes, 
may cluck and pish-tush that this is all very imprecise, vague, 
woolly, and sentimental. But in the harsh clacking of their 
disciplined voices, their accurate distinctions, and precise 
calculations, I hear the rattle of rifle bolts and the clicking of 
heels. “Like a mighty army moves the Church of God.” But this is 
no way for a gentle-man. 


© 
What Shall We Do with the Church? 


September 1, 1970 


What are we going to do with an enormous amount of valuable 
real estate known, not quite correctly, as the Church—whether it 
be Catholic, Episcopalian, Presbyterian, Lutheran, Methodist, 
Congregational, or Unitarian? I am going to offer some very 
practical suggestions, for whereas, on the one hand, “Something 
is happening and you don’t know what it is, do you, Mr. 
Jones?”—on the other, the theological education of young 
clergymen has been so vastly improved in recent years that they 
are baffled by congregations who want everything just as they 
imagine it always was, even if the pews do get emptier and 
emptier as they die off. 

Talking of pews reminds me that as a child I always thought of 
church as a bus. The vicar was up front as the driver, and the 
people sat in long rows observing the backs of each other’s necks. 
The organ music was the sound of the engine. And they were 
always singing ditties about “Forward!” “Onward!” “Upward!” 
This kind of church still has some popularity among older people 
in the more provincial areas of the United States. But in the great 
urban and suburban regions on the two coasts, and about such 
cities as Chicago, the churches—especially those which have 
established themselves great cathedrals and “plants’—are in 
serious financial trouble. For example, it costs some $800 a day 
just to run the facilities of Grace Cathedral in San Francisco, and 
about eighty people turn out for the main Sunday service. 

I myself was once a clergyman, and was for five years the 


Episcopal chaplain to students, United States Navy units, and 
faculty at Northwestern University, so I know whereof I speak 
from the inside. I am also, and have been for forty years, a 
student of comparative religion, and have concluded that any 
form of orthodox, conservative, or fundamentalist Christianity is 
the most difficult religion in the world to explain to any 
intelligent person. It can be done, but it takes hours and hours of 
explaining, and sometimes explaining away, a system of theology, 
history, and symbolism which is as remote from the 
comprehension of most educated young people as the religion of 
the Incas or Aztecs. Some people—like C. S. Lewis, Jacques 
Maritain, William Temple, and even Dorothy Sayers—have made 
a good try at it, but one comes away with the feeling that these 
are such brilliant intellectual types that they could make a good 
case for any proposition whatsoever—as that the entire solar 
system is inside the sun (which is easy to argue), or that the 
entire system of galaxies is the atomic structure in the pimple on 
the nose of an old lady, who lives a very ordinary life, in an 
immeasurably larger dimension. 

The churches have, for at least a century, been trying to beguile 
young people into acceptance of this bizarre religion—with 
negligible results. They have tried young people’s fellowships, 
with dances and pot-luck suppers, drama clubs, discussion 
groups, sports teams, Bible study circles, choral groups, bingo 
games, and have even gone so far as to use jazz for their service 
music and invite rock bands to play at the altar. They have made 
up prayers and retold Bible stories in hip language. They have 
opened up crypts and basements as immense pads where vagrant 
and impoverished hippies can flop for the night. Yet there is the 
inescapable sensation that all this is bait on a trap—and of course 
it is, for the Church has been on the make as a missionary 
organization, counting converts, since its inception, and, with 
only the most cursory examination of other religions, knows in 
advance that it is the only really good and true one. 

The trap itself is (1) that the Church would persuade you to 
worship Jesus Christ as your sole Savior and Hero, and to regard 
him not simply as wise, loving, and divine, but—competitively— 
as the wisest, most loving, and only truly divine being that has 
ever walked the earth, and that in some mysterious way, which 
has never yet been clearly explained, his death by crucifixion 


paid the price for all our sins, if only we will accept it as having 
done so. (This is an argument in which the advocate and the 
judge are invariably the same person or corporation.) 

(2) The Church will insist that you abstain from all genital 
sexual activity whatsoever until such time as you are 
monogamously wedded, preferably under the Church’s auspices. 
Under the present economic and educational system this should 
keep most lusty people completely frustrated until at least 
twenty-three, unless parents are willing to help out, and then 
again it is extremely foolhardy to embark upon a monogamous 
marriage until you are at least forty. 

(3) When you become a member, the Church will expect of you 
an annual pledge of x dollars, to be divided between missionary 
work and the maintenance of your own particular church, and 
which goes chiefly for utilities, paying the minister’s salary, and, 
above all, paying off the mortgage on a whopping Gothic-style 
building. 

(4) The Church will expect you to attend at least one of its 
services regularly, every Sunday, and with very, very few 
exceptions these are universally abominable. In the first place 
they consist almost exclusively of talk. We tell God what to do 
and what not to do, and give him information about things 
which, if he is omniscient, he already knows. We attempt to 
celebrate his glory with doggerels and religious nursery rhymes 
called hymns, mostly set to military or sentimental tunes. And 
then the minister, speaking on God’s behalf, thinks up ear- 
catching ways of spinning out platitudes concerning the 
avoidance of evil and the cultivation of goodness. The Roman 
Catholic Church recently made the serious mistake of having the 
Mass celebrated everywhere in the vernacular, so that it could be 
“understood,” and added insult to injury by having some person 
standing with a microphone beside the altar to “explain” what 
was going on, thereby depriving Christendom of the last 
widespread stronghold of mystery. To find it any more you have 
to go to such joyous places as the Russian Orthodox Cathedral in 
Paris, where there are no pews, and the rite is celebrated in Old 
Slavonic, which nobody understands. It was the same with the 
medieval Latin of the Roman Church. Even if you knew Latin 
quite well, it was so chanted or mumbled as to be perfectly 
unintelligible. 


Why should a religious service be unintelligible? Because its 
function is, to quote Keats, “to tease us out of thought, as doth 
eternity.” For many people the contemplation of God, of the 
Ground of Being, is most easily reached through the 
contemplation of pure sound, which is why Hindus and Buddhists 
hum very slowly such virtually meaningless mantras as OM AH 
HUM. Christians could just as well use AMEN, IESUS, ADONAI, 
ALLELUIA, or KYRIE ELEISON. To contemplate through sound in 
this way, you must simply be absorbed in the sound itself and 
forget all about anything it is supposed to mean, for when words 
are used for their meaning they become abstract signs and 
symbols, pointing to something other than themselves, and one 
step removed from reality. Services therefore should be focused 
on meditation and contemplation, still using chanting and 
appropriate music, though I feel the organ has such maudlin 
associations attached to it that it has had its day. 

The next step is to strip the churches of pews, leaving only a 
few chairs around the walls for old people and invalids, and 
otherwise cover the floors with carpets and cushions. Ministers 
should not be required to wear two sets of clothes, with their 
vestments covering their ordinary street clothes or cassocks, but 
should wear white or colored robes with hoods, like the Greek 
chlamys. And none should preach a sermon longer than ten 
minutes. And none should be asked to go about in that supreme 
symbol of stuffiness and self-righteousness, the uncomfortable 
round starched collar. There is no reason why Mass should not be 
celebrated in such churches, but rather for the mood and attitude 
of worship than for the didactic meaning of what is said—using 
Latin, Greek, Old Slavonic, Sanskrit, or Hebrew. I have myself 
made up a Mass called the Missa Glossolalia or the Mass of the 
Gift of Tongues. I go through the whole traditional action of the 
Mass, but what I should chant, in any language or no language, I 
leave to the Spirit and thus need no book beside me. 

The next reforms may be harder for conservative church people 
to take. I think we should abandon petitionary prayers. We might 
focus the psychic energy of the congregation upon given 
individuals in trouble. But if God is loving, omnipotent, and 
omniscient, to attempt to draw his attention to a sick friend or 
relative is sheer impertinence and even lack of faith—for if such a 
God exists he is taking much better care of your Aunt Susan with 


cancer than either you or her doctors. In my own theology Aunt 
Susan is, like everyone else, God in disguise, playing hide-and- 
seek with himself at an extreme end of the spectrum of “hide,” at 
which extreme point Aunt Susan may well do a flip and discover 
who and what she really is. For Christian theologians have not 
yet discovered that the spirit, or pneuma, in man, far superior to 
the soul, psyche, or nephesh, is none other than the ruach Adonai, 
the one and indivisible divine energy itself. One must assume that 
such a person as Jesus lived consciously and continuously from 
the ruach Adonai, and not from the nephesh, or ego. It is thus said 
by Quoheleth, the preacher of the book of Ecclesiastes, that at 
death the body shall return to the dust, and the Spirit to God who 
gave it. In any case, prayers for this, that, and the other put God 
at a distance, when even a great theologian has said that God is 
nearer to you than you are to yourself. They likewise distract 
attention from the many ways of meditation or contemplation 
which introduce us to mystical experience, or immediate 
realization of our union with God. The substitution of 
interminable chatter for this realization is the basic reason why 
the Church has no spiritual power, except among some few silent 
monks like Trappists and Carthusians, and even their power is 
wobbly because they deny themselves the spiritual and physical 
regeneration of sexual communion. 

There is another necessary reform which the die-hards may 
find even more difficult to take, which is that the Church must 
abandon its spiritual imperialism and its craze for making 
converts. It must desist from its proud and arbitrary claim to be 
top religion, and from the impertinence of sending missionaries 
to persuade so-called heathens to substitute Christianity for 
religions of which such missionaries know next to nothing. 
Missionaries did much to ruin the cultures of Hawaii and 
Polynesia; their work lies close to the roots of the barbarous 
apartheid system of South Africa; they successfully destroyed 
Inca, Mayan, and Aztec culture; they founded those very colleges 
in China where most of the leaders of the Communist Revolution 
received their training. Under the dispensation of Lord Macaulay 
they nearly succeeded in obliterating the culture of India. With 
the exception of some strictly medical missionaries, missionaries 
as a whole have wrought incalculable harm, and have nowhere 
succeeded in bringing all mankind to the feet of Christ. One must 


say to the Church, “Put up or shut up.” 

The Church has much to learn from so-called heathens. A 
Benedictine monk has recently written on Christian Yoga, and 
another, as well as a Jesuit, has written on Christian Zen. They 
have a lot to teach us about splendid meditative rituals, and 
about joyous religious dancing—for lack of which many of our 
churches feel like grim courts of law where we are all on trial for 
unspecified crimes, and where the Judge has to be wheedled and 
flattered most humbly into showing mercy. Nevertheless, the 
Church still comprises individuals of high intelligence and good- 
will, and is still legal owner and controller of a formidable 
amount of property—churches, halls, schools, and retreat houses. 
I am willing to bet that if the reforms I am suggesting were 
adopted, if all anxiety about every-member canvasses were 
forgotten, if ministers would let slip the folly of making formal 
parish calls, and if moralistic preachments were indefinitely 
suspended, the churches would suddenly be thronged by 
thousands of young people, who might even be willing to pay a 
reasonable admission fee at the door—attracted there, not by a 
dismal sense of duty, but by the one thing the Church should be 
offering and is not: spiritual and mystical experience. 

For reasons still unclear to me, most clergymen are afraid of 
this dimension of the spiritual life. They say it leads to private 
and personal religious whimsies which need always to be checked 
against standards of sound doctrine and the traditions of the 
universal Church. It does not seem to strike them that the very 
acceptance of such standards is a matter of personal whimsy and 
opinion. They are like the Bandar-Log, the monkeys, in Kipling’s 
Jungle Book who used to get together and scream, “We all say so, 
so it must be true!” It has always seemed to me that when you 
come into contact with a large group of people who share a 
common belief—say, in numerology, or in flying saucers as 
visitors from outer space, the consensus is apt to overwhelm your 
own good judgment. 

The practical problem is therefore to find sufficient clergy with 
the ability and the attitude to conduct services in the manner 
which I have very briefly described, and to let many of those 
more bizarre features of Christianity go by default because they 
are never satisfactorily explained except by endless talk—the 
inheritance of Original Sin from Adam, the Immaculate 


Conception of Mary, the Virgin Birth of Jesus, the Atonement for 
sin by his crucifixion, his physical resurrection from death, his 
corporeal Ascension into Heaven, and the resurrection of our own 
bodies from death on the morning of the Last Judgment, which 
will consign us both physically and spiritually to everlasting bliss 
or to everlasting torture. Interesting as these archetypes may be 
to the student of mythology, there is no way of proving 
conclusively that they are untrue, nor would those who hold 
them to be true be able to imagine any evidence which would 
show the contrary. They are simply implausible. They do not 
speak to our condition, and are meaningless in our universe of 
discourse. They are not even of interest to anyone following the 
contemplative, mystical way—at least, not in this day and age. 
There is no point in attacking them; just let them slide away. 

I believe there are many clergy of almost all denominations, 
except the Protestant lunatic fringe, who would be happy and 
eager to give a lead in this new-old kind of religion—to get away 
from “Jesus Loves Me, This I Know,” and from spending hours 
trying to prepare interesting sermons about small points. A 
relatively short period of training could give them the necessary 
ability, and they would learn the rest as they went along, but 
they would end up with a real religion instead of a talk-and-sing- 
fest, at which everyone dons his most uncomfortable clothes, and 
maintains a demure, stand-offish attitude to everyone else, and is 
shown to his pew by an usher with a white carnation in his 
buttonhole. Of course, there is a good argument for just letting 
obsolete institutions fall apart, since “no man putteth new wine 
into old wineskins,” and let them be replaced by such new 
institutions as the growth centers. I may be presumptuous, but I 
think I can show the churches a workable solution. 


Do You Smell? 


September 10, 1970 


The question seems impolite, and yet it is no more so than asking, 
Do you see? Do you hear? Do you feel? Do you taste? We admire 
a person of taste, but what is wrong with a person of smell? The 
problem is superficially one of bad usage in English grammar. “To 
smell” should mean to sense through the nose, and “a smell” 
should mean no more than a nasal sensation. A person with an 
offensive body odor should be said “to stink,” and an unpleasant 
nasal sensation should be called “a stink” or “a stench,” never “a 
smell,” for the term is as neutral as “a sound.” We have some 
nouns for pleasant smells—a fragrance, a perfume, an aroma. But 
I can find no verb which is the antonym of “to stink,” and which 
means to give forth or to detect a pleasant smell, like the 
Japanese kaori. Furthermore, we have very few adjectives which 
apply specifically to the sense of smell—pungent, acrid, fragrant, 
putrid, aromatic. “Smelly” and “stinky” are simply verbal 
adjectives. “Odoriferous” is simply an affected Latinism for 
“smelly,” while “musky,” “grassy,” “fishy,” and “leathery” say no 
more than, for example, the smell of the musk flower. I would 
like, for example, to introduce the word “chuffly,” to denote all 
those qualities of smell having a dusty or chalky texture— 
blackboard chalk, face powder, smoke, street dust, and so on. 

But we have no spectrum of smell, such as we have of light, nor 
scales and ragas, such as we have of sound. A cat may look at a 
king, and I may listen with obvious attentiveness to what you are 


saying. I may sip your wine with overt gusto, and may even grasp 
your hand on meeting. It is even now becoming customary 
among young men in America to embrace each other. But quite 
deliberately to sniff another person, unless she is your sweetheart, 
is beyond the pale and puts us in mind of dogs, snuffling at each 
other’s bottoms. Aside from perfume on a woman or after-shave 
lotion on a man, you are not supposed to be smelly at all, though 
we also make exceptions for such disinfectant smells as are given 
off by Lavoris, Listerine, and Binaca. Yet a skillful parfumier will 
study a woman’s body odor with great care, considering just what 
other ingredients will transform it into a unique perfume. But on 
the whole, most of us prefer each other to be odoriferously 
anonymous. Some of us like roses, hyacinths, or potpourri in our 
homes, but on the whole houses and offices are supposed to be 
odorless. As G. K. Chesterton put it— 


They haven’t got no noses, 
And goodness only knowses 
The noselessness of man. 


What this really means is that smell is a repressed sense. It 
exists all the time, but is ritually ignored, as certain types of 
scientists will ritually ignore hunches’ and_ other 
parapsychological perceptions. Freud was, I think, correct in 
showing us that repressed energies become amazingly powerful 
but not necessarily in constructive ways. Thus, as is well known, 
we habitually ignore and fail to have conscious memory of much 
that has been right before our eyes or spoken loud and clearly 
into our ears. I knew an archbishop with a superb voice, but can’t 
remember a single thing he said, and have had long conversations 
with women without the vaguest recollection of how they were 
dressed. 

But when an entire sense is virtually repressed it becomes 
unconsciously powerful—the sense of “the unconscious”—and it 
is thus that through smell we form apparently irrational likes and 
dislikes for other people and places. The power of smell is also 
recognized by the uncanny way in which it can evoke vivid 
memories and moods. We imagine that through liberal use of 
soap and water, decent Caucasian people do not emit any 
unpleasant odor. But wash as he may, a meat eater stinks in the 


nostrils of a vegetarian, and the odor of a_ well-soaped 
Englishman is a stench to a Hottentot who, per contra, enjoys the 
company of his own people, who comb their hair with rancid 
butter. Now it is true that people of quality carried nosegays, or 
bunches of well-scented flowers, in those ancient cities of Europe 
which had open drains oozing along the gutters of the streets. 
Things were somewhat better in Japan, where human excrements 
were towed away in “honey-carts” to be dumped into pits on the 
farms and spread on the fields when mature. 

We cannot, therefore, be too sure of the common Protestant 
idea that incense was used at religious ceremonies to counteract 
the collective stink of unwashed crowds. It was discovered that 
certain odors had powerful effects upon mood—that incense 
made from pine, cedar, or aloeswood reminded one of high, 
lonely forests, of environments particularly conducive to quiet 
contemplation. Sandalwood, the most common basis for incense 
in Asia, is slightly more erotic, yet undoubtedly woodsy— 
suggesting the forests of the tropics rather than the mountains. 
Other substances are used—musk, jasmine, rose, wildwood, and 
mogra flowers, but these on the whole are more suitable for the 
boudoir than the temple. The temple incense of the Middle East 
and the West is basically frankincense, which is an aromatic gum 
resin collected from a variety of Asian and African trees of the 
genus Boswellia. It is the characteristic odor of a Roman Catholic 
church. Beware of any incense in stick, cube, or cone form 
colored black or dark purple, for these are apt to have the cloying 
odor of bad, sultry perfume mixed with soap. It is not simply that 
all black or dark purple incenses are of this noxious type, for 
some of the very best are of these colors. So far as I know no 
good incense is made in this country, other than the beige cones 
of juniper and pine that are made in New Mexico and Vermont. 
Insist on trying samples before you buy, and remember that a 
good incense should, when burning, somewhat resemble its odor 
before lighting. 

Incense usually comes in two forms—stick, or powder or 
granules. Occasionally sandalwood may be had in chips. The stick 
has several functions: it is self-burning, the point of light on the 
tip is often used for concentration in yoga, and the burning down 
of the stick measures the time—especially for a period of 
meditation. Powdered, granular, or chip incense is usually burned 


on charcoal, using either ordinary briquettes, or better, a special 
type of disk, self-lighting charcoal impregnated with saltpeter 
which can be purchased at any shop selling Roman Catholic 
church goods, or any bondieuserie. Catholics, both Western and 
Eastern Orthodox, usually light this charcoal in the bottom of 
thuribles, which are brass or silver pots with perforated lids, and 
suspended from chains. These are ceremoniously swung by the 
clergy at the altar or at the people, and are tended by a special 
acolyte known as the thurifer. The thurible of Hindus and 
Buddhists is a similar brass pot with perforated lid, but it has a 
wooden handle, like a saucepan, instead of chains. Otherwise 
Buddhists use various forms of koro, which are simply vessels of 
bronze, cloisonné brass, or ceramic, filled with a mixture of sand 
and ash as a base for either sticks or charcoal. I have even seen a 
self-burning incense laid out upon smooth sand in a wide koro in 
a continuous arabesque of lines that formed an esoteric Buddhist 
symbol. This was at Jodo-in, a temple on Mount Hiei, above 
Kyoto, which is so ancient, remote, and peaceful that I have 
called it “the shrine at the end of the world.” 

Normally Zen Buddhists use jinko, or aloeswood—a diseased 
part of the tree which becomes hard and nubbly in form, and is 
relatively expensive. It is best to burn it, not directly on the 
charcoal, but on a sliver of foil or a small ceramic dish about the 
size of a quarter. The Chinese and Indochinese make a very 
agreeable “punk” incense which fends off insects and has an odor 
reminiscent of burning piles of fallen leaves on an autumn 
afternoon. It comes in long, thick brown sticks or in green coils. 
Amerindians like to use the actual leaves of cedar or juniper, 
throwing them upon the hot embers of a ceremonial fire such as 
is used at the peyote ceremony, where the Road Man, or leader, 
has the Cedar Man sitting at his left to keep the teepee incensed 
all night. 

Now, no one can assert that incense, except the few types 
against which I have warned you, stinks. Why, then, do not 
Protestants burn it at their religious ceremonies, nor most people 
have it in their homes? Catholics refer to people who avoid 
incense as having “Protestant noses.” Is it a waste of money? No 
more so than stained-glass windows, choir surplices, preachers’ 
gowns, organs, lecterns, pulpits, and altar flowers. Is it against 
the Bible? The Old Testament is full of directions for the proper 


use of incense, warning only that it should not be used as a 
substitute for true worship. Is it reminiscent of popery? No more 
so than surplices, than kneeling to pray, than a cross and even 
two candlesticks on the altar, nor than the outrageous popery of 
the Episcopal Church, where the two principal Sunday services 
are usually the monastic offices of matins and vespers, as distinct 
from the Eucharist. Is burning it in your home a secret sign that 
you are a homosexual? Try that one out on me! 

The first reason, which I have already mentioned, is that we 
suppress the sense of smell in general, perhaps in preparation for 
living in atmospheres where we hardly dare breathe. The second 
is that it is allegedly foreign to the culture—like eating seaweed, 
raw fish, snails, broiled eels, octopus, water chestnuts, lotus roots, 
bamboo shoots, and seagull eggs—thus leaving us blisslessly 
ignorant of the delights we are missing. 

But the third goes deeper still. With the support of incense both 
religion and sex can “get under your skin” and reach that 
nonverbal and ecstatic level at which one is tempted to let go and 
abandon oneself, and such Christians and Jews who believe more 
firmly in the Devil than in God are always afraid that if they let 
go, the Devil will take over first, unaware that not having let go is 
the Devil already in full control. For ordinary self-control is the 
domination of one’s behavior by the selfish self: its love is 
assumed, pretensive, and dutiful; its righteousness is hypocritical; 
its chastity issues in cruelty; its spiritual ideals are highbrow ways 
of inflating the ego; its profuse confessions of sin are subtle ways 
of one-upping more ordinary people; and its beneficence has an 
odd way of arousing resentment in its recipients. 

For years I have tried to temper this humorless and inhumane 
selfish self-denial, this closed and clothes-pegged nose attitude to 
life, and to reform its ingenious but destructive technologies with 
the more relaxed, humorous, and pleasurable spirituality of Asia. 
Incense and its general use are but one aspect of the approach. 


On the Tantra 


April 10, 1968 


You yourself are the eternal energy which appears as this 
universe. You didn’t come into this world. You came out of it, like 
a wave from the ocean. You are not a stranger here. On the 
contrary, everything that happens to you, everything that you 
experience, is your karma: your own doing. This, though 
expressed in differing ways, is the central philosophy of both 
Hinduism and Buddhism, cradled alike in the culture of ancient 
India. 

Obviously, this “you yourself” is not the superficial personality 
or ego that we know as John or Jane Doe, which does not feel 
itself directly responsible for growing hair or beating a heart, 
much less for blowing the wind or shining the stars. The Hindu 
and Buddhist sadhanas (or spiritual disciplines) are ways of 
awakening to the actual sensation of oneself as a process vaster 
by far than what is ordinarily felt to be “I”—that very limited 
center of conscious attention and volition which we call the 
person or ego. 

As in watching anything intently—such as the form of a 
beautiful woman—one’s attention becomes fastened upon 
particular details, so the basic energy of this universe becomes 
fascinated with particular plots and patterns, and thus identifies 
itself with each and every “I”—whether human, animal, or 
vegetable. But in each instance of doing this, it temporarily 
forgets that it is what there is, all that there is, the “which than 
which there is no whicher” for ever and ever. 


Thus every individual is, as it were, God in disguise, playing 
hide-and-seek with himself through the ages of eternity. “God” is 
not, in this Hindu view, the universal monarch and governor of 
Jewish and Christian theology, but rather the Player and Actor of 
the world, playing all the parts of life so rapidly and intensely 
that he forgets himself and becomes identified with each one of 
them. Every role he assumes is also audience to all the others, 
and the play is performed so convincingly that the audience takes 
it “for real.” 

According to Indian philosophy, there are two principal ways 
by which you may become free from this fascination and so 
remember your original identity as the source and ground of the 
universe. 

The first and better known is by renunciation of pleasure, by 
detachment and asceticism, as a means of breaking fascination 
with the particular forms of life. The self-tormented fakir on his 
bed of nails is trying to attain to a state in which nothing—but 
nothing—in life can throw him. He returns to center by plumbing 
the sensation of pain to its depths, attaining final freedom from 
the fear of suffering and death. 

The second, less known, way—called Tantra—is the opposite: 
not withdrawal from life but the fullest possible acceptance of 
one’s desires, feelings, and situation as a human being. If you are 
the Godhead, the universal self, fascinated with the particular 
existence of John Doe, then just be that and do that to the full. 
Explore the fascination of desire, love, and lust to its limit. Accept 
and enjoy without reservation the ego that you seem to be. 

Thus, the follower of the Tantric way plunges himself into just 
those things which the ascetic renounces: sexuality, food and 
drink, and all the involvements of worldly life. He does not, 
however, do this in the halfhearted and timid spirit of the 
ordinary pleasure seeker. He abandons himself to the pleasure- 
pain of ordinary sensual experience with the utmost 
concentration on the finest vibrations of feeling, and learns to 
play these sensations as one plays with the breath on a flute. 

Through this intense exploration of sensory experience he 
discovers two things. First, that existence or energy is at root a 
simple alternation or vibration of on and off, yes and no, now you 
see it/now you don’t, which is capable of infinite complication, as 
all numbers can be represented with the symbols 0 and 1. He 


learns that the “yes” or “on” element of energy cannot be 
experienced without contrast with the “no” or “off,” and 
therefore that darkness and death are by no means the mere 
absence of light and life, but rather their origin. In this way the 
fear of death and nothingness is entirely overcome. 

Because of this startling discovery, so alien to our normal 
common sense, he worships the divinity under its female rather 
than its male form—for the female is symbolically representative 
of the negative, dark, and hollow aspect of the world, without 
which the masculine, positive, light, and solid aspect cannot be 
manifested or seen. The very word “Tantra” is connected with the 
art of weaving, and denotes the interdependence of warp and 
woof in woven cloth: the one cannot hold together without the 
other. 

Second, he discovers that existence is basically a kind of 
dancing or music—an immensely complex energy pattern which 
needs no explanation other than itself—just as we do not ask 
what is the meaning of fugues by Bach or sonatas by Mozart. We 
do not dance to reach a certain point on the floor, but simply to 
dance. Energy itself, as William Blake said, is eternal delight— 
and all life is to be lived in the spirit of rapt absorption in an 
arabesque of rhythms. 

Tantric imagery in painting, sculpture, and ritual has, 
therefore, particular themes which exemplify its own way of 
experiencing the world. It shows the male and female divinities 
joined in a meditative form of sexual union in which each 
worships the other as his and her origin. It shows the god or 
goddess as a many-headed or multi-armed being, a sort of cosmic 
centipede, portraying every individual as a limb of the central 
and eternal self. It also employs patterns of meaningless letters 
and chants of meaningless sounds (mantras) to suggest and help 
one to realize the essentially musical and dancing spirit of the 
universe. 

Some understanding of Tantra is therefore a marvelous and 
welcome corrective to certain excesses of Western civilization. 
We overaccentuate the positive, think of the negative as “bad,” 
and thus live in a frantic terror of death and extinction which 
renders us incapable of “playing” life with an air of noble and 
joyous detachment. Failing to understand the musical quality of 
nature, which fulfills itself in an eternal present, we live for a 


0 


tomorrow which never comes—like an orchestra racing to attain 
the finale of a symphony. But through understanding the creative 
power of the female, of the negative, of empty space, and of 
death, we may at least become completely alive in the present. 


The Art of Contemplation 


April 1972 


The individual is an aperture through which the whole energy of 
the universe is aware of itself, a vortex of vibrations in which it 
realizes itself as man or beast, flower or star—not alone, but as 
central to all that surrounds it. These centers are not, as it may 
seem, apart from their surroundings, but stand in mutual 
relationship to them—center to circumference—in the same way 
as the magnetic poles. It is thus that each center anywhere 
implies all other centers elsewhere. The individual is not, 
therefore, only a center. He is the entire surround centered at this 
time or this place, which is why the astrologers try to infer the 
character of an individual from the disposition of the universe 
encircling him, though it is doubtful whether they know how to 
read it correctly. 

The whole system is symbiotic in principle, for no individual 
can appear, for however short a time, except in mutual 
interdependence with the whole. For it could be said, in the 
rather clumsy language of nouns and verbs which arbitrarily 
distinguishes things from events, that the individual is something 
which the whole is doing, and that the whole is something which 
the individual is doing simultaneously. This relationship is not 
ordinarily felt or recognized in human consciousness, fascinated 
as it is by the apparent independence of the individual from the 
whole—and also frightened by it. The individual feels restricted 
to the area of his voluntary behavior, since all else seems to be an 
independent and uncontrollable happening on the part of 


something quite other than himself. He does not realize that, just 
as one cannot walk without ground, one cannot experience doing 
except in relation to happening, or self (center) except in relation 
to other (surround). Thus nothing other than oneself is quite 
other, for between self and other, doing and happening, there is, 
again, the same kind of unity which exists between magnetic 
poles, or between the crest and the trough of a wave. 


This essay has already been published in the form of a 
reproduction of the original handwritten manuscript (Society for 
Comparative Philosophy, 1972, and Pantheon Books, 1973). It is 
included here for convenience, in a more compact and—possibly 
—legible form. 

The system as a whole appears to be a distribution of solid 
entities or modes of energy in the midst of emptiness or space. 
Human consciousness preoccupies itself with these entities and 
virtually ignores their spatial background. We consider it 
“nothing” in the sense of that which has neither importance nor 
significance, forgetting that without the spatial field none of these 
entities could be manifested or distinguished. There is, however, 
between space and entity the same polar relationship as between 
crest and trough, for which reason nothingness is not simply the 
contrary or absence of being but rather its ground and origin. We 
believe so firmly in the maxim “ex nihilo nihil fit’—nothing can 
come out of nothing—that it is almost impossible for us to see 
that emptiness is the essential prerequisite for every form of 
being, unless we can conceive that space has some structure 
concealed from our senses. 

While there are indeed such structures or processes as cosmic 
rays which do not appear to the naked senses, the usefulness and 
potency of emptiness is, as Lao-tzu said, precisely that it is 
perfectly empty. “Being and nonbeing arise mutually.” Thus not 
to see the unity of self and other is the fear of life, and not to see 
the unity of being and nonbeing is the fear of death. 

To understand the reciprocity or mutual interdependence of 
polar opposites—being and nothing, center and surround, self 
and other, doing and happening—might be called polar vision. I 
have been speaking of it in the dry terms of logic, through which 
it may be grasped intellectually. But when polar vision comes in 


the form of immediate sensation and feeling, it is known as 
mystical experience or cosmic consciousness, and of this it is 
better to speak in the mode of poetry and paradox. Thus, to feel 
polar vision is to feel that what happens to you is your own 
doing, and that your own doing is happening to you; that death 
and emptiness are the firm ground upon which life walks; and 
that oneself, as both center and surround, is the eternal universe. 
But this feeling, or intuition, does not come in the form of words 
or ideas and does not depend on any trick of imagination or self- 
suggestion. It is more as when one simply sees blue sky or feels 
that one is alive. 

This feeling, or rather, the basis for it, is always present. We 
are unaware of it only because our consciousness is distracted by 
another and incompatible feeling of identity which almost all 
thinking peoples learn from childhood. All too easily, we confuse 
symbols and signs with what they represent, as in saying, “This is 
a tree,” when that to which we are pointing is quite other than 
the sound “tree.” At a much deeper level we confuse what we 
actually are, as  center-and-surround or  organism-and- 
environment, with an idea, concept, or image of ourselves from 
which the interdependence of self and other is absent. This image 
we call the “I,” the ego, the person, or the subject (as distinct 
from the object). We consider it as the doer of our deeds, the 
thinker of our thoughts, and the feeler of our feelings. It is a false 
image for three reasons. 

The first is that it is only a concept or symbol and thus can no 
more do anything than the word “water” can quench thirst. The 
second is that it is no more than an impoverished caricature of 
our whole organism, since there is nothing in it which 
corresponds to the subconscious processes of our being. The third 
is that it entirely leaves out the polar unity of the organism with 
the universe, ignoring the fact that the two are a single process. 

Under the impression that this pure abstraction is the vital core 
and organizing center of our being, we try to exert its “will” 
when action is difficult or emotions hard to restrain. Thus in 
“taking a hard look” at something, or listening intently, we 
tighten muscles in the regions of the eyes and ears. We scratch 
our heads when we are puzzled and frown when we are trying to 
pay close attention. We grit our teeth when trying to endure pain, 
clench our fists when trying to “hold on to ourselves,” and tighten 


our stomach muscles when attempting to restrain anxiety. All 
these actions are futile and do nothing to attain the desired 
objectives. But they are chronic and habitual and build up a 
generalized state of bodily tension, often centered just above and 
between the eyes, which serves as the referent, the felt 
experience, corresponding to the symbol-image of the person or 
ego—thus marrying an illusion to a futility. 

The question, “What, then, can be done to overcome this false 
sense of identity and to replace it with polar vision and cosmic 
consciousness?” is impossible to answer in its own terms. All that 
needs to be experienced for cosmic consciousness is already 
present, and anything in excess of this would be obstructive and 
redundant—like red ink on a rose. Otherwise, it is simply 
necessary to see that our usual “I” is a false and impotent image. 
But just as this phantom cannot actually will or do anything, it 
cannot get rid of itself. No tensing of muscles or, for that matter, 
deliberate relaxing of muscles, no repetitions of formulae, no self- 
suggestion, no exercises of imagination, no psychophysical 
regimens of any kind, will do anything but add strength to the 
phantom. For every littlest movement to change, or to try not to 
change, the way you actually feel now will be just one more of 
those futile muscular tensions (like trying to lift an airliner off the 
ground by straining at your seatbelt) which give semblance to the 
reality of the separated ego. You, considered as that ego, cannot 
get polar vision or cosmic consciousness. It might arise all of 
itself, as if by divine grace, but there is nothing, just nothing, you 
can do or not do to bring it about. Yogis and Zen followers 
sometimes come to this point after long and heroic efforts. 

At this point there is nothing to do except what is happening of 
itself. All that remains is the simple awareness of what is going 
on—trees outside, street sounds, clock ticking, sunlight on carpet, 
breathing, body feelings, talking to yourself in your head. Usual 
cosmic jazz. That’s what there is, and every bit of it, including 
memories and recollections, is happening now. It comes out of 
nothing as sounds come out of silence, for it should be obvious 
that the universe has always started from now and left traces 
behind, like a pen as it writes, though the written record, the 
seeming past, is still and only now. 

You, as ego, cannot change what you are feeling, and you 
cannot, effectively, try not to change it. There is simply and only 


what is happening, including those particular thoughts, images, 
and tensions which you customarily attributed to the phantom 
thinker and doer. They persist like echoes, but as it is seen that 
they are just static in the nervous system and not the work of any 
central ego, they lose interest, subside, and go away of 
themselves. Hoping that they will go away is just more static. 

If you have understood all this, you are simply aware of what is 
happening now, and we might call this state meditation or, 
better, contemplation. But it is not that you are something which 
is just watching what happens. “What happens” is just using your 
organism to watch itself. It is the universe centering as a 
particular being, though it is not necessary to use or insist on this 
concept, for what is important here is not the idea but the feeling 
of it. The words are only a special use of noises in the air, marks 
on paper, or vibrations in the brain. 

If this becomes clear, the effort to transform one’s own mind 
should collapse, and along with it the whole illusion that one is a 
separate center of consciousness to which experience happens 
and for which these happenings are problematic. This collapse 
would then become the state of contemplation, the realization 
that all is One. I may understand this point theoretically, but still 
there seems to be no change, for which reason I look for some 
process whereby I can move from theoretical to immediate or 
intuitive understanding—not recognizing that this is still a subtle 
form of the absurd attempt to transform the transformer, arising 
from the illusory distinction of thinker and thought, experiencer 
and experience. 

So long as this subtle confusion remains, one can be beguiled 
into various ways of trying to meditate, and a competent guru 
will suggest techniques so clever that their absurdity will be 
difficult to discover without resolute attempts to follow them 
through. Furthermore, the aspirations and minor successes of 
other seekers will compound a collective illusion, and even a 
mutual one-upmanship contest, of believing that this or that 
method or guru is, at last, the one that really works. Yet the 
intention of the guru himself is simply to exhaust the energy of 
the illusion by bringing his disciples again and again to 
experiences of the absurdity of trying to transform mind with 
mind. As the Zen patriarch Seng-ts’an put it: 


The wise person does not strive; 

The ignorant man ties himself up ... 

If you work on your mind with your mind, 
How can you avoid an immense confusion? 


But once it has been explained, you may naturally ask whether 
it is really necessary to go through all this rigorous folly to 
dissipate the illusion. You will wonder whether knowing in 
advance, theoretically, that these disciplines are absurd, you will 
no longer have the motivation to follow them through. Yet 
shouldn’t it be clear that the very question “Is it necessary in 
order to dissipate?” arises directly from the illusion itself? If it 
isn’t clear, you will have the itch to go through the discipline and 
try to “get” some attainment and rise to some higher rank of 
spirituality. But if it is clear, you may feel completely nonplussed 
and confounded, as if—as they say in Zen—you were a mosquito 
trying to bite an iron bull. However, this feeling is precisely the 
sensation that there is no separate self which can either do or not 
do anything about the problem. Thus it may appear, further, that 
if there is no distinct ego to be nonplussed, the stream of 
experience can simply flow on unobstructed by itself. Hence the 
verse: 


Blue mountains are of themselves blue mountains: White clouds 
are of themselves white clouds. 


This unobstructed flow is the Tao, the way or course of nature, 
and is also what is meant by the state of nonattachment—a 
spontaneous, unforced and unblocked flowing of life. Yet the 
prospect of such flowing as a way of life gives us intense moral 
anxiety, for at once there are qualms about unleashing the tigers 
and demons within us if no control is exercised. But such qualms 
are, again, symptoms of the same old illusion. What if there has 
been no controlling self all along? Consider, too, whether the 
human condition could be much more depraved than it is 
already, and mark the horrendous behavior of people who believe 
in will power and in control over their minds and their 
circumstances. Hitler was an ascetic; Rasputin had incredible 


mastery of his mind and body; and many of the samurai exploited 
Zen training for the improvement of military skills, though there 
were a few, like Miyamoto Musashi, who finally realized the 
futility of the enterprise. The Tao flows without obstruction 
whether we know it or not, for the not-knowing is no more than a 
variant pattern of the flow. As another Zen verse puts it: 


If you understand, things are just as they are; 
If you do not understand, things are just as they are. 


Now, it is widely believed that those who are free from the 
illusion of separateness are automatically endowed with 
extraordinary powers, and this is true in the obvious sense that 
all the wonders of nature are no other than oneself. Beyond this, 
the gifts of psionic powers (siddhi) may or may not be manifested, 
just as there may or may not be good weather. In any milieu 
where the liberated guru is highly revered, people will faith-heal 
themselves of sickness in his presence and attribute the cure to 
his magic. But meditation may be regarded as a state in which 
the fruits of nature and the potentialities of the human organism 
may develop more richly, though this will never happen if their 
growth is forced. So long, then, as we are concerned with powers, 
we are still aiming at increased control of nature and aggravating 
our frustrations. I am speaking, needless to say, of a control of 
nature supposedly imposed from the outside. It is really incorrect 
to think of nature as controlled, self-controlled, or uncontrolled, 
for the idea of control always involves a duality in which one 
element commands and the other obeys, or refuses to obey. The 
pattern or order of nature depends on no such division, since 
cause and effect, action and reaction, are simply two aspects or 
poles of a single process, or two ways of looking at it. No cause is 
separate from its effect, except for purposes of description in a 
dualistic language. 

As a rule, the mystics and gurus who are no longer seeking any 
attainment go on with what appear to be the formal practices of 
meditation. The various Buddhas and Bodhisattvas are usually 
depicted in the position of meditating in the padmasana, or lotus 
posture, like any novice, but this is actually a ritual which is done 
for its own sake—as one might play the flute, or dance, or invite 


friends to a formal dinner. It is almost ridiculous to ask, “Why 
meditate?” as if it were going out of one’s way to do something 
bizarre, like lying on a bed of nails. Why look at the stars or 
watch clouds? Why go sailing to no fixed destination? Nothing is 
really explained by its cause or motivation, for we find only 
causes behind causes until we can pursue them no longer. It is 
like a child asking, “Why? why? why?” until its father, like a Zen 
master, says, “O shut up and suck your lollipop!” 

Thus contemplation as a particular “exercise,” done in a formal 
way, is simply the ritual enjoyment of that basic awareness of 
what is happening now which goes on always from moment to 
moment. In the same way, dancing as dancing is the ritual form 
of dancing while cooking, or dancing with the pen while writing. 
It is therefore quite against the spirit of such contemplation to 
undertake it in a mood of grim seriousness, as is sometimes the 
way in monasteries and religious communities which are really 
schools for adolescents without true vocation to _ the 
contemplative life, where young people are drilled in ritual like 
conscripted soldiers. Children should under no circumstances be 
forced to participate in such exercises, just as we would not 
dream of requiring them to engage in sexual intercourse. In such 
ritual it is equally absurd to treat ourselves as children and to 
browbeat ourselves into arduous practice with the thought that it 
will be good for us. The good of contemplation is contemplation 
—not some result that it may bring. 

While there are traditional forms of the contemplative ritual, 
there are no fixed ways in which it must be done. It has, 
however, been found appropriate to sit like a Buddha with the 
legs crossed, or in lotus posture, with the back easily erect and 
the breath coming and going on its own—as if it were falling out 
and falling in, not as being pushed out or pulled in. 

In the same spirit, one does not listen, but simply hears all 
sounds that are emerging from silence without making any effort 
to place or identify them. Similarly, one does not look, but only 
sees light, color, and form playing with the eyes as they, too, 
emerge moment by moment from the void. Thoughts, likewise, 
are treated in the same way as sounds, and, if they arise, are 
merely watched without comment as they come and go; one 
“hears” them in the same way one would hear the chattering of 
birds on the roof. 


When the breath subsides into a slow rhythm, it is a special 
delight to let the voice float a tone upon it, with the sound OM, 
or the mantram OM AH HUM, and to hear the tone reverberating 
—perhaps to the accompaniment of a gong which is allowed to 
hum until its sound fades into all other sounds. There are many 
suitable forms of such chanting ritual, employing not only 
prolonged single tones, but also rhythmic phrases repeated again 
and again, as for instance the familiar lilting mantram HARI 
KRISHNA, HARI KRISHNA, KRISHNA KRISHNA, HARI HARI; 
HARI RAMA, HARI RAMA, RAMA RAMA, HARI HARI. What is 
important here is not the meaning of the words but their actual 
sound and the movement of the breath and lips, giving direct 
experience of the basic energy of life as it comes from the void. 

It is possible that in the course of contemplation there may 
arise visions or ecstatic states of consciousness, and it is a natural 
temptation to think of these as the goals of contemplation. 
However, to attempt to prolong these states, or to regain them 
when they subside, is like straining the facial muscles to see 
clearly, and is an effort to interrupt the natural flow of what is 
happening now. There may also arise a curious sensitivity to the 
unspoken thoughts and intentions of others, or astonishing 
dexterity of intellect or fidelity of memory, but these are not to be 
taken as signs of “progress” in contemplation, because 
contemplation ceases as soon as there is any seeking for results. 
Such temptations as these beset ritual contemplation in the same 
way as playing a musical instrument may be used for ends 
extraneous to the enjoyment of music, as in competing with 
oneself or with others for musical status. 

Too much concern for ritual contemplation may also lead to a 
one-sidedly passive form of life and to the impression of falling 
away from the eternal now while engaged in other and more 
strenuous activities. Now, the habitual use of muscular tension as 
the referent for the ego in looking, listening, and willing carries 
over into the use of natural physical exertion in running, lifting, 
and hauling so as to make such actions seem entirely different 
from those which happen “of themselves,” spontaneously. 
Curiously, this sets up, say, in the effort to run, a redundant effort 
to make the effort, giving the impression that the exertion of 
running is a direct demonstration of the activity and potency of 
the ego-image. We have learned, mostly as children, to put on an 


act of strenuousness while doing strenuous things. Yet efforts to 
make efforts, being redundant, work against the natural use of 
muscular energy in such a way that they are self-imposed 
obstacles, or efforts against effort. It is as if, in pulling, the triceps 
were to work against the biceps. When this redundant use of 
effort falls away, it becomes obvious that decision to do this or 
that, and the consequent physical actions, happen of themselves 
like everything else. 

Free action is certainly not caused by a purely abstract “I.” It 
emerges from the total intelligence of the organism, in the same 
way as the growth of the brain and the digestion of food, and it 
will employ conscious reasoning in situations where reasoning is 
an appropriate tool. This would perhaps be called biologically or 
physically “determined” action by those who separate the 
organism from the rest of the universe, and see it “obeying” or 
“responding” to “drives” which have first been defined as 
external to itself. But the individual-and-universe has no external 
or extraneous determinant. The individual may be seen as 
constrained by natural processes only when viewed out of context 
as something in but not of its whole environment. Laws and 
artificial restraints become necessary when, through the illusion 
of separateness, the individual loses touch with his organic 
intelligence and feels at odds with his environment. Obviously, 
the operation of organic intelligence is not to be confused with 
the false spontaneity of actions deliberately calculated to be at 
variance with natural order or human law. Social conventions 
still govern those who go out of their way to oppose them. 

In past times all matters concerning the practice of 
contemplation were considered esoteric or, what amounts in the 
West to the same thing, heretical—though not every heresy was 
of this order, and the contemplative way became heresy only as 
people tried to describe its content. For, speaking in religious 
language, it would be plain to the contemplative that only God 
exists and that there is nothing other than God. For obvious 
reasons this is a doctrine greatly feared by both ecclesiastical and 
secular rulers. On the one hand, when it is necessary that the 
people be exploited and oppressed, it is important to imbue them 
with a servile mentality. On the other hand, when people are 
vulgar and greedy, the mere idea that “all is God” or that good 
and evil are polar is used to justify every wanton excess. It is for 


this reason that governments forbid the ingestion of hemp flowers 
and other psychedelic substances, lest immature and halfcivilized 
individuals profane the mysteries. One does not wish noble wines 
to be used for drunken brawls. 

The fiction of the isolated ego or person as the real individual 
has therefore been implanted to stimulate the feeling of 
creatureliness and the fear of God. It is likewise advantageous to 
rulers that the people be blind to the polarity of life and death, 
and so fear death if they fear not God. But when those who 
implant this fiction are also its dupes, they seek for themselves as 
persons the powers which they already enjoy as God, but have 
forgotten. In this endeavor they resort to such crude wisdom as 
may be expressed in linear signs, words, and numbers for the 
government of a nonlinear and immeasurably subtle world. And 
as the person is a linear version of man, confused with the real 
man, so the linear understanding of the world—with which linear 
wisdom must deal—is confused with the real world. Only by 
violence, then, can the real and living world be straightened out, 
squared away, evened off, boxed into clear-cut categories, and so 
conformed to the crudities of linear wisdom. Consequently, all 
the balances and interdependencies of nature are thrown into 
confusion—to the bewilderment of birds, beasts, and plants, and 
the befuddlement of man’s own nonlinear body and brain. In such 
an emergency it is necessary to take the risks of exposing the 
illusion of the person and all its work, and to allow what has 
been esoteric to become generally known. 

It is thus that, in contemplation, man discovers himself as 
inseparable from the cosmos as a whole in both its positive and 
negative aspects, its appearances and disappearances. Astronomy 
and physics are therefore theoretical adumbrations of the 
vastness of our dimensions, for it is not simply that we are 
subordinate parts of the system, but that the entire system is 
ourself in its full and only true sense. Ordinarily, we may glimpse 
this truth in a shallowly intellectual way, in affairs and basic 
emotions. But in contemplation this view is as real and self- 
evident as breathing and enables the problems of mundane life to 
be seen in their true perspective—sub specie aeternitatis— 
balancing and correcting the usual myopia of exclusive 
preoccupation with nasty little games and schemes. 

Nature, that is, our own true nature, is bringing these 


preoccupations to a stop by coming forth with the technical 
power to pursue them on a colossal scale, hitherto unknown. 
Pursued and magnified with such power, they come swiftly to 
absurdity and catastrophe, so that their innate contradictions 
become obvious to all. For we have been trying to harness 
technology to the impossible game of having positive without 
negative, defying the principles of that very electricity upon 
which technology so largely depends. This objective is as illusory 
as the ego which seeks it. 

Thus a time when the objective seems clearly unattainable is a 
time ripe for the unmasking of that ego—itself the persona-mask 
which conceals the splendor of our Original Face. When spring 
comes the buds break out of their busks, the little birds cast off 
their shells, and young plants burst from their seed-casings. When 
there is a crack in the Cosmic Egg, Buddha is about to be born. 


The Zero-One Amazement 


September 1, 1971 


I have recently been studying G. Spencer Brown’s book Laws of 
Form (Julian Press, New York, 1972), and though he was modest 
enough not to begin his title with the word The, this book is 
surely the most wonderful contribution to Western philosophy 
since Wittgenstein’s Tractatus. This is not to be a review of it. I 
want to use the book as a point of departure for some further 
reflections. But it should be said, in passing, that this is a little 
classic of exquisite reasoning which goes down to the very roots 
of thinking, and could be called an approach to mystical 
experience by way of mathematical logic. 

Spencer Brown explains that any universe is one turn, from the 
Latin uni (one) vertere (to turn). Now it’s your turn. Every dog has 
its day. You have only one life. Thus a universe begins by 
drawing a distinction. You can make any distinction you like, but 
you must draw the line somewhere. But once you have done this, 
you set out on a path in which your choices are progressively 
limited and inevitable. When you were born, or conceived, you 
became one. But we don’t know the meaning of one without 
none, and so one and none arrived together as the first 
distinction. We can say that before there was one there was none, 
though we should never have known this unless one had 
happened. But how could one come out of none? How did God 
create the universe out of nothing? To understand this you would 
have to have two turns instead of one. You would have to be able 


to turn, not just to the left or the right, but back upon yourself to 
see your own eyes. 

This is like the ancient problem of being given three wishes. Be 
careful of what you desire: you may get it. The second wish has 
to be used, therefore, to cancel the first, because you will 
invariably regret an arbitrary and miraculous change in the 
course of nature when you behold its unforeseen results. The 
problem, which is like a Zen koan, is what to do with the third 
wish. We shall return to this in due course. 

Spencer Brown’s point is that a system which observes itself 
can never observe all of itself, and that, therefore, as our 
telescopes become more powerful the universe must necessarily 
expand. If I am continuous with the universe, if the physics of my 
body is the same as the physics of everything else, then I have the 
same relation to the outside world as to that much of my own 
body which I can see. Without mirrors I cannot see my back or 
my head. Even with mirrors I cannot see into my brain, and even 
if, like a neurosurgeon, I study other people’s brains, I cannot 
study my own while I am doing it. This is utterly frustrating, but 
it has a marvelous and fascinating implication which is absolutely 
inescapable. You yourself are the universe which you are 
observing. You are trying to get at yourself when you love/hate 
other people. I am going to leave it to you to work out the 
connection between the frustration and its implication (it’s a 
wonderful trip), and only add that the aspect of yourself which 
you cannot see is obviously not any idea, image, or opinion of 
yourself that you have already formed. 

So the first distinction is between none and one (or 0 and 1). 
This is the yin (negative) and yang (positive) polarity of the Book 
of Changes, which Leibnitz read in a Latin translation, and which 
gave him the idea that all numbers could be represented by the 
figures 0 and 1, so that for the series 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 we have 001, 
010, 100, 101, 110, etc., which is now the arithmetic used by 
digital computers. 

Therefore almost any information can be represented in these 
terms. Just as colored television is transmitted by nothing more 
than a series of pulses, all the information in our nervous systems 
is represented in terms of neuron cells which either respond or do 
not respond. The principle of the thing becomes obvious when 
you consider that sufficiently small dots and spaces of the same 


size can be arranged so as to represent any black-and-white 
photograph. This is a language. This same language can be used 
to inform a machine to select any one of four different colors 
when it prints a dot, thus it doesn’t require too much imagination 
to see that all sensations and concepts can be conveyed, as on 
magnetic tape, in terms of nothing but yang dots and yin spaces. 
There is even a method whereby magnetic tape, which delivers or 
does not deliver a pulse (yang), can inform a machine using laser 
beams to sculpture any three-dimensional image from a block of 
plastic. So the question arises: If, given sufficient technical skill, 
we can reproduce everything that we can know in terms of a code 
consisting only of patterns of yes and no, on and off, are we 
simply reproducing what is already, and has always been, going 
on in the world? 

This same question can be asked in a surprisingly different 
form: If we could attain perfect control of all events, would we 
not discover to our astonishment that we were doing what has 
always been happening? 

This would involve, furthermore, the realization that what we 
had hitherto regarded as external and independent events were in 
fact our own behavior. Put it another way: If everything which 
happens is inevitable, this is only an obverse way of saying that 
we ourselves are doing it. A truly consistent fatalist will be forced 
to the conclusion that he is God and therefore has complete 
freedom of will. This is the principle of bending to survive and 
stooping to conquer. Calvinists (i.e., predestinarian Presbyterians) 
and Muslims half believe this. They concede that everything 
which comes to pass is the divine will, but continue to regard 
themselves as separate and submissive subjects of that will. They 
are therefore notably energetic and aggressive people, but 
because they still regard themselves as puppets of that will, their 
energy takes a divisive, cantankerous, hostile, and exclusive 
course. For when you surrender to God, you must secretly hate 
him and then vent this hatred on other people. But among 
Muslims there is a “heresy” called Sufism, and the Sufis know 
that there is no separate self to surrender to God: there is only 
God, Allah—upon which it is impossible to resist the play of 
words, “All ... Ah!” So the Sufis say, “As there is no deity but he, 
there is no heity [i.e., identity] but he.” And it so happens that 
the Sufis represent the other side of Islam—not the dreary Koran 


and its raging prophetism, but music, dancing, and arabesques— 
all of which are patterns of conviviality. 

Let us suppose, then, that you are suddenly struck with this 
realization that there is no “you” apart and separate from all that 
there is/isn’t (for we must include the 0 as well as the 1, and for 
the same reason, we must include the death aspect as well as the 
life aspect, for you would not know that you were alive unless 
you had once been dead). The realization is at once thrilling and 
scary, like when we first came into being and made the 
distinction of deciding to be one. This is how Spencer Brown 
describes it: 


The skin of a living organism cuts off an outside 
from an inside.... By tracing the way we represent 
such a severance, we can begin to reconstruct, with an 
accuracy and coverage that appear almost uncanny, 
the basic forms underlying linguistic, mathematical, 
physical, and biological science, and can begin to see 
how the familiar laws of our own experience follow 
inexorably from the original act of severance. The act 
is itself already remembered, even if unconsciously, as 
our first attempt to distinguish different things in a 
world where, in the first place, the boundaries can be 
drawn anywhere we please. At this stage the universe 
cannot be distinguished from how we act upon it, and 
the world may seem like shifting sand beneath our 
feet. 


As also when you listen to a recording of your own voice that 
comes back to you a second or so after you speak, you wait for 
that other fellow to go on. For we are accustomed to the feeling 
that the world is firmly ordained and constituted by someone or 
something other than ourselves, and thus an experience in which 
“the universe cannot be distinguished from how we act upon it” 
may be weirdly unnerving.* 

The cultures deriving from the Jewish, Christian, and Islamic 
religions are founded on this fear. “The fear of the Lord is the 
beginning of wisdom.” They want to feel driven along looking, 
not straight ahead, but at the rear-vision mirror, following the 


commandments of their ancestors. Among these peoples it is 
therefore the greatest taboo, sin, and blasphemy to find out that 
the universe cannot be distinguished from how you act upon it— 
that you are, in fact, just as much an incarnation of God as Jesus 
or Kabir or Ramana Maharshi. But this is a state of nature, like 
having a heart, and is one of those things which (as Spencer 
Brown puts it) 


once they are discovered, are seen to be extremely 
simple and obvious, and make everybody, including 
their discoverer, appear foolish for not having 
discovered them before. It is all too often forgotten 
that the ancient symbol for the prenascence (i.e., prior 
to emergence state) of the world is a fool, and that 
foolishness, being a divine state, is not a condition to 
be either proud or ashamed of. 


This is why, in the Buddhist cultures of the Far East, it is 
possible to have a popular Buddha who is a fat slob and an 
aimlessly wandering bum, Hotei, who carries a big bag of 
interesting rubbish which he gives away to children. (It is said 
that he was an eccentric Zen priest of the late T’ang dynasty. In 
twentieth-century America or the People’s Republic of China he 
would be arrested as a vagrant lunatic and confined in a mental 
hospital.) For Hotei knows what to wish on the third—which is to 
wish not to wish any more. For when you see that the universe 
cannot be distinguished from how you act upon it there is neither 
fate nor free will, self nor other. There is simply one all-inclusive 
Happening, in which your personal sensation of being alive 
occurs in just the same way as the river flowing and the stars 
shining far out in space. There is no question of submitting or 
accepting or going with it, for what happens in and as you is no 
different from what happens as it. To think of submission is to 
divide yourself from it, and also to pile up a huge store of 
negative and aggressive energy against it. 

This Happening may be called God, or the Tao, or the All-ah! 
You may even think of it as a conscious being, but if so, do not 
place upon it the burden and the bore of holding perpetual court 
to be flattered, petitioned, whined at, wheedled, apologized to, 


and howled at with hymns. Saint Paul ordered that women 
should be silent in church, but he himself prayed without ceasing. 
If you were Jesus, wouldn’t you have turned to him and said, 
“Can’t you be quiet for a while?” 

To abandon the idea of separation from and submission to God 
has always been feared as a threat to morals, but there is 
absolutely no evidence to show that monotheists have behaved 
more lovingly to one another than pantheists. If anything, the 
evidence goes the other way, for all peoples who have a 
cosmology that corresponds to a military chain of command are 
obnoxious fighters and imperialists. They are forever punishing 
and disciplining other people for their own good, and milking 
them to the limit at the same time. And despite their professed 
atheism, Russia and China are both theocratic states, with icons 
and holy scriptures and inquisitions—except that their icons are 
enormous and vulgar photographs instead of sensitive paintings 
adorned with goldwork and jewels. 

If a human being is to have dignity, serenity, and sanity—like a 
great tree, a lion, or a galaxy—he must understand and feel that 
he himself is, basically, this whole Happening and that his 
individual organism is one of its innumerable gestures. I said 
earlier that that aspect of yourself which you cannot see, which 
you cannot observe as an object, is not any idea, image, or 
opinion of yourself that you have formed or can ever form. But 
this is why Moses and Mohammed knew, in a rather obscure way, 
that one should not make images of God. Like a flawless crystal 
or lens, emptiness makes form perfectly clear, and this is why 
space—of which one is aware without being able to form an 
image of it—is the nearest we can get to an idea of God, and also 
to an apprehension of one’s own unseen aspect. 

A most curious consequence follows. As transparency, or 
emptiness, lends clarity and definition to form, I find that the 
more I understand that I myself am the Happening, and can make 
no mistake, the more I appreciate every kind of careful and 
formal discipline and technique. You are somehow freed to do 
things lovingly and well when you realize that you are not doing 
anything out of duty or obligation to an overlord. When you no 
longer make the distinction between the universe and how you 
are acting upon it, you are really on your own and so acquire a 
sense of responsibility. And to the degree that we develop (or that 


there grows in us) this sense of compassionate, as distinct from 
anxious, carefulness we shall be able to do without the State just 
as we have been learning to do without the Church. 


*It is precisely this sensation which gives the horrors to people undergoing 
premature experiences of cosmic consciousness as a result of using LSD-25, 
or other psychedelic chemicals, without adequate intellectual preparation. 


Protogenesis 


The Seven Secret 
Sayings of God 


1. 


Before athe beginning when God created the heaven and 
the earth, and the earth was without form, and void: and 
darkness was upon the face of the deep, God said bI AM 
THAT. And it is so. 


. Also, being in eternity which is neither linear nor 


sequential, where all is nowever, God said, YOU MUST 
DRAW THE LINE SOMEWHERE. And it was drawn. 


. But it was no dreary straight line or flat wall, for God then 


said, HAVE A BALL. And there was a ball, in the image 
whereof all stars and planets came to be formed. 


. Thereupon God said, THERE ARE TWO SIDES TO 


EVERYTHING. And there are: the inside and the outside, 
the dense and the spacious, the right and the wrong, the 
left and the taken, for, as it is written, cOne shall be taken, 
and the other left. 


. And God said, IT MUST BE IN TIME. And thereafter it was, 


is, and will be, for as it is written again, dAs it was in the 
beginning is now, and ever shall be, through all ages of 
ages. Amen. 


. And forthwith God said, SPACE IT OUT. Whereupon it 


came to pass that, beside this and that and now and then, 
there is also here and there. 


. And God beheld chow firm a foundation this was and said 


unto himself, GET LOST. And there you are. 


a Gen. 1.1-2. Ps. 33.6. Acts. 14.15 
b Ex. 3.14. Jno. 8.58 

c Mat. 24.40-41 

d Lit. St. John Chrys. 

e Hymn 564. 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


Atan Watts, who held both a master’s degree in theology and a 
doctorate of divinity, has earned the reputation of being one of 
the most original and “unrutted” philosophers of the century. He 
is best known as an interpreter of Zen Buddhism in particular, 
and of Indian and Chinese philosophy in general. He was the 
author of more than twenty books on the philosophy and 
psychology of religion, including (in Vintage Books) Behold the 
Spirit, The Book, Does It Matter?, The Joyous Cosmology, Nature, 
Man and Woman, The Supreme Identity, The Way of Zen, The 
Wisdom of Insecurity, This Is It, and Beyond Theology. He died in 
1973. 


