“Alan Watts describes 
with startling clarity and poetic 
beauty his drug-induced experiences.” 


— CONTEMPORARY PSYCHOLOGY 


Adventures in the Chemistry 
of Consciousness 
With a new introduction by Daniel Pinchbeck 


Foreword by Timothy Leary 
and Richard Alpert 


THE JOYOUS 
COSMOLOGY 


Also by Alan Watts 


Behold the Spirit 
Beyond Theology 
The Book 
Cloud-Hidden, Whereabouts Unknown 
Myth and Ritual in Christianity 
Nature, Man and Woman 
Psychotherapy East and West 
The Spirit of Zen 
The Supreme Identity 
Tao 
This Is It 
The Way of Zen 
The Wisdom of Insecurity 


Also by Alan Watts from New World Library 


Does It Matter? 
Eastern Wisdom, Modern Life 
In My Own Way 
Still the Mind 
What Is Tao? 

What Is Zen? 


THE JOYOUS 
COSMOLOGY 


Adventures in the Chemistry 
of Consciousness 


ALAN W. WATTS 


With a new introduction by Daniel Pinchbeck 
CXS 


Foreword by Timothy Leary, PhD, 
and Richard Alpert, PhD 


SECOND EDITION 


i Wore, 


YEN 
CIB RAS 
New World Library 


Novato, California 


ws Wor, New World Library 
14 Pamaron Way 
Gaue Novato, California 94949 


Copyright © 1962 by Pantheon Books, a division of Random House, Inc. 
Copyright © 2013 by Joan Watts and Anne Watts 

Introduction copyright © 2013 by Daniel Pinchbeck 

Originally published in 1962 by Pantheon Books 


All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic, mechani- 
cal, or other—without written permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer, 
who may quote brief passages in a review. 


Text design by Tona Pearce Myers 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Watts, Alan, 1915-1973. 

The joyous cosmology : adventures in the chemistry of consciousness / Alan W. 
Watts ; with a new introduction by Daniel Pinchbeck ; foreword by Timothy Leary, 
PhD, and Richard Alpert, PhD. — Second edition. 

pages cm 

“Originally published in 1962 by Pantheon Books.” 

Includes bibliographical references. 

ISBN 978-1-60868-204-1 (pbk. : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-60868-205-8 (ebook) 

1. Consciousness. 2. Hallucinogenic drugs. I. Title. 
BF320.W3 2013 
154.4—dc23 2013004835 


First printing of second edition, May 2013 
ISBN 978-1-60868-204-1 
Printed in the USA on 100% postconsumer-waste recycled paper 


New World Library is proud to be a Gold Certified Environmentally 
Responsible Publisher. Publisher certification awarded by Green Press 


Initiative. www.greenpressinitiative.org 


109 87654321 


To the people of Druid Heights 


CONTENTS 


Description of Photographs 
Introduction by Daniel Pinchbeck 


Foreword by Timothy Leary, PhD, 
and Richard Alpert, PhD 


Preface 

Prologue 

The Joyous Cosmology 

Epilogue 

Appendix: Psychedelics and Religious Experience 


About the Author 


DESCRIPTION OF PHOTOGRAPHS 


Page 28 Polished agate surface (Wolf Strache) 

Page 32 Plumage of a francolin (Wolf Strache) 

Page 35 Back of a goliath beetle (Wolf Strache) 

Page 36 — Glass sponge (Wolf Strache) 

Page 41 Harp shell (Wolf Strache) 

Page 43 = Brazilian peacock butterfly (Wolf Strache) 

Page 46 = Raditolaria skeletons 

Page 49 Feeding pattern of a caterpillar (Wolf Strache) 

Page 51 Coral formations (Barbara Gould) 

Page 53 = Fructification of clematis (Wolf Strache) 

Page 54 Pinions of argus pheasant (Wolf Strache) 

Page 59 —- Shattered glass (Ken Knollenberg) 

Page6o = Wall surface (Barbara Gould) 

Page 64 = Skeleton of star coral (Wolf Strache) 

Page 66 — Spiral algae, in negative (Horst Janus) 

Page 68 = Creek system in ocean shallows (National Foto 
Persbureau) 

Page 71 Platinum crystal, 750, o0ox (Erwin W. Miiller, 
Pennsylvania State University) Probably the deepest 
that the eye has yet seen into the structure of the world 

Page 74 ‘Reflections on moving water (Wolf Strache) 

Page 79 = Malva flower (Anton Stankowski) 

Page 85 Leaf skeleton of the black poplar (Wolf Strache) 

Page 94 = Spiral nebula, Messier 81 


INTRODUCTION 


HE Joyous Cosmozocy inevitably sends me into a state of 

poetic euphoria and anarchistic delight. Alan Watts wrote 

this wonderful little book in the early 1960s: that long- 
lost moment of innocence when psychedelic substances like LSD 
and psilocybin were starting to permeate the culture of the modern 
West but no final decision had yet been made on their utility or 
fate—or their legality. It was a time when a handful of philosopher- 
poets had the chance to muse on the power of these compounds— 
“to give some impression of the new world of consciousness which 
these substances reveal,” Watts wrote. 

Reading it again, I can’t help but recall my first forays into the 
soul-unfolding and mind-opening qualities of the visionary plants 
and chemical catalysts. Those first trips unmasked the brittle delu- 
sions of our current culture and revealed that deeper dimensions 
of psychic reality were available for us to explore. Watts is such a 
fluid stylist—such a master of evanescent, evocative, pitch-perfect 
prose—that it is easy to gloss over or to entirely miss the explo- 
sive, radical, even revolutionary core of his message and meaning: 
the Western ego, the primacy of self that our entire civilization is 
intricately designed to shore up and protect, simply does not exist. 

When one uses the magnifying glass or microscope provided 
by one of a number of chemical compounds that, Watts can- 
nily noted, do not impart wisdom in itself but provide “the raw 


xi 


materials of wisdom,” one finds nothing fixed, stable, permanent— 
no essence. Only relationship, pattern, flow. Watts’s psychedelic 
journeys provided experiential confirmation of the core teachings 
of Eastern metaphysics: that the Tao is all, that consciousness is 
“one without a second,” that there is no doing, only infinite reci- 
procity and divine play. 

This book retains the freshness of precocious notebook jot- 
tings. It also, almost accidentally, gives a beautiful sense of life in 
the dawn of the psychedelic era on the West Coast, when groups 
of friends would gather in backyards beside eucalyptus groves to 
explore together, with the gentle humor of wise children, the infi- 
nite within. “All of us look at each other knowingly, for the feeling 
that we knew each other in that most distant past conceals some- 
thing else—tacit, awesome, almost unmentionable—the realiza- 
tion that at the deep center of a time perpendicular to ordinary time 
we are, and always have been, one,” Watts wrote. “We acknowl- 
edge the marvelously hidden plot, the master illusion, whereby we 
appear to be different.” 

Over the past forty or so years, we have suffered from the cul- 
tural delusion—put forth by a corporate media and government 
working overtime to keep consciousness locked up, as our industries 
suck the lifeblood from our planet—that the psychedelic revolu- 
tion of the 1960s was a failure. Revisiting Watts’s Joyous Cosmology 


xii 


INTRODUCTION 


reminds me that the psychedelic revolution has barely begun. The 
journey inward is the great adventure that remains for humanity 
to take together. As long as we refuse to turn our attention to the 
vast interior dimensions of the Psyche —“The Kingdom of God 
is within”—we will continue to exhaust the physical resources of 
the planet, cook the atmosphere, and mindlessly exterminate the 
myriad plant, animal, and insect species who weave the web of life 
with us. 

When on psychedelics, we tend to find that each moment takes 
on archetypal, timeless, mythological significance. At one point, 
Watts and his friends enter into a garage full of trash, where they 
collapse with helpless laughter. “The culmination of civilization 
in monumental heaps of junk is seen, not as thoughtless ugliness, 
but as self-caricature—as the creation of phenomenally absurd 
collages and abstract sculptures in deliberate but kindly mockery 
of our own pretensions.” Our civilization mirrors the “defended 
defensiveness” of the individual ego, which fortifies itself against 
the revelation of interdependence and interconnectivity, the pleni- 
tude and emptiness of the void. 

We are lucky to have Watts’s testament of his encounters: 
The Joyous Cosmology is a carrier wave of information and insight, 
which has lost none of its subtlety, suppleness, or zest. It is also an 


expression of a larger culture process, one that is unfolding over 


xiii 


the course of decades, through a “War on Drugs” that is secretly a 
war on consciousness. 

Dr. Thomas B. Roberts, author of The Psychedelic Future of 
the Mind, among other works, has proposed that the rediscovery of 
entheogens by the modern West in the mid-twentieth century was 
the beginning of a “second Reformation,” destined to have reper- 
cussions at least as profound as those of the first one. In the first 
Reformation, the Bible was translated into the common vernacular, 
printed, and mass-produced, providing direct access to the “word 
of God,” which had previously been protected by the priests. With 
psychedelics, many people now have direct and unmediated access 
to the mystical and visionary experience, instead of reading about 
it in musty old tomes. As Watts’s scintillating prose makes clear— 
and all appearances to the contrary—the future will be psyche- 
delic, or it will not be. 

Daniel Pinchbeck, author of 

Breaking Open the Head: A Psychedelic Journey 
into the Heart of Contemporary Shamanism 
New York City, 2013 


xiv 


FOREWORD 


HE Joyous Cosmozoey is a brilliant arrangement of words 

describing experiences for which our language has no 

vocabulary. To understand this wonderful but difficult 
book it is useful to make the artificial distinction between the exter- 
nal and the internal. This is, of course, exactly the distinction which 
Alan Watts wants us to transcend. But Mr. Watts is playing the ver- 
bal game in a Western language, and his reader can be excused for 
following along with conventional dichotomous models. 

External and internal. Behavior and consciousness. Chang- 
ing the external world has been the genius and the obsession of 
our civilization. In the last two centuries the Western monotheistic 
cultures have faced outward and moved objects about with aston- 
ishing efficiency. In more recent years, however, our culture has 
become aware of a disturbing imbalance. We have become aware 
of the undiscovered universe within, of the uncharted regions of 
consciousness. 

This dialectic trend is not new. The cycle has occurred in the 
lives of many cultures and individuals. External material success 
is followed by disillusion and the basic “why” questions, and then 
by the discovery of the world within—a world infinitely more 
complex and rich than the artifactual structures of the outer world, 
which after all are, in origin, projections of human imagination. 


Eventually, the logical conceptual mind turns on itself, recognizes 


XV 


the foolish inadequacy of the flimsy systems it imposes on the 
world, suspends its own rigid control, and overthrows the domina- 
tion of cognitive experience. 

We speak here (and Alan Watts speaks in this book) about the 
politics of the nervous system—certainly as complicated and cer- 
tainly as important as external politics. The politics of the nervous 
system involves the mind against the brain, the tyrannical verbal 
brain disassociating itself from the organism and world of which it 
is a part, censoring, alerting, evaluating. 

Thus appears the fifth freedom—freedom from the learned, 
cultural mind. The freedom to expand one’s consciousness beyond 
artifactual cultural knowledge. The freedom to move from con- 
stant preoccupation with the verbal games—the social games, the 
game of self—to the joyous unity of what exists beyond. 

We are dealing here with an issue that is not new, an issue that 
has been considered for centuries by mystics, by philosophers of 
the religious experience, by those rare and truly great scientists 
who have been able to move in and then out beyond the limits of 
the science game. It was seen and described clearly by the great 
American psychologist William James: 


...our normal waking consciousness, rational conscious- 
ness as we call it, is but one special type of consciousness, 
whilst all about it, parted from it by the filmiest of screens, 


Xvi 


FOREWORD 


there lie potential forms of consciousness entirely dif- 
ferent. We may go through life without suspecting their 
existence; but apply the requisite stimulus, and at a touch 
they are there in all their completeness, definite types of 
mentality which probably somewhere have their field of 
application and adaptation. No account of the universe 
in its totality can be final which leaves these other forms 
of consciousness quite disregarded. How to regard them 
is the question,—for they are so discontinuous with or- 
dinary consciousness. Yet they may determine attitudes 
though they cannot furnish formulas, and open a region 
though they fail to give a map. At any rate, they forbid 
a premature closing of our accounts with reality. Look- 
ing back on my own experiences, they all converge toward 
a kind of insight to which I cannot help ascribing some 
metaphysical significance. 


But what are the stimuli necessary and sufficient to overthrow 
the domination of the conceptual and to open up the “potential 
forms of consciousness”? There are many. Indian philosophers 
have described hundreds of methods. So have the Japanese Bud- 
dhists. The monastics of our Western religions provide more 
examples. Mexican healers and religious leaders from South and 


North American Indian groups have for centuries utilized sacred 


xvii 


plants to trigger off the expansion of consciousness. Recently our 
Western science has provided, in the form of chemicals, the most 
direct techniques for opening new realms of awareness. 

William James used nitrous oxide and ether to “stimulate the 
mystical consciousness in an extraordinary degree.” Today the 
attention of psychologists, philosophers, and theologians is center- 
ing on the effects of three synthetic substances—mescaline, lyser- 
gic acid, and psilocybin. 

What are these substances? Medicines or drugs or sacramental 
foods? It is easier to say what they are not. They are not narcotics, 
nor intoxicants, nor energizers, nor anaesthetics, nor tranquilizers. 
They are, rather, biochemical keys which unlock experiences shat- 
teringly new to most Westerners. 

For the last two years, staff members of the Center for Re- 
search in Personality at Harvard University have engaged in sys- 
tematic experiments with these substances. Our first inquiry into 
the biochemical expansion of consciousness has been a study of 
the reactions of Americans in a supportive, comfortable natural- 
istic setting. We have had the opportunity of participating in over 
one thousand individual administrations. From our observations, 
from interviews and reports, from analysis of questionnaire data, 
and from pre- and postexperimental differences in personality test 


results, certain conclusions have emerged. (1) These substances 


xviii 


FOREWORD 


do alter consciousness. There is no dispute on this score. (2) It 
is meaningless to talk more specifically about the “effect of the 
drug.” Set and setting, expectation, and atmosphere account for 
all specificity of reaction. There is no “drug reaction” but always 
setting-plus-drug. (3) In talking about potentialities it is useful to 
consider not just the setting-plus-drug but rather the potentialities 
of the human cortex to create images and experiences far beyond 
the narrow limitations of words and concepts. Those of us on this 
research project spend a good share of our working hours listening 
to people talk about the effect and use of consciousness-altering 
drugs. If we substitute the words human cortex for drug we can then 
agree with any statement made about the potentialities—for good 
or evil, for helping or hurting, for loving or fearing. Potentialities 
of the cortex, not of the drug. The drug is just an instrument. 

In analyzing and interpreting the results of our studies we 
looked first to the conventional models of modern psychology— 
psychoanalytic, behavioristic—and found these concepts quite 
inadequate to map the richness and breadth of expanded con- 
sciousness. To understand our findings we have finally been forced 
back on a language and point of view quite alien to us who are 
trained in the traditions of mechanistic objective psychology. We 
have had to return again and again to the nondualistic conceptions 


of Eastern philosophy, a theory of mind made more explicit and 


xix 


familiar in our Western world by Bergson, Aldous Huxley, and 
Alan Watts. In the first part of this book Mr. Watts presents with 
beautiful clarity this theory of consciousness, which we have seen 
confirmed in the accounts of our research subjects—philosophers, 
unlettered convicts, housewives, intellectuals, alcoholics. The leap 
across entangling thickets of the verbal, to identify with the total- 
ity of the experienced, is a phenomenon reported over and over by 
these persons. 

Alan Watts spells out in eloquent detail his drug-induced 
visionary moments. He is, of course, attempting the impossible— 
to describe in words (which always lie) that which is beyond words. 
But how well he can do it! 

Alan Watts is one of the great reporters of our times. He has 
an intuitive sensitivity for news, for the crucial issues and events 
of the century. And he has along with this the verbal equipment 
of a poetic philosopher to teach and inform. Here he has given 
us perhaps the best statement on the subject of space-age mysti- 
cism, more daring than the two classic works of Aldous Huxley 
because Watts follows Mr. Huxley’s lead and pushes beyond. The 
recognition of the love aspects of the mystical experience and the 
implications for new forms of social communication are especially 
important. 


You are holding in your hand a great human document. But 


XX 


FOREWORD 


unless you are one of the few Westerners who have (accidentally 
or through chemical good fortune) experienced a mystical minute 
of expanded awareness, you will probably not understand what 
the author is saying. Too bad, but still not a cause for surprise. 
The history of ideas reminds us that new concepts and new visions 
have always been non-understood. We cannot understand that for 
which we have no words. But Alan Watts is playing the book game, 
the word game, and the reader is his contracted partner. 

But listen. Be prepared. There are scores of great lines in this 
book. Dozens of great ideas. Too many. Too compressed. They 
glide by too quickly. Watch for them. 

If you catch even a few of these ideas, you will find yourself 
asking the questions which we ask ourselves as we look over our 
research data: Where do we go from here? What is the application 
of these new wonder medicines? Can they do more than provide 
memorable moments and memorable books? 

The answer will come from two directions. We must provide 
more and more people with these experiences and have them tell 
us, as Alan Watts does here, what they experienced. (There will 
hardly be a lack of volunteers for this ecstatic voyage. Ninety-one 
percent of our subjects are eager to repeat and to share the experi- 
ence with their family and friends.) We must also encourage sys- 
tematic objective research by scientists who have taken the drug 


xxi 


themselves and have come to know the difference between inner 
and outer, between consciousness and behavior. Such research 
should explore the application of these experiences to the prob- 
lems of modern living—in education, religion, creative industry, 
creative arts. 

There are many who believe that we stand at an important turn- 
ing point in man’s power to control and expand his awareness. Our 
research provides tentative grounds for such optimism. The Joyous 


Cosmology is solid testimony for the same happy expectations. 


Timothy Leary, PhD, and Richard Alpert, PhD 
Harvard University, January 1962 


xxii 


PREFACE 


N THE Doors oF Perception Aldous Huxley has given us 

a superbly written account of the effects of mescaline upon a 

highly sensitive person. It was a record of his first experience 
of this remarkable transformation of consciousness, and by now, 
through subsequent experiments, he knows that it can lead to far 
deeper insights than his book described. While I cannot hope to 
surpass Aldous Huxley as a master of English prose, I feel that the 
time is ripe for an account of some of the deeper, or higher, levels of 
insight that can be reached through these consciousness-changing 
“drugs” when accompanied with sustained philosophical reflection 
by a person who is in search, not of kicks, but of understanding. I 
should perhaps add that, for me, philosophical reflection is barren 
when divorced from poetic imagination, for we proceed to under- 
standing of the world upon two legs, not one. 

It is now a commonplace that there is a serious lack of com- 
munication between scientists and laymen on the theoretical level, 
for the layman does not understand the mathematical language in 
which the scientist thinks. For example, the concept of curved space 
cannot be represented in any image that is intelligible to the senses. 
But I am still more concerned with the gap between theoretical 
description and direct experience among scientists themselves. 
Western science is now delineating a new concept of man, not as a 


solitary ego within a wall of flesh, but as an organism which is what 


xxiii 


it is by virtue of its inseparability from the rest of the world. But 
with the rarest exceptions even scientists do not feel themselves 
to exist in this way. They, and almost all of us, retain a sense of 
personality which is independent, isolated, insular, and estranged 
from the cosmos that surrounds it. Somehow this gap must be 
closed, and among the varied means whereby the closure may be 
initiated or achieved are medicines which science itself has discov- 
ered, and which may prove to be the sacraments of its religion. 

For a long time we have been accustomed to the compart- 
mentalization of religion and science as if they were two quite dif- 
ferent and basically unrelated ways of seeing the world. I do not 
believe that this state of doublethink can last. It must eventually 
be replaced by a view of the world which is neither religious nor 
scientific but simply our view of the world. More exactly, it must 
become a view of the world in which the reports of science and 
religion are as concordant as those of the eyes and the ears. 

But the traditional roads to spiritual experience seldom appeal 
to persons of scientific or skeptical temperament, for the vehicles 
that ply them are rickety and piled with excess baggage. There is 
thus little opportunity for the alert and critical thinker to share at 
first hand in the modes of consciousness that seers and mystics are 
trying to express—often in archaic and awkward symbolism. If the 
pharmacologist can be of help in exploring this unknown world, 


XXiv 


PREFACE 


he may be doing us the extraordinary service of rescuing religious 
experience from the obscurantists. 

To make this book as complete an expression as possible of the 
quality of consciousness which these drugs induce, I have included 
a number of photographs which, in their vivid reflection of the pat- 
terns of nature, give some suggestion of the rhythmic beauty of 
detail which the drugs reveal in common things. For without losing 
their normal breadth of vision the eyes seem to become a micro- 
scope through which the mind delves deeper and deeper into the 
intricately dancing texture of our world. 


Alan W. Watts 
San Francisco, 1962 


XXV 


PROLOGUE 


LOWLY IT BECOMES CLEAR that one of the greatest of all 

superstitions is the separation of the mind from the body. 

This does not mean that we are being forced to admit that we 
are only bodies; it means that we are forming an altogether new idea 
of the body. For the body considered as separate from the mind is 
one thing—an animated corpse. But the body considered as insep- 
arable from the mind is another, and as yet we have no proper word 
for a reality which is simultaneously mental and physical. To call 
it mental-physical will not do at all, for this is the very unsatisfac- 
tory joining of two concepts which have both been impoverished 
by long separation and opposition. But we are at least within sight 
of being able to discard altogether ideas of a stuff which is mental 
and a stuff which is material. “Stuff” is a word which describes 
the formless mush that we perceive when sense is not keen enough 
to make out its pattern. The notion of material or mental stuff is 
based on the false analogy that trees are made of wood, mountains 
of stone, and minds of spirit in the same way that pots are made 
of clay. “Inert” matter seems to require an external and intelligent 
energy to give it form. But now we know that matter is not inert. 
Whether it is organic or inorganic, we are learning to see matter as 
patterns of energy—not of energy as if energy were a stuff, but as 
energetic pattern, moving order, active intelligence. 


The realization that mind and body, form and matter, are one 


is blocked, however, by ages of semantic confusion and psycholog- 
ical prejudice. For it is common sense that every pattern, shape, or 
structure is a form of something as pots are forms of clay. It is hard 
to see that this “something” is as dispensable as the ether in which 
light was once supposed to travel, or as the fabulous tortoise upon 
which the earth was once thought to be supported. Anyone who 
can really grasp this point will experience a curiously exhilarating 
liberation, for the burden of stuff will drop from him and he will 
walk less heavily. 

The dualism of mind and body arose, perhaps, as a clumsy way 
of describing the power of an intelligent organism to control itself. 
It seemed reasonable to think of the part controlled as one thing 
and the part controlling as another. In this way the conscious will 
was opposed to the involuntary appetites and reason to instinct. In 
due course we learned to center our identity, our selfhood, in the 
controlling part—the mind—and increasingly to disown as a mere 
vehicle the part controlled. It thus escaped our attention that the 
organism as a whole, largely unconscious, was using conscious- 
ness and reason to inform and control itself. We thought of our 
conscious intelligence as descending from a higher realm to take 
possession of a physical vehicle. We therefore failed to see it as an 
operation of the same formative process as the structure of nerves, 


muscles, veins, and bones—a structure so subtly ordered (that is, 


PROLOGUE 


intelligent) that conscious thought is as yet far from being able to 
describe it. 

This radical separation of the part controlling from the part 
controlled changed man froma self-controlling to a self-frustrating 
organism, to the embodied conflict and self-contradiction that he 
has been throughout his known history. Once the split occurred 
conscious intelligence began to serve its own ends instead of those 
of the organism that produced it. More exactly, it became the inten- 
tion of the conscious intelligence to work for its own, dissociated, 
purposes. But, as we shall see, just as the separation of mind from 
body is an illusion, so also is the subjection of the body to the inde- 
pendent schemes of the mind. Meanwhile, however, the illusion is 
as real as the hallucinations of hypnosis, and the organism of man is 
indeed frustrating itself by patterns of behavior which move in the 
most complex vicious circles. The culmination is a culture which 
ever more serves the ends of mechanical order as distinct from 
those of organic enjoyment, and which is bent on self-destruction 
against the instinct of every one of its members. 

We believe, then, that the mind controls the body, not that the 
body controls itself through the mind. Hence the ingrained preju- 
dice that the mind should be independent of all physical aids to its 
working—despite microscopes, telescopes, cameras, scales, com- 


puters, books, works of art, alphabets, and all those physical tools 


apart from which it is doubtful whether there would be any mental 
life at all. At the same time there has always been at least an obscure 
awareness that in feeling oneself to be a separate mind, soul, or ego 
there is something wrong. Naturally, for a person who finds his 
identity in something other than his full organism is less than half a 
man. He is cut off from complete participation in nature. Instead of 
being a body he “has” a body. Instead of living and loving he “has” 
instincts for survival and copulation. Disowned, they drive him as 
if they were blind furies or demons that possessed him. 

The feeling that there is something wrong in all this revolves 
around a contradiction characteristic of all civilizations. This is the 
simultaneous compulsion to preserve oneself and to forget oneself. 
Here is the vicious circle: if you feel separate from your organic 
life, you feel driven to survive; survival—going on living—thus 
becomes a duty and also a drag because you are not fully with it; 
because it does not quite come up to expectations, you continue to 
hope that it will, to crave for more time, to feel driven all the more 
to go on. What we call self-consciousness is thus the sensation of 
the organism obstructing itself, of not being with itself, of driving, 
so to say, with accelerator and brake on at once. Naturally, this is 
a highly unpleasant sensation, which most people want to forget. 

The lowbrow way of forgetting oneself is to get drunk, to be 


diverted with entertainments, or to exploit such natural means of 


4 


PROLOGUE 


self-transcendence as sexual intercourse. The highbrow way is to 
throw oneself into the pursuit of the arts, of social service, or of 
religious mysticism. These measures are rarely successful because 
they do not disclose the basic error of the split self. The highbrow 
ways even aggravate the error to the extent that those who follow 
them take pride in forgetting themselves by purely mental means— 
even though the artist uses paints or sounds, the social idealist dis- 
tributes material wealth, and the religionist uses sacraments and 
rituals, or such other physical means as fasting, yoga breathing, or 
dervish dancing. And there is a sound instinct in the use of these 
physical aids, as in the repeated insistence of mystics that to know 
about God is not enough: transformation of the self is only through 
realizing or feeling God. The hidden point is that man cannot func- 
tion properly through changing anything so superficial as the order 
of his thoughts, of his dissociated mind. What has to change is the 
behavior of his organism; it has to become self-controlling instead 
of self-frustrating. 

How is this to be brought about? Clearly, nothing can be done 
by the mind, by the conscious will, so long as this is felt to be some- 
thing apart from the total organism. But if it were felt otherwise, 
nothing would need to be done! A very small number of Eastern 
gurus, or masters of wisdom, and Western psychotherapists have 


found—rather laborious—ways of tricking or coaxing the organ- 


ism into integrating itself—mostly by a kind of judo, or “gentle 
way,” which overthrows the process of self-frustration by carrying 
it to logical and absurd extremes. This is pre-eminently the way 
of Zen, and occasionally that of psychoanalysis. When these ways 
work it is quite obvious that something more has happened to the 
student or patient than a change in his way of thinking; he is also 
emotionally and physically different; his whole being is operating 
in anew way. 

For a long time it has been clear to me that certain forms of 
Eastern “mysticism”—in particular Taoism and Zen Buddhism— 
do not presuppose a universe divided into the spiritual and the 
material, and do not culminate in a state of consciousness where 
the physical world vanishes into some undifferentiated and bodi- 
less luminescence. Taoism and Zen are alike founded upon a phi- 
losophy of relativity, but this philosophy is not merely speculative. 
It is a discipline in awareness as a result of which the mutual inter- 
relation of all things and all events becomes a constant sensation. 
This sensation underlies and supports our normal awareness of the 
world as a collection of separate and different things—an aware- 
ness which, by itself, is called avidya (ignorance) in Buddhist phi- 
losophy because, in paying exclusive attention to differences, it 
ignores relationships. It does not see, for example, that mind and 


form or shape and space are as inseparable as front and back, nor 


PROLOGUE 


that the individual is so interwoven with the universe that he and 
it are one body. 

This is a point of view which, unlike some other forms of mys- 
ticism, does not deny physical distinctions but sees them as the plain 
expression of unity. As one sees so clearly in Chinese painting, the 
individual tree or rock is not on but with the space that forms its 
background. The paper untouched by the brush is an integral part 
of the picture and never mere backing. It is for this reason that 
when a Zen master is asked about the universal or the ultimate, he 
replies with the immediate and particular—‘“The cypress tree in 
the yard!” Here, then, we have what Robert Linssen has called a 
spiritual materialism—a standpoint far closer to relativity and field 
theory in modern science than to any religious supernaturalism. 
But whereas the scientific comprehension of the relative universe 
is as yet largely theoretical, these Eastern disciplines have made 
it a direct experience. Potentially, then, they would seem to offer 
a marvelous parallel to Western science, but on the level of our 
immediate awareness of the world. 

For science pursues the common-sense assumption that the 
natural world is a multiplicity of individual things and events by 
attempting to describe these units as accurately and minutely as 
possible. Because science is above all analytic in its way of describ- 


ing things, it seems at first to disconnect them more than ever. Its 


experiments are the study of carefully isolated situations, designed 
to exclude influences that cannot be measured and controlled—as 
when one studies falling bodies in a vacuum to cut out the friction 
of air. But for this reason the scientist understands better than any- 
one else just how inseparable things are. The more he tries to cut 
out external influences upon an experimental situation, the more he 
discovers new ones, hitherto unsuspected. The more carefully he 
describes, say, the motion of a given particle, the more he finds him- 
self describing also the space in which it moves. The realization that 
all things are inseparably related is in proportion to one’s effort to 
make them clearly distinct. Science therefore surpasses the common- 
sense point of view from which it begins, coming to speak of things 
and events as properties of the “fields” in which they occur. But this 
is simply a theoretical description of a state of affairs which, in these 
forms of Eastern “mysticism,” is directly sensed. As soon as this is 
clear, we have a sound basis for a meeting of minds between East 
and West which could be remarkably fruitful. 

The practical difficulty is that Taoism and Zen are so involved 
with the forms of Far Eastern culture that it is a major problem to 
adapt them to Western needs. For example, Eastern teachers work 
on the esoteric and aristocratic principle that the student must learn 
the hard way and find out almost everything for himself. Aside 
from occasional hints, the teacher merely accepts or rejects the 


PROLOGUE 


student’s attainments. But Western teachers work on the exoteric 
and democratic principle that everything possible must be done to 
inform and assist the student so as to make his mastery of the sub- 
ject as easy as possible. Does the latter approach, as purists insist, 
merely vulgarize the discipline? The answer is that it depends 
upon the type of discipline. If everyone learns enough mathemat- 
ics to master quadratic equations, the attainment will seem small 
in comparison with the much rarer comprehension of the theory 
of numbers. But the transformation of consciousness undertaken 
in Taoism and Zen is more like the correction of faulty perception 
or the curing of a disease. It is not an acquisitive process of learn- 
ing more and more facts or greater and greater skills, but rather an 
unlearning of wrong habits and opinions. As Lao-tzu said, “The 
scholar gains every day, but the Taoist loses every day.” 

The practice of Taoism or Zen in the Far East is therefore an 
undertaking in which the Westerner will find himself confronted 
with many barriers erected quite deliberately to discourage idle 
curiosity or to nullify wrong views by inciting the student to pro- 
ceed systematically and consistently upon false assumptions to the 
reductio ad absurdum. My own main interest in the study of com- 
parative mysticism has been to cut through these tangles and to 
identify the essential psychological processes underlying those 


alterations of perception which enable us to see ourselves and the 


9 


world in their basic unity. I have perhaps had some small measure 
of success in trying, Western fashion, to make this type of experi- 
ence more accessible. I am therefore at once gratified and embar- 
rassed by a development in Western science which could possibly 
put this unitive vision of the world, by almost shockingly easy 
means, within the reach of many who have thus far sought it in 
vain by traditional methods. 

Part of the genius of Western science is that it finds simpler 
and more rational ways of doing things that were formerly chancy 
or laborious. Like any inventive process, it does not always make 
these discoveries systematically; often it just stumbles upon them, 
but then goes on to work them into an intelligible order. In medi- 
cine, for example, science isolates the essential drug from the for- 
mer witch-doctor’s brew of salamanders, mugwort, powdered 
skulls, and dried blood. The purified drug cures more surely, buz— 
it does not perpetuate health. The patient still has to change habits 
of life or diet which made him prone to the disease. 

Is it possible, then, that Western science could provide a medi- 
cine which would at least give the human organism a start in releas- 
ing itself from its chronic self-contradiction? The medicine might 
indeed have to be supported by other procedures—psychotherapy, 
“spiritual” disciplines, and basic changes in one’s pattern of life— 


but every diseased person seems to need some kind of initial lift to 


10 


PROLOGUE 


set him on the way to health. The question is by no means absurd 
if it is true that what afflicts us is a sickness not just of the mind 
but of the organism, of the very functioning of the nervous system 
and the brain. Is there, in short, a medicine which can give us tem- 
porarily the sensation of being integrated, of being fully one with 
ourselves and with nature as the biologist knows us, theoretically, 
to be? If so, the experience might offer clues to whatever else must 
be done to bring about full and continuous integration. It might be 
at least the tip of an Ariadne’s thread to lead us out of the maze in 
which all of us are lost from our infancy. 

Relatively recent research suggests that there are at least three 
such medicines, though none is an infallible “specific.” They work 
with some people, and much depends upon the social and psycho- 
logical context in which they are given. Occasionally their effects 
may be harmful, but such limitations do not deter us from using 
penicillin—often a far more dangerous chemical than any of these 
three. I am speaking, of course, of mescaline (the active ingredient 
of the peyote cactus), lysergic acid diethylamide (a modified ergot 
alkaloid), and psilocybin (a derivative of the mushroom psilocybe 
mexicana). 

The peyote cactus has long been used by the Indians of the 
Southwest and Mexico as a means of communion with the divine 
world, and today the eating of the dried buttons of the plant is 


11 


the principal sacrament of an Indian church known as the Native 
American Church of the United States—by all accounts a most 
respectable and Christian organization. At the end of the nine- 
teenth century its effects were first described by Weir Mitchell and 
Havelock Ellis, and some years later its active ingredient was iden- 
tified as mescaline, a chemical of the amine group which is quite 
easily synthesized. 

Lysergic acid diethylamide was first discovered in 1938 by 
the Swiss pharmacologist A. Hofman in the course of studying 
the properties of the ergot fungus. Quite by accident he absorbed 
a small amount of this acid while making certain changes in its 
molecular structure, and noticed its peculiar psychological effects. 
Further research proved that he had hit upon the most powerful 
consciousness-changing drug now known, for LSD-25 (as it is called 
for short) will produce its characteristic results in so minute a dosage 
as 20 micrograms, 1/700,000,000 of an average man’s weight. 

Psilocybin is derived from another of the sacred plants of the 
Mexican Indians—a type of mushroom known to them as teonana- 
catl, “the flesh of God.” Following Robert Weitlaner’s discovery in 
1936 that the cult of “the sacred mushroom” was still prevalent in 
Oaxaca, a number of mycologists, as specialists in mushrooms are 
known, began to make studies of the mushrooms of this region. 


Three varieties were found to be in use. In addition to psilocybe 


12 


PROLOGUE 


mexicana there were also psilocybe aztecorum Heim and psilocybe 
Wassonit, named respectively after the mycologists Roger Heim 
and Gordon and Valentina Wasson, who took part in the ceremo- 
nies of the cult. 

Despite a very considerable amount of research and specula- 
tion, little is known of the exact physiological effect of these chem- 
icals upon the nervous system. The subjective effects of all three 
tend to be rather similar, though LSD-25, perhaps because of the 
minute dosage required, seldom produces the nauseous reactions 
so often associated with the other two. All the scientific papers I 
have read seem to add up to the vague impression that in some way 
these drugs suspend certain inhibitory or selective processes in the 
nervous system so as to render our sensory apparatus more open 
to impressions than is usual. Our ignorance of the precise effect of 
these drugs is, of course, linked to the still rather fumbling state 
of our knowledge of the brain. Such ignorance obviously suggests 
great caution in their use, but thus far there is no evidence that, in 
normal dosage, there is any likelihood of physiological damage.* 


Normal dosage for mescaline is 300 milligrams, for LSD-25 100 micrograms, and 
for psilocybin 20 milligrams. The general reader interested in a more detailed 
account of consciousness-changing drugs and the present state of research con- 
cerning them should consult Robert S. de Ropp’s Drugs and the Mind (Grove 
Press, New York, 1960). 


13 


In a very wide sense of the word, each of these substances is 
a drug, but one must avoid the serious semantic error of confus- 
ing them with drugs which induce physical craving for repeated 
use or which dull the senses like alcohol or the sedatives. They are 
classed, officially, as hallucinogens—an astonishingly inaccurate 
term, since they cause one neither to hear voices nor to see visions 
such as might be confused with physical reality. While they do 
indeed produce the most complex and very obviously “hallucina- 
tory” patterns before closed eyes, their general effect is to sharpen 
the senses to a supernormal degree of awareness. The standard 
dosage of each substance maintains its effects for from five to eight 
hours, and the experience is often so deeply revealing and moving 
that one hesitates to approach it again until it has been thoroughly 
“digested,” and this may be a matter of months. 

The reaction of most cultured people to the idea of gaining 
any deep psychological or philosophical insight through a drug is 
that it is much too simple, too artificial, and even too banal to be 
seriously considered. A wisdom which can be “turned on” like the 
switch of a lamp seems to insult human dignity and degrade us 
to chemical automata. One calls to mind pictures of a brave new 
world in which there is a class of synthesized Buddhas, of people 
who have been “fixed” like the lobotomized, the sterilized, or the 
hypnotized, only in another direction—people who have somehow 


14 


PROLOGUE 


lost their humanity and with whom, as with drunkards, one can- 
not really communicate. This is, however, a somewhat ghoulish 
fantasy which has no relation to the facts or to the experience itself. 
It belongs to the same kind of superstitious dread which one feels 
for the unfamiliar, confusing it with the unnatural—the way some 
people feel about Jews because they are circumcised or even about 
Negroes because of their “alien” features and color. 

Despite the widespread and undiscriminating prejudice against 
drugs as such, and despite the claims of certain religious disciplines 
to be the sole means to genuine mystical insight, I can find no essen- 
tial difference between the experiences induced, under favorable 
conditions, by these chemicals and the states of “cosmic conscious- 
ness” recorded by R. M. Bucke, William James, Evelyn Underhill, 
Raynor Johnson, and other investigators of mysticism. “Favorable 
conditions” means a setting which is socially and physically con- 
genial; ideally this would be some sort of retreat house (vot a hos- 
pital or sanitarium) supervised by religiously oriented psychiatrists 
or psychologists. The atmosphere should be homelike rather than 
clinical, and it is of the utmost importance that the supervisor’s 
attitude be supportive and sympathetic. Under insecure, bizarre, 
or unfriendly circumstances the experience can easily degenerate 
into a highly unpleasant paranoia. Two days should be set aside 


—one for the experience itself, which lasts for six or eight hours, 


15 


and one for evaluation in the calm and relaxed frame of mind that 
normally follows. 

This is simply to say that the use of such powerful medicines 
is not to be taken lightly, as one smokes a cigarette or tosses down 
a cocktail. They should be approached as one approaches a sacra- 
ment, though not with the peculiar inhibition of gaiety and humor 
that has become customary in our religious rituals. It is a sound gen- 
eral rule that there should always be present some qualified super- 
visor to provide a point of contact with “reality” as it is socially 
defined. Ideally the “qualified supervisor” should be a psychiatrist 
or clinical psychologist who has himself experienced the effects of 
the drug, though I have observed that many who are technically 
qualified have a frightened awe of unusual states of consciousness 
which is apt to communicate itself, to the detriment of the experi- 
ence, to those under their care. The most essential qualification of 
the supervisor is, therefore, confidence in the situation—which is 
likewise “picked up” by people in the state of acute sensitivity that 
the drugs induce. 

The drugs in question are not aphrodisiacs, and when they are 
taken in common by a small group the atmosphere is not in the 
least suggestive of a drunken brawl nor of the communal torpor of 
an opium den. Members of the group usually become open to each 
other with a high degree of friendly affection, for in the mystical 


16 


PROLOGUE 


phase of the experience the underlying unity or “belongingness” 
of the members can have all the clarity of a physical sensation. 
Indeed the social situation may become what religious bodies aim 
at, but all too rarely achieve, in their rites of communion—a rela- 
tionship of the most vivid understanding, forgiveness, and love. 
Of course, this does not automatically become a permanent feel- 
ing, but neither does the sense of fellowship sometimes evoked in 
strictly religious gatherings. The experience corresponds almost 
exactly to the theological concept of a sacrament or means of 
grace—an unmerited gift of spiritual power whose lasting effects 
depend upon the use made of it in subsequent action. Catholic 
theology also recognizes those so-called “extraordinary” graces, 
often of mystical insight, which descend spontaneously outside the 
ordinary or regular means that the Church provides through the 
sacraments and the disciplines of prayer. It seems to me that only 
special pleading can maintain that the graces mediated through 
mushrooms, cactus plants, and scientists are artificial and spurious 
in contrast with those which come through religious discipline. 
Claims for the exclusive virtue of one’s own brand is, alas, as com- 
mon in organized religion as in commerce, coupled in the former 
instance with the puritan’s sense of guilt in enjoying anything for 
which he has not suffered. 

The grounds for any possible suppression of these medicines 


17 


are almost entirely superstitious. There is no evidence for their 
being as deleterious as alcohol or tobacco, nor, indeed, for their 
being harmful in any way except when used in improper cir- 
cumstances or, perhaps, with psychotic subjects.* They are con- 
siderably less dangerous than many of the ordinary contents of 
the family medicine cupboard or kitchen closet. As instruments 
of power and inquiry they do not even begin to be as risky as 
X-rays, and as threats to mental health they can hardly match the 
daily drivel assailing our thoughts through radio, television, and 
the newspaper. Any public alarm about the widening use of these 
drugs seems to be due, on the one hand, to their association with 
the beat generation and the hipster world, and, on the other, to 
embarrassment at the fact that anything genuinely spiritual can 
come out of a bottle. The latter cause is part of the superstition that 
human nature is degraded in the admission that men are, after all, 
physical organisms and that what they are has a great deal to do 
with what they eat. Furthermore, speaking quite strictly, mystical 
insight is no more in the chemical itself than biological knowledge 


is in the microscope. 


* — Anything—even a glass of beer or a walk upstairs—may be dangerous to a per- 


son in poor health. Naturally, such contingencies are quite beyond the bounds of 
this discussion. 


18 


PROLOGUE 


There is no difference in principle between sharpening percep- 
tion with an external instrument, such as a microscope, and sharp- 
ening it with an internal instrument, such as one of these three 
drugs. If they are an affront to the dignity of the mind, the micro- 
scope is an affront to the dignity of the eye and the telephone to the 
dignity of the ear. Strictly speaking, these drugs do not impart wis- 
dom at all, any more than the microscope alone gives knowledge. 
They provide the raw materials of wisdom, and are useful to the 
extent that the individual can integrate what they reveal into the 
whole pattern of his behavior and the whole system of his knowl- 
edge. As an escape, an isolated and dissociated ecstasy, they may 
have the same sort of value as a rest cure or a good entertainment. 
But this is like using a giant computer to play tick-tack-toe, and the 
hours of heightened perception are wasted unless occupied with 
sustained reflection or meditation upon whatever themes may be 
suggested. 

The nearest thing I know in literature to the reflective use of 
one of these drugs is the so-called Bead Game in Hermann Hesse’s 
Magister Ludi (Das Glasperlenspiel). Hesse writes of a distant future 
in which an order of scholar-mystics have discovered an ideo- 
graphic language which can relate all the branches of science and 
art, philosophy and religion. The game consists in playing with the 


relationships between configurations in these various fields in the 


19 


same way that the musician plays with harmonic and contrapun- 
tal relationships. From such elements as the design of a Chinese 
house, a Scarlatti sonata, a topological formula, and a verse from 
the Upanishads, the players will elucidate a common theme and 
develop its application in numerous directions. No two games are 
the same, for not only do the elements differ, but also there is no 
thought of attempting to force a static and uniform order upon the 
world. The universal language facilitates the perception of rela- 
tionships but does not fix them, and is founded upon a “musical” 
conception of the world in which order is as dynamic and changing 
as the patterns of sound in a fugue. 

Similarly, in using lysergic acid or psilocybin, I usually start 
with some such theme as polarity, transformation (as of food into 
organism), competition for survival, the relation of the abstract to 
the concrete, or of Logos to Eros, and then allow my heightened 
perception to elucidate the theme in terms of certain works of art or 
music, of some such natural object as a fern, a flower, or a sea shell, 
of a religious or mythological archetype (it might be the Mass), 
and even of personal relationships with those who happen to be 
with me at the time. Or I may concentrate upon one of the senses 
and try, as it were, to turn it back upon itself so as to see the process 
of seeing, and from this move on to trying to know knowing, so 


approaching the problem of my own identity. 


20 


PROLOGUE 


From these reflections there arise intuitive insights of aston- 
ishing clarity, and because there is little difficulty in remembering 
them after the effects of the drug have ceased (especially if they 
are recorded or written down at the time), the days or weeks fol- 
lowing may be used for testing them by the normal standards of 
logical, aesthetic, philosophical, or scientific criticism. As might be 
expected, some prove to be valid and others not. It is the same with 
the sudden hunches that come to the artist or inventor in the ordi- 
nary way; they are not always as true or as applicable as they seem 
to be in the moment of illumination. The drugs appear to give an 
enormous impetus to the creative intuition, and thus to be of more 
value for constructive invention and research than for psychother- 
apy in the ordinary sense of “adjusting” the disturbed personality. 
Their best sphere of use is not the mental hospital but the studio 
and the laboratory, or the institute of advanced studies. 

The following pages make no attempt to be a scientific report 
on the effects of these chemicals, with the usual details of dosage, 
time and place, physical symptoms, and the like. Such documents 
exist by the thousand, and, in view of our very rudimentary knowl- 
edge of the brain, seem to me to have a rather limited value. As 
well try to understand a book by dissolving it in solution and pop- 
ping it into a centrifuge. My object is rather to give some impres- 


sion of the new world of consciousness which these substances 


21 


reveal. I do not believe that this world is either a hallucination or 
an unimpeachable revelation of truth. It is probably the way things 
appear when certain inhibitory processes of the brain and senses 
are suspended, but this is a world in some ways so unfamiliar that it 
is liable to misinterpretation. Our first impressions may be as wide 
of the mark as those of the traveler in an unfamiliar country or of 
astronomers taking their first look at the galaxies beyond our own. 

I have written this account as if the whole experience had hap- 
pened on one day in a single place, but it is in fact a composite 
of several occasions. Except where I am describing visions before 
closed eyes, and this is always specified, none of these experiences 
are hallucinations. They are simply changed ways of seeing, inter- 
preting, and reacting to actual persons and events in the world of 
“public reality,” which, for purposes of this description, is a coun- 
try estate on the West Coast with garden, orchard, barns, and sur- 
rounding mountains—all just as described, including the rattletrap 
car loaded with junk. Consciousness-changing drugs are popularly 
associated with the evocation of bizarre and fantastic images, but in 
my own experience this happens only with closed eyes. Otherwise, 
it is simply that the natural world is endowed with a richness of 
grace, color, significance, and, sometimes, humor, for which our 
normal adjectives are insufficient. The speed of thought and asso- 


ciation is increased so astonishingly that it is hard for words to keep 


22 


PROLOGUE 


pace with the flood of ideas that come to mind. Passages that may 
strike the reader as ordinary philosophical reflection are reports of 
what, at the time, appear to be the most tangible certainties. So, 
too, images that appear before closed eyes are not just figments of 
imagination, but patterns and scenes so intense and autonomous 
that they seem to be physically present. The latter have, however, 
proved of less interest to me than one’s transformed impression 
of the natural world and the heightened speed of associative 
thought, and it is thus with these that the following account is 
chiefly concerned. 


23 


O BEGIN WITH, this world has a different kind of time. It 

is the time of biological rhythm, not of the clock and all 

that goes with the clock. There is no hurry. Our sense of 
time is notoriously subjective and thus dependent upon the qual- 
ity of our attention, whether of interest or boredom, and upon the 
alignment of our behavior in terms of routines, goals, and dead- 
lines. Here the present is self-sufficient, but it is not a static pres- 
ent. It is a dancing present—the unfolding of a pattern which has 
no specific destination in the future but is simply its own point. It 
leaves and arrives simultaneously, and the seed is as much the goal 
as the flower. There is therefore time to perceive every detail of 
the movement with infinitely greater richness of articulation. Nor- 
mally we do not so much look at things as overlook them. The 
eye sees types and classes—flower, leaf, rock, bird, fire—mental 
pictures of things rather than things, rough outlines filled with flat 
color, always a little dusty and dim. 

But here the depth of light and structure in a bursting bud go 
on forever. There is time to see them, time for the whole intricacy 
of veins and capillaries to develop in consciousness, time to see 
down and down into the shape of greenness, which is not green 
at all, but a whole spectrum generalizing itself as green—purple, 
gold, the sunlit turquoise of the ocean, the intense luminescence of 


the emerald. I cannot decide where shape ends and color begins. 


27 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


The bud has opened and the fresh leaves fan out and curve back 
with a gesture which is unmistakably communicative but does not 
say anything except, “Thus!” And somehow that is quite satisfac- 
tory, even startlingly clear. The meaning is transparent in the same 
way that the color and texture are transparent, with light which 
does not seem to fall upon surfaces from above but to be right 
inside the structure and color. Which is of course where it is, for 
light is an inseparable trinity of sun, object, and eye, and the chem- 
istry of the leaf is its color, its light. 

But at the same time color and light are the gift of the eye to the 
leaf and the sun. Transparency is the property of the eyeball, pro- 
jected outward as luminous space, interpreting quanta of energy in 
terms of the gelatinous fibers in the head. I begin to feel that the 
world is at once inside my head and outside it, and the two, inside 
and outside, begin to include or “cap” one another like an infinite 
series of concentric spheres. I am unusually aware that everything 
I am sensing is also my body—that light, color, shape, sound, and 
texture are terms and properties of the brain conferred upon the 
outside world. I am not looking az the world, not confronting it; 
I am knowing it by a continuous process of transforming it into 
myself, so that everything around me, the whole globe of space, no 
longer feels away from me but in the middle. 


This is at first confusing. I am not quite sure of the direction 


29 


from which sound comes. The visual space seems to reverberate 
with them as if it were a drum. The surrounding hills rumble with 
the sound of a truck, and the rumble and the color-shape of the 
hills become one and the same gesture. I use that word deliber- 
ately and shall use it again. The hills are moving into their stillness. 
They mean something because they are being transformed into my 
brain, and my brain is an organ of meaning. The forests of red- 
wood trees upon them look like green fire, and the copper-gold of 
the sun-dried grass heaves immensely into the sky. Time is so slow 
as to be a kind of eternity, and the flavor of eternity transfers itself 
to the hills—burnished mountains which I seem to remember from 
an immeasurably distant past, at once so unfamiliar as to be exotic 
and yet as familiar as my own hand. Thus transformed into con- 
sciousness, into the electric, interior luminosity of the nerves, the 
world seems vaguely insubstantial—developed upon a color film, 
resounding upon the skin of a drum, pressing, not with weight, 
but with vibrations interpreted as weight. Solidity is a neurological 
invention, and, I wonder, can the nerves be solid to themselves? 
Where do we begin? Does the order of the brain create the order of 
the world, or the order of the world the brain? The two seem like 
egg and hen, or like back and front. 

The physical world is vibration, quanta, but vibrations of 
what? To the eye, form and color; to the ear, sound; to the nose, 


30 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


scent; to the fingers, touch. But these are all different languages for 
the same thing, different qualities of sensitivity, different dimen- 
sions of consciousness. The question, “Of what are they differ- 
ing forms?” seems to have no meaning. What is light to the eye 
is sound to the ear. I have the image of the senses being terms, 
forms, or dimensions not of one thing common to all, but of each 
other, locked in a circle of mutuality. Closely examined, shape 
becomes color, which becomes vibration, which becomes sound, 
which becomes smell, which becomes taste, and then touch, and 
then again shape. (One can see, for example, that the shape of a leaf 
is its color. There is no outline around the leaf; the outline is the 
limit where one colored surface becomes another.) I see all these 
sensory dimensions as a round dance, gesticulations of one pattern 
being transformed into gesticulations of another. And these ges- 
ticulations are flowing through a space that has still other dimen- 
sions, which I want to describe as tones of emotional color, of light 
or sound being joyous or fearful, gold elated or lead depressed. 
These, too, form a circle of reciprocity, a round spectrum so polar- 
ized that we can only describe each in terms of the others. 
Sometimes the image of the physical world is not so much a 
dance of gestures as a woven texture. Light, sound, touch, taste, and 
smell become a continuous warp, with the feeling that the whole 


dimension of sensation is a single continuum or field. Crossing the 


31 


” 
W/ , 
Wi) 
iff Y] 
Ue // i 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


warp is a woof representing the dimension of meaning—moral 
and aesthetic values, personal or individual uniqueness, logical 
significance, and expressive form—and the two dimensions inter- 
penetrate so as to make distinguishable shapes seem like ripples in 
the water of sensation. The warp and the woof stream together, 
for the weaving is neither flat nor static but a many-directioned 
cross-flow of impulses filling the whole volume of space. I feel that 
the world is on something in somewhat the same way that a color 
photograph is on a film, underlying and connecting the patches of 
color, though the film here is a dense rain of energy. I see that what 
it is on is my brain—“that enchanted loom,” as Sherrington called 
it. Brain and world, warp of sense and woof of meaning, seem to 
interpenetrate inseparably. They hold their boundaries or limits in 
common in such a way as to define one another and to be impos- 


sible without each other. 


I AM LISTENING TO THE MUSIC OF AN ORGAN. As leaves seemed to ges- 
ture, the organ seems quite literally to speak. There is no use of the 
vox humana stop, but every sound seems to issue from a vast human 
throat, moist with saliva. As, with the base pedals, the player moves 
slowly down the scale, the sounds seem to blow forth in immense, 
gooey spludges. As I listen more carefully, the spludges acquire tex- 
ture—expanding circles of vibration finely and evenly toothed like 


33 


combs, no longer moist and liquidinous like the living throat, but 
mechanically discontinuous. The sound disintegrates into the innu- 
merable individual drrrits of vibration. Listening on, the gaps close, 
or perhaps each individual drrrit becomes in its turn a spludge. 
The liquid and the hard, the continuous and the discontinuous, the 
gooey and the prickly, seem to be transformations of each other, or 
to be different levels of magnification upon the same thing. 

This theme recurs in a hundred different ways—the insepa- 
rable polarity of opposites, or the mutuality and reciprocity of all 
the possible contents of consciousness. It is easy to see theoreti- 
cally that all perception is of contrasts—figure and ground, light 
and shadow, clear and vague, firm and weak. But normal attention 
seems to have difficulty in taking in both at once. Both sensuously 
and conceptually we seem to move serially from one to the other; 
we do not seem to be able to attend to the figure without relative 
unconsciousness of the ground. But in this new world the mutu- 
ality of things is quite clear at every level. The human face, for 
example, becomes clear in all its aspects—the total form together 
with each single hair and wrinkle. Faces become all ages at once, 
for characteristics that suggest age also suggest youth by implica- 
tion; the bony structure suggesting the skull evokes instantly the 
newborn infant. The associative couplings of the brain seem to fire 
simultaneously instead of one at a time, projecting a view of life 
which may be terrifying in its ambiguity or joyous in its integrity. 


34 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


Decision can be completely paralyzed by the sudden realiza- 
tion that there is no way of having good without evil, or that it is 
impossible to act upon reliable authority without choosing, from 
your own inexperience, to do so. If sanity implies madness and faith 
doubt, am I basically a psychotic pretending to be sane, a blithering 
terrified idiot who manages, temporarily, to put on an act of being 
self-possessed? I begin to see my whole life as a masterpiece of 
duplicity—the confused, helpless, hungry, and hideously sensitive 
little embryo at the root of me having learned, step by step, to com- 
ply, placate, bully, wheedle, flatter, bluff, and cheat my way into 
being taken for a person of competence and reliability. For when it 
really comes down to it, what do any of us know? 


I AM LISTENING TO A PRIEST CHANTING THE Mass and a choir 
of nuns responding. His mature, cultivated voice rings with 
the serene authority of the One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic 
Church, of the Faith once and for all delivered to the saints, and 
the nuns respond, naively it seems, with childlike, utterly innocent 
devotion. But, listening again, I can hear the priest “putting on” 
his voice, hear the inflated, pompous balloon, the studiedly unctu- 
ous tones of a master deceptionist who has the poor little nuns, 
kneeling in their stalls, completely cowed. Listen deeper. The nuns 
are not cowed at all. They are playing possum. With just a little 
stiffening, the limp gesture of bowing turns into the gesture of the 


37 


closing claw. With too few men to go around, the nuns know what 
is good for them: how to bend and survive. 

But this profoundly cynical view of things is only an intermedi- 
ate stage. I begin to congratulate the priest on his gamesmanship, 
on the sheer courage of being able to put up such a performance of 
authority when he knows precisely nothing. Perhaps there is no 
other knowing than the mere competence of the act. If, at the heart of 
one’s being, there is no real self to which one ought to be true, sin- 
cerity is simply nerve; it lies in the unabashed vigor of the pretense. 

But pretense is only pretense when it is assumed that the act 
is not true to the agent. Find the agent. In the priest’s voice I hear 
down at the root the primordial how] of the beast in the jungle, but 
it has been inflected, complicated, refined, and textured with cen- 
turies of culture. Every new twist, every additional subtlety, was a 
fresh gambit in the game of making the original howl more effec- 
tive. At first, crude and unconcealed, the cry for food or mate, or 
just noise for the fun of it, making the rocks echo. Then rhythm to 
enchant, then changes of tone to plead or threaten. Then words to 
specify the need, to promise and bargain. And then, much later, the 
gambits of indirection. The feminine stratagem of stooping to con- 
quer, the claim to superior worth in renouncing the world for the 
spirit, the cunning of weakness proving stronger than the might of 
muscle—and the meek inheriting the earth. 

As I listen, then, I can hear in that one voice the simultaneous 


38 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


presence of all the levels of man’s history, as of all the stages of life 
before man. Every step in the game becomes as clear as the rings 
in a severed tree. But this is an ascending hierarchy of maneuvers, 
of stratagems capping stratagems, all symbolized in the overlays 
of refinement beneath which the original howl is still sounding. 
Sometimes the how] shifts from the mating call of the adult animal 
to the helpless crying of the baby, and I feel all man’s music—its 
pomp and circumstance, its gaiety, its awe, its confident solem- 
nity—as just so much complication and concealment of baby wail- 
ing for mother. And as I want to cry with pity, I know I am sorry 
for myself. I, as an adult, am also back there alone in the dark, just 
as the primordial howl is still present beneath the sublime modula- 
tions of the chant. 

You poor baby! And yet—you selfish little bastard! As I try to 
find the agent behind the act, the motivating force at the bottom of 
the whole thing, I seem to see only an endless ambivalence. Behind 
the mask of love I find my innate selfishness. What a predicament 
I am in if someone asks, “Do you really love me?” I can’t say yes 
without saying no, for the only answer that will really satisfy is, 
“Yes, I love you so much I could eat you! My love for you is identi- 
cal with my love for myself. I love you with the purest selfishness.” 
No one wants to be loved out of a sense of duty. 

So I will be very frank. “Yes, I am pure, selfish desire and I 
love because you make me feel wonderful—at any rate for the time 


39 


being.” But then I begin to wonder whether there isn’t something 
a bit cunning in this frankness. It is big of me to be so sincere, to 
make a play for her by not pretending to be more than I am— 
unlike the other guys who say they love her for herself. I see that 
there is always something insincere about trying to be sincere, as 
if I were to say openly, “The statement that I am now making is a 
lie.” There seems to be something phony about every attempt to 
define myself, to be totally honest. The trouble is that I can’t see the 
back, much less the inside, of my head. I can’t be honest because I 
don’t fully know what I am. Consciousness peers out from a center 
which it cannot see—and that is the root of the matter. 

Life seems to resolve itself down to a tiny germ or nipple of 
sensitivity. I call it the Eenie-Weenie—a squiggling little nucleus 
that is trying to make love to itself and can never quite get there. 
The whole fabulous complexity of vegetable and animal life, as 
of human civilization, is just a colossal elaboration of the Eenie- 
Weenie trying to make the Eenie- Weenie. I am in love with myself, 
but cannot seek myself without hiding myself. As I pursue my own 
tail, it runs away from me. Does the amoeba split itself in two in an 
attempt to solve this problem? 

I try to go deeper, sinking thought and feeling down and down 
to their ultimate beginnings. What do I mean by loving myself? 
In what form do I know myself? Always, it seems, in the form of 


40 


something other, something strange. The landscape I am watching 
is also a state of myself, of the neurons in my head. I feel the rock in 
my hand in terms of my own fingers. And nothing is stranger than 
my own body—the sensation of the pulse, the eye seen through a 
magnifying glass in the mirror, the shock of realizing that oneself 
is something in the external world. At root, there is simply no way 
of separating self from other, self-love from other-love. All knowl- 
edge of self is knowledge of other, and all knowledge of other 
knowledge of self. I begin to see that self and other, the familiar 
and the strange, the internal and the external, the predictable and 
the unpredictable imply each other. One is seek and the other is 
hide, and the more I become aware of their implying each other, 
the more I feel them to be one with each other. I become curiously 
affectionate and intimate with all that seemed alien. In the features 
of everything foreign, threatening, terrifying, incomprehensible, 
and remote I begin to recognize myself. Yet this is a “myself” 
which I seem to be remembering from long, long ago—not at all 
my empirical ego of yesterday, not my specious personality. 

The “myself” which I am beginning to recognize, which I had 
forgotten but actually know better than anything else, goes far back 
beyond my childhood, beyond the time when adults confused me 
and tried to tell me that I was someone else; when, because they were 
bigger and stronger, they could terrify me with their imaginary 


42 


fears and bewilder and outface me in the complicated game that 
I had not yet learned. (The sadism of the teacher explaining the 
game and yet having to prove his superiority in it.) Long before 
all that, long before I was an embryo in my mother’s womb, there 
looms the ever-so-familiar stranger, the everything not me, which 
I recognize, with a joy immeasurably more intense than a meeting 
of lovers separated by centuries, to be my original self. The good 
old sonofabitch who got me involved in this whole game. 

At the same time everyone and everything around me takes on 
the feeling of having been there always, and then forgotten, and 
then remembered again. We are sitting in a garden surrounded 
in every direction by uncultivated hills, a garden of fuchsias and 
hummingbirds in a valley that leads down to the westernmost 
ocean, and where the gulls take refuge in storms. At some time 
in the middle of the twentieth century, upon an afternoon in the 
summer, we are sitting around a table on the terrace, eating dark 
homemade bread and drinking white wine. And yet we seem to 
have been there forever, for the people with me are no longer the 
humdrum and harassed little personalities with names, addresses, 
and social security numbers, the specifically dated mortals we are 
all pretending to be. They appear rather as immortal archetypes of 
themselves without, however, losing their humanity. It is just that 


their differing characters seem, like the priest’s voice, to contain all 


44 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


history; they are at once unique and eternal, men and women but 
also gods and goddesses. For now that we have time to look at each 
other we become timeless. The human form becomes immeasur- 
ably precious and, as if to symbolize this, the eyes become intel- 
ligent jewels, the hair spun gold, and the flesh translucent ivory. 
Between those who enter this world together there is also a love 
which is distinctly eucharistic, an acceptance of each other’s natures 
from the heights to the depths. 

Ella, who planted the garden, is a beneficent Circe—sorcer- 
ess, daughter of the moon, familiar of cats and snakes, herbalist and 
healer—with the youngest old face one has ever seen, exquisitely 
wrinkled, silver-black hair rippled like flames. Robert is a manifes- 
tation of Pan, but a Pan of bulls instead of the Pan of goats, with 
frizzled short hair tufted into blunt horns—a man all sweating 
muscle and body, incarnation of exuberant glee. Beryl, his wife, is 
a nymph who has stepped out of the forest, at mermaid of the land 
with swinging hair and a dancing body that seems to be naked even 
when clothed. It is her bread that we are eating, and it tastes like the 
Original Bread of which mother’s own bread was a bungled imita- 
tion. And then there is Mary, beloved in the usual, dusty world, but 
in this world an embodiment of light and gold, daughter of the sun, 
with eyes formed from the evening sky—a creature of all ages, baby, 


moppet, maid, matron, crone, and corpse, evoking love of all ages. 


45 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


I try to find words that will suggest the numinous, mythologi- 
cal quality of these people. Yet at the same time they are as familiar 
as if I had known them for centuries, or rather, as if 1 were recog- 
nizing them again as lost friends whom I knew at the beginning of 
time, from a country begotten before all worlds. This is of course 
bound up with the recognition of my own most ancient identity, 
older by far than the blind squiggling of the Eenie- Weenie, as if 
the highest form that consciousness could take had somehow been 
present at the very beginning of things. All of us look at each 
other knowingly, for the feeling that we knew each other in that 
most distant past conceals something else—tacit, awesome, almost 
unmentionable—the realization that at the deep center of a time 
perpendicular to ordinary time we are, and always have been, one. 
We acknowledge the marvelously hidden plot, the master illusion, 
whereby we appear to be different. 

The shock of recognition. In the form of everything most 
other, alien, and remote—the ever-receding galaxies, the mystery 
of death, the terrors of disease and madness, the foreign-feeling, 
gooseflesh world of sea monsters and spiders, the queasy labyrinth 
of my own insides—in all these forms I have crept up on myself and 
yelled “Boo!” I scare myself out of my wits, and, while out of my 
wits, cannot remember just how it happened. Ordinarily I am lost 
in a maze. I don’t know how I got here, for I have lost the thread 
and forgotten the intricately convoluted system of passages through 


47 


which the game of hide-and-seek was pursued. (Was it the path I 
followed in growing the circuits of my brain?) But now the principle 
of the maze is clear. It is the device of something turning back upon 
itself so as to seem to be other, and the turns have been so many 
and so dizzyingly complex that I am quite bewildered. The principle 
is that all dualities and opposites are not disjoined but polar; they 
do not encounter and confront one another from afar; they exfo- 
liate from a common center. Ordinary thinking conceals polarity 
and relativity because it employs terms, the terminals or ends, the 
poles, neglecting what lies between them. The difference of front 
and back, to be and not to be, hides their unity and mutuality. 

Now consciousness, sense perception, is always a sensation of 
contrasts. It is a specialization in differences, in noticing, and noth- 
ing is definable, classifiable, or noticeable except by contrast with 
something else. But man does not live by consciousness alone, for 
the linear, step-by-step, contrast-by-contrast procedure of atten- 
tion is quite inadequate for organizing anything so complex as a 
living body. The body itself has an “omniscience” which is uncon- 
scious, or superconscious, just because it deals with relation instead 
of contrast, with harmonies rather than discords. It “thinks” or orga- 
nizes as a plant grows, not as a botanist describes its growth. This 
is why Shiva has ten arms, for he represents the dance of life, the 


omnipotence of being able to do innumerably many things at once. 


48 


In the type of experience I am describing, it seems that the 
superconscious method of thinking becomes conscious. We see the 
world as the whole body sees it, and for this very reason there is 
the greatest difficulty in attempting to translate this mode of vision 
into a form of language that is based on contrast and classification. 
To the extent, then, that man has become a being centered in con- 
sciousness, he has become centered in clash, conflict, and discord. 
He ignores, as beneath notice, the astounding perfection of his 
organism as a whole, and this is why, in most people, there is such 
a deplorable disparity between the intelligent and marvelous order 
of their bodies and the trivial preoccupations of their consciousness. 
But in this other world the situation is reversed. Ordinary people 
look like gods because the values of the organism are uppermost, 
and the concerns of consciousness fall back into the subordinate 
position which they should properly hold. Love, unity, harmony, 
and relationship therefore take precedence over war and division. 

For what consciousness overlooks is the fact that all boundar- 
ies and divisions are held in common by their opposite sides and 
areas, so that when a boundary changes its shape both sides move 
together. It is like the yang-yin symbol of the Chinese—the black 
and white fishes divided by an S-curve inscribed within a circle. 
The bulging head of one is the narrowing tail of the other. But 


how much more difficult it is to see that my skin and its movements 


50 


belong both to me and to the external world, or that the spheres 
of influence of different human beings have common walls like so 
many rooms in a house, so that the movement of my wall is also the 
movement of yours. You can do what you like in your room just so 
long as I can do what I like in mine. But each man’s room is himself 
in his fullest extension, so that my expansion is your contraction 


and vice versa. 


I AM LOOKING AT what I would ordinarily call a confusion of 
bushes—a tangle of plants and weeds with branches and leaves 
going every which way. But now that the organizing, relational 
mind is uppermost I see that what is confusing is not the bushes but 
my clumsy method of thinking. Every twig is in its proper place, 
and the tangle has become an arabesque more delicately ordered 
than the fabulous doodles in the margins of Celtic manuscripts. 
In this same state of consciousness I have seen a woodland at fall, 
with the whole multitude of almost bare branches and twigs in 
silhouette against the sky, not as a confusion, but as the lacework 
or tracery of an enchanted jeweler. A rotten log bearing rows of 
fungus and patches of moss became as precious as any work of 
Cellini—an inwardly luminous construct of jet, amber, jade, and 
ivory, all the porous and spongy disintegrations of the wood seem- 
ing to have been carved out with infinite patience and skill. I do not 
know whether this mode of vision organizes the world in the same 


52 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


way that it organizes the body, or whether it is just that the natural 
world zs organized in that way. 

A journey into this new mode of consciousness gives one a 
marvelously enhanced appreciation of patterning in nature, a fas- 
cination deeper than ever with the structure of ferns, the formation 
of crystals, the markings upon sea shells, the incredible jewelry of 
such unicellular creatures of the ocean as the radiolaria, the fairy 
architecture of seeds and pods, the engineering of bones and skel- 
etons, the aerodynamics of feathers, and the astonishing profu- 
sion of eye-forms upon the wings of butterflies and birds. All this 
involved delicacy of organization may, from one point of view, be 
strictly functional for the purposes of reproduction and survival. 
But when you come down to it, the survival of these creatures is the 
same as their very existence—and what is that for? 

More and more it seems that the ordering of nature is an art 
akin to music—fugues in shell and cartilage, counterpoint in fi- 
bers and capillaries, throbbing rhythm in waves of sound, light, 
and nerve. And oneself is connected with it quite inextricably — 
a node, a ganglion, an electronic interweaving of paths, circuits, 
and impulses that stretch and hum through the whole of time and 
space. The entire pattern swirls in its complexity like smoke in 
sunbeams or the rippling networks of sunlight in shallow water. 
Transforming itself endlessly into itself, the pattern alone remains. 
The crosspoints, nodes, nets, and curlicues vanish perpetually into 


55 


each other. “The baseless fabric of this vision.” It is its own base. 
When the ground dissolves beneath me I float. 

Closed-eye fantasies in this world seem sometimes to be rev- 
elations of the secret workings of the brain, of the associative and 
patterning processes, the ordering systems which carry out all our 
sensing and thinking. Unlike the one I have just described, they are 
for the most part ever more complex variations upon a theme— 
ferns sprouting ferns sprouting ferns in multidimensional spaces, 
vast kaleidoscopic domes of stained glass or mosaic, or patterns 
like the models of highly intricate molecules—systems of colored 
balls, each one of which turns out to be a multitude of smaller balls, 
forever and ever. Is this, perhaps, an inner view of the organizing 
process which, when the eyes are open, makes sense of the world 
even at points where it appears to be supremely messy? 

Later that same afternoon, Robert takes us over to his barn 
from which he has been cleaning out junk and piling it into a big 
and battered Buick convertible, with all the stuffing coming out of 
the upholstery. The sight of trash poses two of the great questions 
of human life, “Where are we going to put it?” and “Who’s going 
to clean up?” From one point of view living creatures are simply 
tubes, putting things in at one end and pushing them out at the 
other—until the tube wears out. The problem is always where to 
put what is pushed out at the other end, especially when it begins 
to pile so high that the tubes are in danger of being crowded off the 


56 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


earth by their own refuse. And the questions have metaphysical 
overtones. “Where are we going to put it?” asks for the foundation 
upon which things ultimately rest—the First Cause, the Divine 
Ground, the bases of morality, the origin of action. “Who’s going 
to clean up?” is asking where responsibility ultimately lies, or how 
to solve our ever-multiplying problems other than by passing the 
buck to the next generation. 

I contemplate the mystery of trash in its immediate mani- 
festation: Robert’s car piled high, with only the driver’s seat 
left unoccupied by broken door-frames, rusty stoves, tangles of 
chicken-wire, squashed cans, insides of ancient harmoniums, name- 
less enormities of cracked plastic, headless dolls, bicycles without 
wheels, torn cushions vomiting kapok, non-returnable bottles, 
busted dressmakers’ dummies, rhomboid picture-frames, shattered 
bird-cages, and inconceivable messes of string, electric wiring, 
orange peels, eggshells, potato skins, and light bulbs—all gar- 
nished with some ghastly-white chemical powder that we call 
“angel shit.” Tomorrow we shall escort this in a joyous convoy 
to the local dump. And then what? Can any melting and burning 
imaginable get rid of these ever-rising mountains of ruin—espe- 
cially when the things we make and build are beginning to look 
more and more like rubbish even before they are thrown away? 
The only answer seems to be that of the present group. The sight 
of Robert’s car has everyone helpless with hysterics. 


57 


The Divine Comedy. All things dissolve in laughter. And for 
Robert this huge heap of marvelously incongruous uselessness is a 
veritable creation, a masterpiece of nonsense. He slams it together 
and ropes it securely to the bulbous, low-slung wreck of the sup- 
posedly chic convertible, and then stands back to admire it as if it 
were a float for a carnival. Theme: the American way of life. But 
our laughter is without malice, for in this state of consciousness 
everything is the doing of gods. The culmination of civilization in 
monumental heaps of junk is seen, not as thoughtless ugliness, but 
as self-caricature—as the creation of phenomenally absurd col- 
lages and abstract sculptures in deliberate but kindly mockery of 
our own pretensions. For in this world nothing is wrong, nothing 
is even stupid. The sense of wrong is simply failure to see where 
something fits into a pattern, to be confused as to the hierarchi- 
cal level upon which an event belongs—a play which seems quite 
improper at level 28 may be exactly right at level 96. I am speaking 
of levels or stages in the labyrinth of twists and turns, gambits and 
counter-gambits, in which life is involving and evolving itself— 
the cosmological one-upmanship which the yang and the yin, the 
light and the dark principles, are forever playing, the game which 
at some early level in its development seems to be the serious battle 
between good and evil. If the square may be defined as one who 
takes the game seriously, one must admire him for the very depth 


58 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


of his involvement, for the courage to be so far-out that he doesn’t 
know where he started. 

The more prosaic, the more dreadfully ordinary anyone or 
anything seems to be, the more I am moved to marvel at the inge- 
nuity with which divinity hides in order to seek itself, at the lengths 
to which this cosmic joie de vivre will go in elaborating its dance. I 
think of a corner gas station on a hot afternoon. Dust and exhaust 
fumes, the regular Standard guy all baseball and sports cars, the 
billboards halfheartedly gaudy, the flatness so reassuring—noth- 
ing around here but just us folks! I can see people just pretending 
not to see that they are avatars of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva, that 
the cells of their bodies aren’t millions of gods, that the dust isn’t 
a haze of jewels. How solemnly they would go through the act of 
not understanding me if I were to step up and say, “Well, who do 
you think you’re kidding? Come off it, Shiva, you old rascal! It’s 
a great act, but it doesn’t fool me.” But the conscious ego doesn’t 
know that it is something which that divine organ, the body, is only 
pretending to be.* When people go to a guru, a master of wisdom, 


* — “Self-conscious man thinks he thinks. This has long been recognized to be an 
error, for the conscious subject who thinks he thinks is not the same as the organ 
which does the thinking. The conscious person is one component only, a series of 
transitory aspects, of the thinking person.” L. L. Whyte, The Unconscious Before 
Freud (Basic Books, New York, 1960), p. 59. 


61 


seeking a way out of darkness, all he really does is to humor them 
in their pretense until they are outfaced into dropping it. He tells 
nothing, but the twinkle in his eye speaks to the unconscious— 
“You know.... You know!” 

In the contrast world of ordinary consciousness man feels 
himself, as will, to be something in nature but not of it. He likes it 
or dislikes it. He accepts it or resists it. He moves it or it moves him. 
But in the basic superconsciousness of the whole organism this 
division does not exist. The organism and its surrounding world 
are a single, integrated pattern of action in which there is neither 
subject nor object, doer nor done to. At this level there is not one 
thing called pain and another thing called myself, which dislikes 
pain. Pain and the “response” to pain are the same thing. When 
this becomes conscious it feels as if everything that happens is my 
own will. But this is a preliminary and clumsy way of feeling that 
what happens outside the body is one process with what happens 
inside it. This is that “original identity” which ordinary language 
and our conventional definitions of man so completely conceal. 

The active and the passive are two phases of the same act. A 
seed, floating in its white sunburst of down, drifts across the sky, 
sighing with the sound of a jet plane invisible above. I catch it by 
one hair between thumb and index finger, and am astonished to 


watch this little creature actually wiggling and pulling as if it were 


62 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


struggling to get away. Common sense tells me that this tugging is 
the action of the wind, not of the thistledown. But then I recognize 
that it is the “intelligence” of the seed to have just such delicate 
antennae of silk that, in an environment of wind, it can move. Hav- 
ing such extensions, it moves itself with the wind. When it comes 
to it, is there any basic difference between putting up a sail and 
pulling an oar? If anything, the former is a more intelligent use of 
effort than the latter. True, the seed does not intend to move itself 
with the wind, but neither did I intend to have arms and legs. 

It is this vivid realization of the reciprocity of will and world, 
active and passive, inside and outside, self and not-self, which 
evokes the aspect of these experiences that is most puzzling from 
the standpoint of ordinary consciousness: the strange and seem- 
ingly unholy conviction that “I” am God. In Western culture this 
sensation is seen as the very signature of insanity. But in India it is 
simply a matter of course that the deepest center of man, atman, 
is the deepest center of the universe, Brahman. Why not? Surely 
a continuous view of the world is more whole, more holy, more 
healthy, than one in which there is a yawning emptiness between 
the Cause and its effects. Obviously, the “I” which is God is not the 
ego, the consciousness of self which is simultaneously an uncon- 
sciousness of the fact that its outer limits are held in common with 


the inner limits of the rest of the world. But in this wider, less 


63 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


ignore-ant consciousness I am forced to see that everything I claim 
to will and intend has a common boundary with all I pretend to 
disown. The limits of what I will, the form and shape of all those 
actions which I claim as mine, are identical and coterminous with 
the limits of all those events which I have been taught to define as 
alien and external. 

The feeling of self is no longer confined to the inside of the 
skin. Instead, my individual being seems to grow out from the rest 
of the universe like a hair from a head or a limb from a body, so 
that my center is also the center of the whole. I find that in ordinary 
consciousness I am habitually trying to ring myself off from this 
totality, that I am perpetually on the defensive. But what am I try- 
ing to protect? Only very occasionally are my defensive attitudes 
directly concerned with warding off physical damage or depriva- 
tion. For the most part I am defending my defenses: rings around 
rings around rings around nothing. Guards inside a fortress inside 
entrenchments inside a radar curtain. The military war is the out- 
ward parody of the war of ego versus world: only the guards are 
safe. In the next war only the air force will outlive the women and 
children. 

I trace myself back through the labyrinth of my brain, through 
the innumerable turns by which I have ringed myself off and, by 
perpetual circling, obliterated the original trail whereby I entered 


65 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


this forest. Back through the tunnels—through the devious status- 
and-survival strategy of adult life, through the interminable pas- 
sages which we remember in dreams—all the streets we have ever 
traveled, the corridors of schools, the winding pathways between 
the legs of tables and chairs where one crawled as a child, the tight 
and bloody exit from the womb, the fountainous surge through the 
channel of the penis, the timeless wanderings through ducts and 
spongy caverns. Down and back through ever-narrowing tubes to 
the point where the passage itself is the traveler—a thin string of 
molecules going through the trial and error of getting itself into the 
right order to be a unit of organic life. Relentlessly back and back 
through endless and whirling dances in the astronomically propor- 
tioned spaces which surround the original nuclei of the world, the 
centers of centers, as remotely distant on the inside as the nebulae 
beyond our galaxy on the outside. 

Down and at last out—out of the cosmic maze to recognize in 
and as myself, the bewildered traveler, the forgotten yet familiar 
sensation of the original impulse of all things, supreme identity, 
inmost light, ultimate center, self more me than myself. Standing 
in the midst of Ella’s garden I feel, with a peace so deep that it 
sings to be shared with all the world, that at last I belong, that I 
have returned to the home behind home, that I have come into the 


inheritance unknowingly bequeathed from all my ancestors since 


67 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


the beginning. Plucked like the strings of a harp, the warp and woof 
of the world reverberate with memories of triumphant hymns. The 
sure foundation upon which I had sought to stand has turned out to 
be the center from which I seek. The elusive substance beneath all 
the forms of the universe is discovered as the immediate gesture of 
my hand. But how did I ever get lost? And why have I traveled so 
far through these intertwined tunnels that I seem to be the quaking 


vortex of defended defensiveness which is my conventional self? 


GOING INDOORs I FIND that all the household furniture is alive. 
Everything gestures. Tables are tabling, pots are potting, walls are 
walling, fixtures are fixturing—a world of events instead of things. 
Robert turns on the phonograph, without telling me what is being 
played. Looking intently at the pictures picturing, I only gradually 
become conscious of the music, and at first cannot decide whether I 
am hearing an instrument or a human voice simply lalling. A single 
stream of sound, curving, rippling, and jiggling with a soft snarl 
that at last reveals it to be a reed instrument—some sort of oboe. 
Later, human voices join it. But they are not singing words, noth- 
ing but a kind of “buoh—buah—bueeh” which seems to be explor- 
ing all the liquidinous inflections of which the voice is capable. 
What has Robert got here? I imagine it must be some of his far- 


out friends in a great session of nonsense-chanting. The singing 


69 


intensifies into the most refined, exuberant, and delightful war- 
bling, burbling, honking, hooting, and howling—which quite 
obviously means nothing whatsoever, and is being done out of 
pure glee. There is a pause. A voice says, “Dit/” Another seems to 
reply, “Da/” Then, “Dit-da! Di-ditty-da!” And getting gradually 
faster, “Da-dt-ditty-di-ditty-da! Di-da-di-ditty-ditty-da-di-da-di- 
ditty-da-da!” And so on, until the players are quite out of their 
minds. The record cover, which Robert now shows me, says “Clas- 
sical Music of India,” and informs me that this is a series edited 
by Alain Danielou, who happens to be the most serious, esoteric, 
and learned scholar of Hindu music, and an exponent, in the line 
of René Guénon and Ananda Coomaraswamy, of the most for- 
mal, traditional, and difficult interpretation of Yoga and Vedanta. 
Somehow I cannot quite reconcile Danielou, the pandit of pandits, 
with this delirious outpouring of human bird-song. I feel my leg is 
being pulled. Or perhaps Danielou’s leg. 

But then, maybe not. Oh, indeed not! For quite suddenly I feel 
my understanding dawning into a colossal clarity, as if everything 
were opening up down to the roots of my being and of time and 
space themselves. The sense of the world becomes totally obvious. 
I am struck with amazement that I or anyone could have thought 
life a problem or being a mystery. I call to everyone to gather 


round. 


70 


pe 
ap >>. 
—-* 


iif 


. 


£ pesto 


“Listen, there’s something I must tell. I’ve never, never seen 
it so clearly. But it doesn’t matter a bit if you don’t understand, 
because each one of you is quite perfect as you are, even if you don’t 
know it. Life is basically a gesture, but no one, no thing, is mak- 
ing it. There is no necessity for it to happen, and none for it to go 
on happening. For it isn’t being driven by anything; it just happens 
freely of itself. It’s a gesture of motion, of sound, of color, and just 
as no one is making it, it isn’t happening to anyone. There is simply 
no problem of life; it is completely purposeless play—exuberance 
which is its own end. Basically there is the gesture. Time, space, and 
multiplicity are complications of it. There is no reason whatever to 
explain it, for explanations are just another form of complexity, a 
new manifestation of life on top of life, of gestures gesturing. Pain 
and suffering are simply extreme forms of play, and there isn’t any- 
thing in the whole universe to be afraid of because it doesn’t happen 
to anyone! There isn’t any substantial ego at all. The ego is a kind 
of flip, a knowing of knowing, a fearing of fearing. It’s a curlicue, 
an extra jazz to experience, a sort of double-take or reverberation, a 
dithering of consciousness which is the same as anxiety.” 

Of course, to say that life is just a gesture, an action without 
agent, recipient, or purpose, sounds much more empty and futile 
than joyous. But to me it seems that an ego, a substantial entity to 
which experience happens, is more of a minus than a plus. It is an 
estrangement from experience, a lack of participation. And in this 


72 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


moment I feel absolutely with the world, free of that chronic resis- 
tance to experience which blocks the free flowing of life and makes 
us move like muscle-bound dancers. But I don’t have to overcome 
resistance. I see that resistance, ego, is just an extra vortex in the 
stream—part of it—and that in fact there is no actual resistance at 
all. There is no point from which to confront life, or stand against it. 


I GO INTO THE GARDEN AGAIN. The hummingbirds are soaring 
up and falling in their mating dance, as if there were someone 
behind the bushes playing ball with them. Fruit and more wine 
have been put out on the table. Oranges—transformations of the 
sun into its own image, as if the tree were acknowledging gratitude 
for warmth. Leaves, green with the pale, yellow-fresh green that I 
remember from the springtimes of my childhood in Kentish spin- 
neys, where breaking buds were spotted all over the hazel branches 
in a floating mist. Within them, trunks, boughs, and twigs moist 
black behind the sunlit green. Fuchsia bushes, tangled traceries 
of stalks, intermingled with thousands of magenta ballerinas with 
purple petticoats. And, behind all, towering into the near-twilight 
sky, the grove of giant eucalyptus trees with their waving clusters 
of distinctly individual, bamboolike leaves. Everything here is the 
visual form of the lilting nonsense and abandoned vocal dexterity 
of those Hindu musicians. 

I recall the words of an ancient Tantric scripture: “As waves 


73 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


come with water and flames with fire, so the universal waves with 
us.” Gestures of the gesture, waves of the wave—leaves flowing 
into caterpillars, grass into cows, milk into babies, bodies into 
worms, earth into flowers, seeds into birds, quanta of energy into 
the iridescent or reverberating labyrinths of the brain. Within and 
swept up into this endless, exulting, cosmological dance are the 
base and grinding undertones of the pain which transformation 
involves: chewed nerve endings, sudden electric-striking snakes in 
the meadow grass, swoop of the lazily circling hawks, sore muscles 
piling logs, sleepless nights trying to keep track of the unrelenting 
bookkeeping which civilized survival demands. 

How unfamiliarly natural it is to see pain as no longer a 
problem. For problematic pain arises with the tendency of self- 
consciousness to short-circuit the brain and fill its passages with 
dithering echoes—revulsions to revulsions, fears of fear, cringing 
from cringing, guilt about guilt—twisting thought to trap itself in 
endless oscillations. In his ordinary consciousness man lives like 
someone trying to speak in an excessively sensitive echo-chamber; 
he can proceed only by doggedly ignoring the interminably gib- 
bering reflections of his voice. For in the brain there are echoes and 
reflected images in every dimension of sense, thought, and feel- 
ing, chattering on and on in the tunnels of memory. The difficulty 


is that we confuse this storing of information with an intelligent 


75 


commentary on what we are doing at the moment, mistaking for 
intelligence the raw materials of the data with which it works. 
Like too much alcohol, self-consciousness makes us see ourselves 
double, and we mistake the double image for two selves—mental 
and material controlling and controlled, reflective and spontane- 
ous. Thus instead of suffering we suffer about suffering, and suffer 
about suffering about suffering. 

As has always been said, clarity comes with the giving up of 
self. But what this means is that we cease to attribute selfhood to 
these echoes and mirror images. Otherwise we stand in a hall of 
mirrors, dancing hesitantly and irresolutely because we are mak- 
ing the images take the lead. We move in circles because we are 
following what we have already done. We have lost touch with our 
original identity, which is not the system of images but the great 
self-moving gesture of this as yet unremembered moment. The gift 
of remembering and binding time creates the illusion that the past 
stands to the present as agent to act, mover to moved. Living thus 
from the past, with echoes taking the lead, we are not truly here, 
and are always a little late for the feast. Yet could anything be more 
obvious than that the past follows from the present like a comet’s 
tail, and that if we are to be alive at all, here is the place to be? 

Evening at last closes a day that seemed to have been going 
on since the world began. At the high end of the garden, above 
a clearing, there stands against the mountain wall a semicircle 


76 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


of trees, immensely tall and dense with foliage, suggesting the 
entrance grove to some ancient temple. It is from here that the 
deep blue-green transparency of twilight comes down, silencing 
the birds and hushing our own conversation. We have been watch- 
ing the sunset, sitting in a row upon the ridgepole of the great barn 
whose roof of redwood tiles, warped and cracked, sweeps clear to 
the ground. Below, to the west, lies an open sward where two white 
goats are munching the grass, and beyond this is Robert’s house 
where lights in the kitchen show that Beryl is preparing dinner. 
Time to go in, and leave the garden to the awakening stars. 

Again music—harpsichords and a string orchestra, and Bach 
in his most exultant mood. I lie down to listen, and close my eyes. 
All day, in wave after wave and from all directions of the mind’s 
compass, there has repeatedly come upon me the sense of my origi- 
nal identity as one with the very fountain of the universe. I have 
seen, too, that the fountain is its own source and motive, and that its 
spirit is an unbounded playfulness which is the many-dimensioned 
dance of life. There is no problem left, but who will believe it? Will 
I believe it myself when I return to normal consciousness? Yet I can 
see at the moment that this does not matter. The play is hide-and- 
seek or lost-and-found, and it is all part of the play that one can get 
very lost indeed. How far, then, can one go in getting found? 

As if in answer to my question there appears before my closed 
eyes a vision in symbolic form of what Eliot has called “the still point 


77 


of the turning world.” I find myself looking down at the floor of 
a vast courtyard, as if from a window high upon the wall, and the 
floor and the walls are entirely surfaced with ceramic tiles display- 
ing densely involved arabesques in gold, purple, and blue. The scene 
might be the inner court of some Persian palace, were it not of such 
immense proportions and its colors of such preternatural transpar- 
ency. In the center of the floor there is a great sunken arena, shaped 
like a combination of star and rose, and bordered with a strip of tiles 
that suggest the finest inlay work in vermilion, gold, and obsidian. 

Within this arena some kind of ritual is being performed in 
time with the music. At first its mood is stately and royal, as if 
there were officers and courtiers in rich armor and many-colored 
cloaks dancing before their king. As I watch, the mood changes. 
The courtiers become angels with wings of golden fire, and in the 
center of the arena there appears a pool of dazzling flame. Look- 
ing into the pool I see, just for a moment, a face which reminds 
me of the Christos Pantocrator of Byzantine mosaics, and I feel 
that the angels are drawing back with wings over their faces in a 
motion of reverent dread. But the face dissolves. The pool of flame 
grows brighter and brighter, and I notice that the winged beings 
are drawing back with a gesture, not of dread, but of tenderness— 
for the flame knows no anger. Its warmth and radiance—“tongues 
of flame infolded”—are an efflorescence of love so endearing that 
I feel I have seen the heart of all hearts. 


78 


ee -. 
- 


EPILOGUE 


HIS IS, AS I HAVE SAID, a record not of one experiment 
with consciousness-changing drugs, but of several, com- 
pressed for reasons of poetic unity into a single day. At 
the same time I have more or less kept to the basic form which 
every individual experiment seems to take—a sort of cycle in 
which one’s personality is taken apart and then put together again, 
in what one hopes is a more intelligent fashion. For example, one’s 
true identity is first of all felt as something extremely ancient, 
familiarly distant—with overtones of the magical, mythological, 
and archaic. But in the end it revolves back to what one is in the 
immediate present, for the moment of the world’s creation is seen 
to lie, not in some unthinkably remote past, but in the eternal now. 
Similarly, the play of life is at first apprehended rather cynically as 
an extremely intricate contest in one-upmanship, expressing itself 
deviously even in the most altruistic of human endeavors. Later, 
one begins to feel a “good old rascal” attitude toward the system; 
humor gets the better of cynicism. But finally, rapacious and all- 
embracing cosmic selfishness turns out to be a disguise for the 
unmotivated play of love. 
But I do not mean to generalize. I am speaking only of what 
I have experienced for myself, and I wish to repeat that drugs of 
this kind are in no sense bottled and predigested wisdom. I feel that 
had I no skill as a writer or philosopher, drugs which dissolve some 


81 


of the barriers between ordinary, pedestrian consciousness and the 
multidimensional superconsciousness of the organism would bring 
little but delightful, or sometimes terrifying, confusion. I am not 
saying that only intellectuals can benefit from them, but that there 
must be sufficient discipline or insight to relate this expanded con- 
sciousness to our normal, everyday life. 

Such aids to perception are medicines, not diets, and as the 
use of a medicine should lead on to a more healthful mode of liv- 
ing, so the experiences which I have described suggest measures 
we might take to maintain a sounder form of sanity. Of these, the 
most important is the practice of what I would like to call medita- 
tion—were it not that this word often connotes spiritual or mental 
gymnastics. But by meditation I do not mean a practice or exer- 
cise undertaken as a preparation for something, as a means to some 
future end, or as a discipline in which one is concerned with prog- 
ress. A better word may be “contemplation” or even “centering,” 
for what I mean is a slowing down of time, of mental hurry, and 
an allowing of one’s attention to rest in the present—so coming to 
the unseeking observation, not of what should be, but of what is. It 
is quite possible, even easy, to do this without the aid of any drug, 
though these chemicals have the advantage of “doing it for you” in 
a peculiarly deep and prolonged fashion. 

But those of us who live in this driven and overpurposeful 


82 


EPILOGUE 


civilization need, more than anyone else, to lay aside some span 
of clock time for ignoring time, and for allowing the contents of 
consciousness to happen without interference. Within such time- 
less spaces, perception has an opportunity to develop and deepen 
in much the same way that I have described. Because one stops 
forcing experience with the conscious will and looking at things as 
if one were confronting them, or standing aside from them to man- 
age them, it is possible for one’s fundamental and unitive appre- 
hension of the world to rise to the surface. But it is of no use to 
make this a goal or to try to work oneself into that way of seeing 
things. Every effort to change what is being felt or seen presup- 
poses and confirms the illusion of the independent knower or ego, 
and to try to get rid of what isn’t there is only to prolong confusion. 
On the whole, it is better to try to be aware of one’s ego than to 
get rid of it. We can then discover that the “knower” is no different 
from the sensation of the “known,” whether the known be “exter- 
nal” objects or “internal” thoughts and memories. 

In this way it begins to appear that instead of knowers and 
knowns there are simply knowings, and instead of doers and deeds 
simply doings. Divided matter and form becomes unified pattern- 


in-process. Thus when Buddhists say that reality is “void” they 
mean simply that life, the pattern-in-process, does not proceed 


from or fall upon some substantial basis. At first, this may seem 


83 


rather disconcerting, but in principle the idea is no more difficult to 
abandon than that of the crystalline spheres which were once sup- 
posed to support and move the planets. 

Eventually this unified and timeless mode of perception “caps” 
our ordinary way of thinking and acting in the practical world: it 
includes it without destroying it. But it also modifies it by making 
it clear that the function of practical action is to serve the abiding 
present rather than the ever-receding future, and the living organ- 
ism rather than the mechanical system of the state or the social 
order. 

In addition to this quiet and contemplative mode of meditation 
there seems to me to be an important place for another, somewhat 
akin to the spiritual exercises of the dervishes. No one is more dan- 
gerously insane than one who is sane all the time: he is like a steel 
bridge without flexibility, and the order of his life is rigid and brit- 
tle. The manners and mores of Western civilization force this per- 
petual sanity upon us to an extreme degree, for there is no accepted 
corner in our lives for the art of pure nonsense. Our play is never 
real play because it is almost invariably rationalized; we do it on 
the pretext that it is good for us, enabling us to go back to work 
refreshed. There is no protected situation in which we can really 
let ourselves go. Day in and day out we must tick obediently like 
clocks, and “strange thoughts” frighten us so much that we rush to 


84 


. Re 4 ¢ Ne 
Fo 
y ne eS a m 
Pel EN : Of poste ots 
: cae 


V 
ae , 
fg Se 

Sita ceacomathanes: 

tee BEETS Pee 
eee Ue 

x 

vateone 


the nearest head-doctor. Our difficulty is that we have perverted 
the Sabbath into a day for laying on rationality and listening to 
sermons instead of letting off steam. 

If our sanity is to be strong and flexible, there must be occasional 
periods for the expression of completely spontaneous movement 
—for dancing, singing, howling, babbling, jumping, groaning, 
wailing—in short, for following any motion to which the organ- 
ism as a whole seems to be inclined. It is by no means impossible 
to set up physical and moral boundaries within which this free- 
dom of action is expressible—sensible contexts in which nonsense 
may have its way. Those who provide for this essential irrationality 
will never become stuffy or dull, and, what is far more important, 
they will be opening up the channels through which the forma- 
tive and intelligent spontaneity of the organism can at last flow 
into consciousness. This is why free association is such a valuable 
technique in psychotherapy; its limitation is that it is purely ver- 
bal. The function of such intervals for nonsense is not merely to 
be an outlet for pent-up emotion or unused psychic energy, but 
to set in motion a mode of spontaneous action which, though at 
first appearing as nonsense, can eventually express itself in intel- 
ligible forms. 

Disciplined action is generally mistaken for forced action, done 


in the dualistic spirit of compelling oneself, as if the will were quite 


86 


EPILOGUE 


other than the rest of the organism. But a unified and integrated 
concept of human nature requires a new concept of discipline— 
the control, not of forced action, but of spontaneous action. It is 
necessary to see discipline as a technique which the organism uses, 
as a carpenter uses tools, and not as a system to which the organ- 
ism must be conformed. Otherwise the purely mechanical and 
organizational ends of the system assume greater importance than 
those of the organism. We find ourselves in the situation where 
man is made for the Sabbath, instead of the Sabbath for man. But 
before spontaneous action can be expressed in controlled patterns, 
its current must be set in motion. That is to say, we must acquire a 
far greater sensitivity to what the organism itself wants to do, and 
learn responsiveness to its inner motions. 

Our language almost compels us to express this point in the 
wrong way—as if the “we” that must be sensitive to the organism 
and respond to it were something apart. Unfortunately our forms 
of speech follow the design of the social fiction which separates the 
conscious will from the rest of the organism, making it the inde- 
pendent agent which causes and regulates our actions. It is thus 
that we fail to recognize what the ego, the agent, or the conscious 
will is. We do not see that it is a social convention, like the intervals 
of clock time, as distinct from a biological or even psychological 


entity. For the conscious will, working against the grain of instinct, 


87 


is the interiorization, the inner echo, of social demands upon the 
individual coupled with the picture of his role or identity which he 
acquires from parents, teachers, and early associates. It is an imagi- 
nary, socially fabricated self working against the organism, the 
self that is biologically grown. By means of this fiction the child is 
taught to control himself and conform himself to the requirements 
of social life. 

At first sight this seems to be an ingenious and highly nec- 
essary device for maintaining an orderly society based upon in- 
dividual responsibility. In fact it is a penny-wise, pound-foolish 
blunder which is creating many more problems than it solves. To 
the degree that society teaches the individual to identify himself 
with a controlling will separate from his total organism, it merely 
intensifies his feeling of separateness, from himself and from oth- 
ers. In the long run it aggravates the problem that it is designed 
to solve, because it creates a style of personality in which an acute 
sense of responsibility is coupled with an acute sense of alienation. 

The mystical experience, whether induced by chemicals or 
other means, enables the individual to be so peculiarly open and 
sensitive to organic reality that the ego begins to be seen for the 
transparent abstraction that it is. In its place there arises (espe- 
cially in the latter phases of the drug experience) a strong sensation 
of oneness with others, presumably akin to the sensitivity which 


88 


EPILOGUE 


enables a flock of birds to twist and turn as one body. A sensation 
of this kind would seem to provide a far better basis for social love 
and order than the fiction of the separate will. 

The general effect of the drugs seems to be that they diminish 
defensive attitudes without blurring perception, as in the case of 
alcohol. We become aware of things against which we normally 
protect ourselves, and this accounts, I feel, for the high suscepti- 
bility to anxiety in the early phases of the experience. But when 
defenses are down we begin to see, not hallucinations, but custom- 
arily ignored aspects of reality—including a sense of social unity 
which civilized man has long since lost. To regain this sense we 
do not need to abandon culture and return to some precivilized 
level, for neither in the drug experience nor in more general forms 
of mystical experience does one lose the skills or the knowledge 
which civilization has produced. 

I have suggested that in these experiences we acquire clues 
and insights which should be followed up through certain forms of 
meditation. Are there not also ways in which we can, even without 
using the drugs, come back to this sense of unity with other peo- 
ple? The cultured Westerner has a very healthy distaste for crowds 
and for the loss of personal identity in “herd-consciousness.” But 
there is an enormous difference between a formless crowd and an 


organic social group. The latter is a relatively small association 


89 


in which every member is in communication with every other 
member. The former is a relatively large association in which the 
members are in communication only with a leader, and because of 
this crude structure a crowd is not really an organism. To think of 
people as “the masses” is to think of them by analogy with a subhu- 
man style of order. 

The corporate worship of churches might have been the nat- 
ural answer to this need, were it not that church services follow 
the crowd pattern instead of the group pattern. Participants sit in 
rows looking at the backs of each other’s necks, and are in com- 
munication only with the leader—whether preacher, priest, or 
some symbol of an autocratic God. Many churches try to make 
up for this lack of communion by “socials” and dances outside the 
regular services. But these events have a secular connotation, and 
the type of communion involved is always somewhat distant and 
demure. There are, indeed, discussion groups in which the leader 
or “resource person” encourages every member to have his say, 
but, again, the communion so achieved is merely verbal and ide- 
ational. 

The difficulty is that the defended defensiveness of the ego 
recoils from the very thing that would allay it—from associa- 
tions with others based on physical gestures of affection, from 
rites, dances, or forms of play which clearly symbolize mutual 


90 


EPILOGUE 


love between the members of the group. Sometimes a play of this 
kind will occur naturally and unexpectedly between close friends, 
but how embarrassing it might be to be involved in the deliberate 
organization of such a relationship with total strangers! Neverthe- 
less, there are countless associations of people who, claiming to be 
firm friends, still lack the nerve to represent their affection for each 
other by physical and erotic contact which might raise friendship 
to the level of love. Our trouble is that we have ignored and thus 
feel insecure in the enormous spectrum of love which lies between 
rather formal friendship and genital sexuality, and thus are always 
afraid that once we overstep the bounds of formal friendship we 
must slide inevitably to the extreme of sexual promiscuity, or 
worse, to homosexuality. 

This unoccupied gulf between spiritual or brotherly love 
and sexual love corresponds to the cleft between spirit and mat- 
ter, mind and body, so divided that our affections or our activities 
are assigned either to one or to the other. There is no continuum 
between the two, and the lack of any connection, any intervening 
spectrum, makes spiritual love insipid and sexual love brutal. To 
overstep the limits of brotherly love cannot, therefore, be under- 
stood as anything but an immediate swing to its opposite pole. 
Thus the subtle and wonderful gradations that lie between the two 


are almost entirely lost. In other words, the greater part of love is 


91 


a relationship that we hardly allow, for love experienced only in its 
extreme forms is like buying a loaf of bread and being given only 
the two heels. 

I have no idea what can be done to correct this in a culture 
where personal identity seems to depend on being physically aloof, 
and where many people shrink even from holding the hand of 
someone with whom they have no formally sexual or familial tie. 
To force or make propaganda for more affectionate contacts with 
others would bring little more than embarrassment. One can but 
hope that in the years to come our defenses will crack spontane- 
ously, like eggshells when the birds are ready to hatch. 

This hope may gain some encouragement from all those trends 
in philosophy and psychology, religion and science, from which we 
are beginning to evolve a new image of man, not as a spirit impris- 
oned in incompatible flesh, but as an organism inseparable from his 
social and natural environment. 

This is certainly the view of man disclosed by these remark- 
able medicines which temporarily dissolve our defenses and per- 
mit us to see what separative consciousness normally ignores—the 
world as an interrelated whole. This vision is assuredly far beyond 
any drug-induced hallucination or superstitious fantasy. It wears 
a striking resemblance to the unfamiliar universe that physicists 
and biologists are trying to describe here and now. For the clear 


92 


EPILOGUE 


direction of their thought is toward the revelation of a unified cos- 
mology, no longer sundered by the ancient irreconcilables of mind 
and matter, substance and attribute, thing and event, agent and act, 
stuff and energy. And if this should come to be a universe in which 
man is neither thought nor felt to be a lonely subject confronted by 
alien and threatening objects, we shall have a cosmology not only 
unified but also joyous. 


93 


APPENDIX: 
PSYCHEDELICS AND RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE* 


he experiences resulting from the use of psychedelic drugs 

are often described in religious terms. They are therefore 

of interest to those like myself who, in the tradition of 
William James,** are concerned with the psychology of religion. 
For more than thirty years I have been studying the causes, the 
consequences, and the conditions of those peculiar states of con- 
sciousness in which the individual discovers himself to be one 
continuous process with God, with the Universe, with the Ground 
of Being, or whatever name he may use by cultural conditioning 
or personal preference for the ultimate and eternal reality. We have 
no satisfactory and definitive name for experiences of this kind. 
The terms “religious experience,” “mystical experience,” and “cos- 
mic consciousness” are all too vague and comprehensive to denote 
that specific mode of consciousness which, to those who have known 
it, is as real and overwhelming as falling in love. This article 
describes such states of consciousness as and when induced by 
psychedelic drugs, although they are virtually indistinguishable 
from genuine mystical experience. The article then discusses objec- 
tions to the use of psychedelic drugs which arise mainly from the 


* 


Originally published in California Law Review, Vol. 56, No. 1, January 1968, pp. 
74-85. 
See W. James, The Varieties of Religious Experience (1911). 


2k 


95 


opposition between mystical values and the traditional religious 


and secular values of Western society. 


| 
The Psychedelic Experience 


The idea of mystical experiences resulting from drug use is not 
readily accepted in Western societies. Western culture has, his- 
torically, a particular fascination with the value and virtue of man 
as an individual, self-determining, responsible ego, controlling 
himself and his world by the power of conscious effort and will. 
Nothing, then, could be more repugnant to this cultural tradition 
than the notion of spiritual or psychological growth through the 
use of drugs. A “drugged” person is by definition dimmed in con- 
sciousness, fogged in judgment, and deprived of will. But not all 
psychotropic (consciousness-changing) chemicals are narcotic and 
soporific, as are alcohol, opiates, and barbiturates. The effects of 
what are now called psychedelic (mind-manifesting) chemicals dif- 
fer from those of alcohol as laughter differs from rage or delight 
from depression. There is really no analogy between being “high” 
on LSD and “drunk” on bourbon. True, no one in either state 
should drive a car, but neither should one drive while reading a 


book, playing a violin, or making love. Certain creative activities 


96 


APPENDIX 


and states of mind demand a concentration and devotion which are 
simply incompatible with piloting a death-dealing engine along a 
highway. 

I myself have experimented with five of the principal psychedel- 
ics: LSD-25, mescaline, psilocybin, dimethyl-tryptamine (DMT), 
and cannabis. I have done so, as William James tried nitrous oxide, 
to see if they could help me in identifying what might be called 
the “essential” or “active” ingredients of the mystical experience. 
For almost all the classical literature on mysticism is vague, not 
only in describing the experience, but also in showing rational 
connections between the experience itself and the various tradi- 
tional methods recommended to induce it—fasting, concentra- 
tion, breathing exercises, prayers, incantations, and dances. A 
traditional master of Zen or Yoga, when asked why such-and-such 
practices lead or predispose one to the mystical experience, always 
responds, “This is the way my teacher gave it to me. This is the 
way I found out. If you’re seriously interested, try it for yourself.” 
This answer hardly satisfies an impertinent, scientifically minded, 
and intellectually curious Westerner. It reminds him of archaic 
medical prescriptions compounding five salamanders, powdered 
gallowsrope, three boiled bats, a scruple of phosphorus, three 
pinches of henbane, and a dollop of dragon dung dropped when 


97 


the moon was in Pisces. Maybe it worked, but what was the essen- 
tial ingredient? 

It struck me, therefore, that if any of the psychedelic chemicals 
would in fact predispose my consciousness to the mystical experi- 
ence, I could use them as instruments for studying and describ- 
ing that experience as one uses a microscope for bacteriology, even 
though the microscope is an “artificial” and “unnatural” contriv- 
ance which might be said to “distort” the vision of the naked eye. 
However, when I was first invited to test the mystical qualities of 
LSD-25 by Dr. Keith Ditman of the Neuropsychiatric Clinic at 
UCLA Medical School, I was unwilling to believe that any mere 
chemical could induce a genuine mystical experience. At most it 
might bring about a state of spiritual insight analogous to swim- 
ming with water wings. Indeed, my first experiment with LSD-25 
was not mystical. It was an intensely interesting aesthetic and intel- 
lectual experience which challenged my powers of analysis and 
careful description to the utmost. 

Some months later, in 1959, I tried LSD-25 again with Drs. 
Sterling Bunnell and Michael Agron, who were then associated 
with the Langley-Porter Clinic in San Francisco. In the course of 
two experiments I was amazed and somewhat embarrassed to find 
myself going through states of consciousness which corresponded 


precisely with every description of major mystical experiences that 


98 


APPENDIX 


I had ever read.* Furthermore, they exceeded both in depth and in 
a peculiar quality of unexpectedness the three “natural and sponta- 
neous” experiences of this kind that had happened to me in previ- 
ous years. 

Through subsequent experimentation with LSD-25 and the 
other chemicals named above (with the exception of DMT, which 
I find amusing but relatively uninteresting) I found I could move 
with ease into the state of “cosmic consciousness,” and in due 
course became less and less dependent on the chemicals themselves 
for “tuning in” to this particular wavelength of experience. Of the 
five psychedelics tried, I found that LSD-25 and cannabis suited my 
purposes best. Of these two, the latter—cannabis—which I had to 
use abroad in countries where it is not outlawed, proved to be the 
better. It does not induce bizarre alterations of sensory perception, 
and medical studies indicate that it may not, save in great excess, 
have the dangerous side effects of LSD, namely chromosomal 
damage and possible psychotic episodes. 

For the purposes of this study, in describing my experiences 
with psychedelic drugs, I avoid the occasional and incidental bi- 
zarre alterations of sense perception which psychedelic chemicals 


* An excellent anthology of such experiences is R. Johnson, Watcher on the Hills 


(1959)- 


99 


may induce. I am concerned, rather, with the fundamental altera- 
tions of the normal, socially induced consciousness of one’s own 
existence and relation to the external world. I am trying to delin- 
eate the basic principles of psychedelic awareness. But I must add 
that I can speak only for myself. The quality of these experiences 
depends considerably upon one’s prior orientation and attitude to 
life, although the now voluminous descriptive literature of these 
experiences accords quite remarkably with my own. 

Almost invariably, my experiments with psychedelics have had 
four dominant characteristics. I shall try to explain them—in the 
expectation that the reader will say, at least of the second and third, 
“Why, that’s obvious! No one needs a drug to see that.” Quite so, 
but every insight has degrees of intensity. There can be obvious, 
and obvious,—and the latter comes on with shattering clarity, 
manifesting its implications in every sphere and dimension of our 
existence. 

The first characteristic is a slowing down of time, a concen- 
tration in the present. One’s normally compulsive concern for the 
future decreases, and one becomes aware of the enormous impor- 
tance and interest of what is happening at the moment. Other peo- 
ple, going about their business on the streets, seem to be slightly 
crazy, failing to realize that the whole point of life is to be fully 


aware of it as it happens. One therefore relaxes, almost luxuriously, 


100 


APPENDIX 


into studying the colors in a glass of water, or in listening to the 
now highly articulate vibration of every note played on an oboe or 
sung by a voice. 

From the pragmatic standpoint of our culture, such an atti- 
tude is very bad for business. It might lead to improvidence, lack 
of foresight, diminished sales of insurance policies, and abandoned 
savings accounts. Yet this is just the corrective that our culture 
needs. No one is more fatuously impractical than the “successful” 
executive who spends his whole life absorbed in frantic paperwork 
with the objective of retiring in comfort at sixty-five, when it will all 
be too late. Only those who have cultivated the art of living com- 
pletely in the present have any use for making plans for the future, 
for when the plans mature they will be able to enjoy the results. 
“Tomorrow never comes.” I have never yet heard a preacher urg- 
ing his congregation to practice that section of the Sermon on the 
Mount which begins, “Be not anxious for the morrow....” The 
truth is that people who live for the future are, as we say of the 
insane, “not quite all there”—or here: by over-eagerness they are 
perpetually missing the point. Foresight is bought at the price of 
anxiety, and when overused it destroys all its own advantages. 

The second characteristic I will call awareness of polarity. This 
is the vivid realization that states, things, and events that we ordi- 


narily call opposite are interdependent, like back and front or the 


101 


poles of a magnet. By polar awareness one sees that things which 
are explicitly different are implicitly one: self and other, subject 
and object, left and right, male and female—and then, a little more 
surprisingly, solid and space, figure and background, pulse and 
interval, saints and sinners, and police and criminals, in-groups and 
out-groups. Each is definable only in terms of the other, and they 
go together transactionally, like buying and selling, for there is no 
sale without a purchase, and no purchase without a sale. As this 
awareness becomes increasingly intense, you feel that you your- 
self are polarized with the external universe in such a way that you 
imply each other. Your push is its pull, and its push is your pull—as 
when you move the steering wheel of a car. Are you pushing it or 
pulling it? 

At first, this is a very odd sensation, not unlike hearing your 
own voice played back to you on an electronic system immediately 
after you have spoken. You become confused, and wait for zt to 
go on! Similarly, you feel that you are something being done by 
the universe, yet that the universe is equally something being done 
by you—which is true, at least in the neurological sense that the 
peculiar structure of our brains translates the sun into light and 
air vibrations into sound. Our normal sensation of relationship 
to the outside world is that sometimes I push it, and sometimes 


it pushes me. But if the two are actually one, where does action 


102 


APPENDIX 


begin and responsibility rest? If the universe is doing me, how can 
I be sure that, two seconds hence, I will still remember the English 
language? If I am doing it, how can I be sure that, two seconds 
hence, my brain will know how to turn the sun into light? From 
such unfamiliar sensations as these the psychedelic experience can 
generate confusion, paranoia, and terror—even though the indi- 
vidual is feeling his relationship to the world exactly as it would 
be described by a biologist, ecologist, or physicist, for he is feeling 
himself as the unified field of organism and environment. 

The third characteristic, arising from the second, is awareness 
of relativity. I see that I am a link in an infinite hierarchy of pro- 
cesses and beings, ranging from molecules through bacteria and 
insects to human beings, and, maybe, to angels and gods—a hier- 
archy in which every level is in effect the same situation. For exam- 
ple, the poor man worries about money while the rich man worries 
about his health: the worry is the same, but the difference is in its 
substance or dimension. I realize that fruit flies must think of them- 
selves as people, because, like ourselves, they find themselves in 
the middle of their own world—with immeasurably greater things 
above and smaller things below. To us, they all look alike and seem 
to have no personality—as do the Chinese when we have not lived 
among them. Yet fruit flies must see just as many subtle distinctions 


among themselves as we among ourselves. 


103 


From this it is but a short step to the realization that all forms 
of life and being are simply variations on a single theme: we are all 
in fact one being doing the same thing in as many different ways 
as possible. As the French proverb goes, plus ¢a change, plus c’est la 
méme chose—“the mote it varies, the more it is one.” I see, further, 
that feeling threatened by the inevitability of death is really the 
same experience as feeling alive, and that as all beings are feeling 
this everywhere, they are all just as much “I” as myself. Yet the “I” 
feeling, to be felt at all, must always be a sensation relative to the 
“other”—to something beyond its control and experience. To be 
at all, it must begin and end. But the intellectual jump which mys- 
tical and psychedelic experiences make here is in enabling you to 
see that all these myriad I-centers are yourself—not, indeed, your 
personal and superficially conscious ego, but what Hindus call the 


paramatman, the Self of all selves.* As the retina enables us to see 


* — Thus Hinduism regards the universe not as an artifact but as an immense drama 
in which the One Actor (the paramatman or brahman) plays all the parts, which 
are his (or “its”) masks or personae. The sensation of being only this one particu- 
lar self, John Doe, is due to the Actor’s total absorption in playing this and every 
other part. For fuller exposition, see S. Radhakrishnan, The Hindu View of Life 
(1927); H. Zimmer, Philosophies of India (1951), pp. 355-463. A popular version is 
in A. Watts, The Book: On the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are (1966). 


104 


APPENDIX 


countless pulses of energy as a single light, so the mystical experi- 
ence shows us innumerable individuals as a single Self. 

The fourth characteristic is awareness of eternal energy, often 
in the form of intense white light, which seems to be both the cur- 
rent in your nerves and that mysterious e which equals mc*. This 
may sound like megalomania or delusion of grandeur—but one 
sees quite clearly that all existence is a single energy, and that this 
energy is one’s own being. Of course there is death as well as 
life, because energy is a pulsation, and just as waves must have 
both crests and troughs, the experience of existing must go on 
and off. Basically, therefore, there is simply nothing to worry 
about, because you yourself are the eternal energy of the universe 
playing hide-and-seek (off-and-on) with itself. At root, you are 
the Godhead, for God is all that there is. Quoting Isaiah just a lit- 
tle out of context: “I am the Lord, and there is none else. I form 
the light and create the darkness: I make peace, and create evil. I, 
the Lord, do all these things.”* This is the sense of the fundamen- 
tal tenet of Hinduism, Tat tvam asi—“THAT (i.e., “that subtle 
Being of which this whole universe is composed”) art thou.”* A 


* 


Isaiah 45: 6, 7. 


2k 


Chandogya Upanishad 6.15.3. 


105 


classical case of this experience, from the West, is in Tennyson’s 


Memotrs: 


A kind of waking trance I have frequently had, quite up from 
boyhood, when I have been all alone. This has generally 
come upon me thro’ repeating my own name two or three 
times to myself silently, till all at once, as it were out of the 
intensity of the consciousness of individuality, the individu- 
ality itself seemed to dissolve and fade away into boundless 
being, and this not a confused state, but the clearest of the 
clearest, the surest of the surest, the weirdest of the weirdest, 
utterly beyond words, where death was an almost laughable 
impossibility, the loss of personality (if so it were) seeming 


no extinction but the only true life.* 


Obviously, these characteristics of the psychedelic experience, 
as I have known it, are aspects of a single state of consciousness— 
for I have been describing the same thing from different angles. 
The descriptions attempt to convey the reality of the experience, 
but in doing so they also suggest some of the inconsistencies 
between such experience and the current values of society. 


* — Quoted in Alfred Lord Tennyson: A Memoir by His Son, vol. 1 (1898), p. 320. 


106 


APPENDIX 


Hl 
Opposition to Psychedelic Drugs 


Resistance to allowing use of psychedelic drugs originates in both 
religious and secular values. The difficulty in describing psy- 
chedelic experiences in traditional religious terms suggests one 
ground of opposition. The Westerner must borrow such words as 
samadhi or moksha from the Hindus, or satori or kensho from the 
Japanese, to describe the experience of oneness with the universe. 
We have no appropriate word because our own Jewish and Chris- 
tian theologies will not accept the idea that man’s inmost self can 
be identical with the Godhead, even though Christians may insist 
that this was true in the unique instance of Jesus Christ. Jews and 
Christians think of God in political and monarchical terms, as the 
supreme governor of the universe, the ultimate boss. Obviously, it 
is both socially unacceptable and logically preposterous for a par- 
ticular individual to claim that he, in person, is the omnipotent and 
omniscient ruler of the world—to be accorded suitable recognition 
and honor. 

Such an imperial and kingly concept of the ultimate reality, 
however, is neither necessary nor universal. The Hindus and the 
Chinese have no difficulty in conceiving of an identity of the self 
and the Godhead. For most Asians, other than Muslims, the God- 
head moves and manifests the world in much the same way that 


107 


a centipede manipulates a hundred legs—spontaneously, without 
deliberation or calculation. In other words, they conceive the uni- 
verse by analogy with an organism as distinct from a mechanism. 
They do not see it as an artifact or construct under the conscious 
direction of some supreme technician, engineer, or architect. 

If, however, in the context of Christian or Jewish tradition, an 
individual declares himself to be one with God, he must be dubbed 
blasphemous (subversive) or insane. Such a mystical experience is a 
clear threat to traditional religious concepts. The Judaeo-Christian 
tradition has a monarchical image of God, and monarchs, who rule 
by force, fear nothing more than insubordination. The Church has 
therefore always been highly suspicious of mystics, because they 
seem to be insubordinate and to claim equality or, worse, identity 
with God. For this reason, John Scotus Erigena and Meister Eck- 
hart were condemned as heretics. This was also why the Quakers 
faced opposition for their doctrine of the Inward Light, and for 
their refusal to remove hats in church and in court. A few occa- 
sional mystics may be all right so long as they watch their language, 
like St. Teresa of Avila and St. John of the Cross, who maintained, 
shall we say, a metaphysical distance of respect between themselves 
and their heavenly King. Nothing, however, could be more alarm- 
ing to the ecclesiastical hierarchy than a popular outbreak of mysti- 


cism, for this might well amount to setting up a democracy in the 


108 


APPENDIX 


kingdom of heaven—and such alarm would be shared equally by 
Catholics, Jews, and fundamentalist Protestants. 

The monarchical image of God, with its implicit distaste for 
religious insubordination, has a more pervasive impact than many 
Christians might admit. The thrones of kings have walls immedi- 
ately behind them, and all who present themselves at court must 
prostrate themselves or kneel, because this is an awkward position 
from which to make a sudden attack. It has perhaps never occurred 
to Christians that when they design a church on the model of a 
royal court (basilica) and prescribe church ritual, they are implying 
that God, like a human monarch, is afraid. This is also implied by 
flattery in prayers: 


O Lord our heavenly Father, high and mighty, King of kings, 
Lord of lords, the only Ruler of princes, who dost from thy 
throne behold all the dwellers upon earth: most heartily we 
beseech thee with thy favor to behold... .* 


The Western man who claims consciousness of oneness with 


God or the universe thus clashes with his society’s concept of 


* A Prayer for the King’s Majesty, Order for Morning Prayer, Book of Common 
Prayer (Church of England, 1904). 


109 


religion. In most Asian cultures, however, such a man will be 
congratulated as having penetrated the true secret of life. He has 
arrived, by chance or by some such discipline as Yoga or Zen medi- 
tation, at a state of consciousness in which he experiences directly 
and vividly what our own scientists know to be true in theory. For 
the ecologist, the biologist, and the physicist know (but seldom 
feel) that every organism constitutes a single field of behavior, 
or process, with its environment. There is no way of separating 
what any given organism is doing from what its environment is 
doing, for which reason ecologists speak not of organisms in envi- 
ronments but of organism-environments. Thus the words “I” and 
“self” should properly mean what the whole universe is doing at 
this particular “here-and-now” called John Doe. 

The kingly concept of God makes identity of self and God, or 
self and universe, inconceivable in Western religious terms. The 
difference between Eastern and Western concepts of man and his 
universe, however, extends beyond strictly religious concepts. The 
Western scientist may rationally perceive the idea of organism- 
environment, but he does not ordinarily feel this to be true. By 
cultural and social conditioning, he has been hypnotized into expe- 
riencing himself as an ego—as an isolated center of consciousness 
and will inside a bag of skin, confronting an external and alien 
world. We say, “I came into this world.” But we did nothing of the 


110 


APPENDIX 


kind. We came out of it in just the same way that fruit comes out of 
trees. Our galaxy, our cosmos, “peoples” in the same way that an 
apple tree “apples.” 

Such a vision of the universe clashes with the idea of a monar- 
chical God, with the concept of the separate ego, and even with the 
secular, atheist-agnostic mentality, which derives its common sense 
from the mythology of nineteenth-century scientism. According 
to this view, the universe is a mindless mechanism and man a sort 
of accidental microorganism infesting a minute globular rock that 
revolves about an unimportant star on the outer fringe of one of the 
minor galaxies. This “put-down” theory of man is extremely com- 
mon among such quasi-scientists as sociologists, psychologists, and 
psychiatrists, most of whom are still thinking of the world in terms 
of Newtonian mechanics, and have never really caught up with the 
ideas of Einstein and Bohr, Oppenheimer and Schrédinger. Thus 
to the ordinary institutional-type psychiatrist, any patient who 
gives the least hint of mystical or religious experience is automati- 
cally diagnosed as deranged. From the standpoint of the mecha- 
nistic religion, he is a heretic and is given electroshock therapy as 
an up-to-date form of thumbscrew and rack. And, incidentally, it 
is just this kind of quasi-scientist who, as consultant to government 
and law-enforcement agencies, dictates official policies on the use 


of psychedelic chemicals. 


Inability to accept the mystic experience is more than an intel- 
lectual handicap. Lack of awareness of the basic unity of organism 
and environment is a serious and dangerous hallucination. For in 
a civilization equipped with immense technological power, the 
sense of alienation between man and nature leads to the use of 
technology in a hostile spirit—to the “conquest” of nature instead 
of intelligent cooperation with nature. The result is that we are 
eroding and destroying our environment, spreading Los Angeli- 
zation instead of civilization. This is the major threat overhang- 
ing Western, technological culture, and no amount of reasoning 
or doom-preaching seems to help. We simply do not respond to 
the prophetic and moralizing techniques of conversion upon which 
Jews and Christians have always relied. But people have an obscure 
sense of what is good for them—call it “unconscious self-healing,” 


2 66 


“survival instinct,” “positive growth potential,” or what you will. 
Among the educated young there is therefore a startling and un- 
precedented interest in the transformation of human conscious- 
ness. All over the Western world publishers are selling millions of 
books dealing with Yoga, Vedanta, Zen Buddhism, and the chemi- 
cal mysticism of psychedelic drugs, and I have come to believe 
that the whole “hip” subculture, however misguided in some of its 
manifestations, is the earnest and responsible effort of young peo- 


ple to correct the self-destroying course of industrial civilization. 


112 


APPENDIX 


The content of the mystical experience is thus inconsistent 
with both the religious and secular concepts of traditional Western 
thought. Moreover, mystical experiences often result in attitudes 
that threaten the authority not only of established churches, but 
also of secular society. Unafraid of death and deficient in worldly 
ambition, those who have undergone mystical experiences are 
impervious to threats and promises. Moreover, their sense of the 
relativity of good and evil arouses the suspicion that they lack both 
conscience and respect for law. Use of psychedelics in the United 
States by a literate bourgeoisie means that an important segment 
of the population is indifferent to society’s traditional rewards and 
sanctions. 

In theory, the existence within our secular society of a group 
that does not accept conventional values is consistent with our 
political vision. But one of the great problems of the United States, 
legally and politically, is that we have never quite had the courage of 
our convictions. The Republic is founded on the marvelously sane 
principle that a human community can exist and prosper only on 
a basis of mutual trust. Metaphysically, the American Revolution 
was a rejection of the dogma of Original Sin, which is the notion 
that because you cannot trust yourself or other people, there must 
be some Superior Authority to keep us all in order. The dogma 


was rejected because, if it is true that we cannot trust ourselves and 


113 


others, it follows that we cannot trust the Superior Authority which 
we ourselves conceive and obey, and that the very idea of our own 
untrustworthiness is unreliable! 

Citizens of the United States believe, or are supposed to 
believe, that a republic is the best form of government. Yet vast 
confusion arises from trying to be republican in politics and mon- 
archist in religion. How can a republic be the best form of gov- 
ernment if the universe, heaven, and hell are a monarchy?* Thus, 
despite the theory of government by consent, based upon mutual 
trust, the peoples of the United States retain, from the authoritar- 
ian backgrounds of their religions or national origins, an utterly 
naive faith in law as some sort of supernatural and paternalistic 
power. “There ought to be a law against it!” Our law-enforcement 
officers are therefore confused, hindered, and bewildered—not to 
mention corrupted—by being asked to enforce sumptuary laws, 
often of ecclesiastical origin, that vast numbers of people have no 


intention of obeying and that, in any case, are immensely difficult 


* — Thus, until quite recently, belief in a Supreme Being was a legal test of valid con- 
scientious objection to military service. The implication was that the individual 
objector found himself bound to obey a higher echelon of command than the 
President and Congress. The analogy is military and monarchical, and therefore 
objectors who, as Buddhists or naturalists, held an organic theory of the universe 
often had difficulty in obtaining recognition. 


114 


APPENDIX 


or simply impossible to enforce—for example, the barring of any- 
thing so undetectable as LSD-25 from international and interstate 
commerce. 

Finally, there are two specific objections to use of psychedelic 
drugs. First, use of these drugs may be dangerous. However, every 
worthwhile exploration is dangerous—climbing mountains, test- 
ing aircraft, rocketing into outer space, skin diving, or collecting 
botanical specimens in jungles. But if you value knowledge and the 
actual delight of exploration more than mere duration of unevent- 
ful life, you are willing to take the risks. It is not really healthy 
for monks to practice fasting, and it was hardly hygienic for Jesus 
to get himself crucified, but these are risks taken in the course of 
spiritual adventures. Today the adventurous young are taking risks 
in exploring the psyche, testing their mettle at the task just as, in 
times past, they have tested it—more violently—in hunting, duel- 
ing, hot-rod racing, and playing football. What they need is not 
prohibitions and policemen, but the most intelligent encourage- 
ment and advice that can be found. 

Second, drug use may be criticized as an escape from reality. 
However, this criticism assumes unjustly that the mystical experi- 
ences themselves are escapist or unreal. LSD, in particular, is by no 
means a soft and cushy escape from reality. It can very easily be an 


experience in which you have to test your soul against all the devils 


115 


in hell. For me, it has been at times an experience in which I was at 
once completely lost in the corridors of the mind and yet relating 
that very lostness to the exact order of logic and language, simulta- 
neously very mad and very sane. But beyond these occasional lost 
and insane episodes, there are the experiences of the world as a sys- 
tem of total harmony and glory, and the discipline of relating these 
to the order of logic and language must somehow explain how 
what William Blake called that “energy which is eternal delight” 
can consist with the misery and suffering of everyday life.* 

The undoubted mystical and religious intent of most users of 
the psychedelics, even if some of these substances should be proved 
injurious to physical health, requires that their free and responsible 
use be exempt from legal restraint in any republic that maintains 
a constitutional separation of church and state.** To the extent 
that mystical experience conforms with the tradition of genuine 


religious involvement, and to the extent that psychedelics induce 


This is discussed at length in A. Watts, The Joyous Cosmology: Adventures in the 
Chemistry of Consciousness (1962). 

**« “Responsible” in the sense that such substances be taken by or administered to 
consenting adults only. The user of cannabis, in particular, is apt to have peculiar 
difficulties in establishing his “undoubted mystical and religious intent” in court. 
Having committed so loathsome and serious a felony, his chances of clemency 


are better if he assumes a repentant demeanor, which is quite inconsistent with 


116 


APPENDIX 


that experience, users are entitled to some constitutional protec- 
tion. Also, to the extent that research in the psychology of religion 
can utilize such drugs, students of the human mind must be free to 
use them. Under present laws, I, as an experienced student of the 
psychology of religion, can no longer pursue research in the field. 
This is a barbarous restriction of spiritual and intellectual freedom, 
suggesting that the legal system of the United States is, after all, 


in tacit alliance with the monarchical theory of the universe, and 


the sincere belief that his use of cannabis was religious. On the other hand, if he 
insists unrepentantly that he looks upon such use as a religious sacrament, many 
judges will declare that they “dislike his attitude,” finding it truculent and lacking 
in appreciation of the gravity of the crime, and the sentence will be that much 
harsher. The accused is therefore put in a “double-bind” situation, in which he is 
“damned if he does, and damned if he doesn’t.” Furthermore, religious integrity 
—as in conscientious objection—is generally tested and established by member- 
ship in some church or religious organization with a substantial following. But the 
felonious status of cannabis is such that grave suspicion would be cast upon all 
individuals forming such an organization, and the test cannot therefore be fulfilled. 
It is generally forgotten that our guarantees of religious freedom were designed 
to protect precisely those who were not members of established denominations, 
but rather such (then) screwball and subversive individuals as Quakers, Shakers, 
Levellers, and Anabaptists. There is little question that those who use cannabis or 
other psychedelics with religious intent are now members of a persecuted religion 
which appears to the rest of society as a grave menace to “mental health,” as dis- 
tinct from the old-fashioned “immortal soul.” But it’s the same old story. 


will, therefore, prohibit and persecute religious ideas and practices 
based on an organic and unitary vision of the universe.* 


Amerindians belonging to the Native American Church who employ the psyche- 
delic peyote cactus in their rituals, are firmly opposed to any government control 
of this plant, even if they should be guaranteed the right to its use. They feel that 
peyote is a natural gift of God to mankind, and especially to natives of the land 
where it grows, and that no government has a right to interfere with its use The 
same argument might be made on behalf of cannabis, or the mushroom Psilocybe 
mexicana Heim. All these things are natural plants, not processed or synthesized 
drugs, and by what authority can individuals be prevented from eating theme 
There is no law against eating or growing the mushroom Amanita pantherina, 
even though it is fatally poisonous and only experts can distinguish it from a 
common edible mushroom. This case can be made even from the standpoint of 
believers in the monarchical universe of Judaism and Christianity, for it is a basic 
principle of both religions, derived from Genesis, that all natural substances cre- 
ated by God are inherently good, and that evil can arise only in their misuse. 
Thus laws against mere possession, or even cultivation, of these plants are in 
basic conflict with biblical principles. Criminal conviction of those who employ 
these plants should be based on proven misuse. “And God said “Behold, I have 
given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and 
every tree, in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for 
meat.... And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very 
good.” Genesis 1:29, 31. 


118 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


LAN Watts, who held both a master’s degree in theol- 
A ogy and a doctorate of divinity, is best known as an inter- 

preter of Zen Buddhism in particular, and of Indian and 
Chinese philosophy in general. Standing apart, however, from sec- 
tarian membership, he earned the reputation of being one of the 
most original and “unrutted” philosophers of the past century. He 
was the author of some twenty books on the philosophy and psy- 
chology of religion, including The Way of Zen; The Wisdom of 
Insecurity; Nature, Man and Woman; The Book; Beyond Theology; In 
My Own Way; and Cloud-Hidden, Whereabouts Unknown. He died 


in 1973. 


119 


