e 
Early Writings 
O 


Alan Watts 


Edited by 

Jobn Snelling . 

with Mark Watts & 
Dennis Sibley 


THE EARLY WRITINGS OF 


AagywaMts 


THE EARLY WRITINGS OF 


tiypwaKr 


THE BRITISH YEARS: 1931-1938 
WRITINGS IN 
BUDDHISM IN ENGLAND 


Edited by John Snelling, 
with Mark Watts and Dennis T. Sibley 


i 
CELESTIAL ARTS Ka BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA 


Copyright © 1987 by Electronic University. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be 
reproduced in any form, except for brief reviews, 
without the written persmission of the publisher. 


Celestial Arts 
PO. Box 7327 
Berkeley, California 94707 


Published simultaneously in the United Kingdom by 
Century Hutchinson Publishing Group Limited, London. 


Cover design by Ken Scott 
Text design by Ken Scott 


Typography by HMS Typography, Inc. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-publication Data 


Watts, Alan, 1915-1973. 
The early writings of Alan Watts. 


1. Buddhism. I. Snelling, John, 1943- 
If. Sibley, Dennis T. HT. Watts, Mark. IV. Title. 
BQ4055.W36 1987 294.3 87-11756 
ISBN 0-89087-480-8 


Manufactured in the United States of America 
First Printing, 1987 


Poop 4S 91 90 89 88 87 


CONTENTS 


Acknowledgements... 0... vii 
Introduction... 0.00000 ee 1 
PART ONE: 
A BUDDHIST IN THE PRECINCTS...... 17 
Ultimate Reality (1931)................00.. 26 
The Influence of Buddhism Upon 
Japanese Art (1931)...................-. 31 
Two Letters (1931 & 1932).............005. 36 
An Outline of Zen Buddhism (1932).......... 38 
The Essence of Zen (1933)................. 55 
Shambhala (poem), by ‘‘Ronin’’ (1932)........ 56 
PART TWO: 
YOUNG BRAHMIN ABOUT TOWN ...... 59 
The Buddha's Path to Reality (1933).......... 79 
The Sutra of Wei Lang (1933)............... 83 
Buddhism in the Modern World (1933/1934). ..89 
Buddhism & Humour (1933).............. 89 
Buddhism & Politics (1933)............... 95 
Buddhism & Sex (1934)...............4. 100 
Buddhism & War (1934)................ 107 


Is Buddhism Serious? (1935)............... 115 


-wsaa LS © e e© 2. ene ee enn e 123 


. vseven Symbols of Life, (1936).............. 159 
The: LOtus 3.04 sissies. Gans aes tates Bane eS 159 
Water and the Wind................... 163 
PIE Gs ones te oe a ese ee VET Shes PAP es 166 
Man, Woman and Child................. 169 
Letters I Receive: The ‘‘What’’ and the 

“How’’ (1936)... .sccssiaeveie cance news 175 
Letters I Receive: Talking of War (1936)...... 180 
The Truth That Is More than 

Teaching. (1936). 5 oa eee Sasi aa dk weaeies 187 
Letters I Receive: Is There a Self? (1936)..... 191 
Letters I Receive: Karma, or 

‘You Have What You Want”’ (193G)....... 197 
Letters I Receive: Education for Progress 

with a Capital ‘‘P’’ (1937)............... 204 
Not Only But Also (1937)................. 210 


Letters I Receive: Simple Language (1937)... .216 
Letters I Receive: The Experience of 


Mystery (W937) ii... ce bok Pe oh OY as 221 
Letters I Receive: The Man and the 

Means: (193.7). shes tp ack Gib 2 aie eee ee 3S 8 226 
The Monkey-Mind in Religion (1938)........ 231 
The Unimportance of War (1938)........... 241 
The Original Face (1938).................. 248 
Can We Help Ourselves? (1938)............ 250 

Appendix I 

Buddhism Advocated at Christian Religious 

Conference” (1933) ccs vite ap eee hl Re ke 265 


Appendix I 


Books Reviewed by Alan Watts in 
Buddhism in England (1934 to 1938)..... 270 


INTRODUCTION 
by John Snelling 


This first volume of the early writings of Alan Watts covers 
the period from 1931, when he was still a schoolboy, to 1938, 
when he departed from Britain for the United States with 
his young bride Eleanor. Besides the tail-end of his school- 
days, this period also encompasses that exciting phase when 
he was a young man about town, gaining a somewhat 
unusual but remarkably interesting education for himself in 
the esoteric and occult circles of London, which of course 
often ran concurrent with sections of the bohemian demi- 
monde of the day. It was also a period when he was work- 
ing hard to develop his talents both as a writer and editor— 
and to great effect. 


The period could be aptly called Watts’ Golden Years 
or his Years of Promise, for there then seemed to be hardly 
a cloud in the blue sky of his brilliant potential. We have, 
however, chosen to subtitle this volume The British Years, 
for this aspect needs emphasising, because on account of 
his fame—some might say his infamy—as a luminary of the 
Californian Counterculture, many have come to regard Alan 
Watts as an essentially American phenomenon. Certainly he 
spent the last thirty-five years of his life in the United States 
and attained far greater influence and popularity there. 
Indeed, in his autobiography, he laments that, despite the 
efforts of his publishers, his books never sold as well in Brit- 


1 
Introduction 


ain as they did on the other side of the Atlantic. Yet it was 
in Britain that he was born, grew up, and received his first 
formative influences. As this anthology clearly demonstrates, 
many of those influences were lasting ones, and many of 
the themes that emerged in these early writings were to recur 
throughout his life. In fact, there is strong evidence here to 
support the view that most of Watts’s major philosophical 
themes arose in these early years and that he later merely 
developed, refined and played variations upon them. 


Alan Wilson Watts was born on January 6, 1915 at 
Chislehurst in Kent, the only son of Laurence Wilson Watts 
(1880-1974) and Emily Mary Buchan (1876?-1961). His father 
was by all accounts a quiet and thoughtful man, with many 
interests. He was particularly fond of reading (the works of 
Rudyard Kipling were a lifelong love) and, gifted with a very 
retentive memory, had acquired a large fund of knowledge. 
He was also a great lover of nature and gardening. His work- 
ing life was spent in the City of London, working for the 
Michelin Tyre Company and later as a fundraiser for the 
Metropolitan Hospital Sunday Fund. Laurence and Alan got 
on famously together and shared many interests in common|, 
including eventually an interest in Eastern religion. Alan’s 
feelings for his mother, on the other hand, were not so 
happy. She was a schoolmistress, and repressive religious 
influences during early life had inculcated a certain straight- 
lacedness that grated on her son. Nevertheless, Laurence and 
Emily were a loving couple and without a shadow of a doubt 
wanted to do the very best they could, within their limited 
means, for their precious only child. 


A couple of years ago I paid a visit to Chislehurst in 
search of Alan Watts’s roots. I caught the train from Water- 
loo East railway station on a grey English winter morning 
and, having traversed the amorphous urban sprawl of south 
London, soon came to the suburbs. There were rather more 
trees here than in London proper, and in summer the area 
could probably be described as leafy, but now the trees were 


2 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


leafless, their stripped branches thin and metallic against the 
white sky. Not far away lurked the rolling chalk downland 
of the Kentish countryside: the Garden of England, as it is 
sometimes called. The harrassed businessmen and office- 
workers of London had been retreating to this area for more 
than a century in search of semi-rural security and tranquil- 
lity. Here they had built their brick and stucco villas: shrines 
to solid English Middle Class values. From here they had 
daily returned to the workaday fray of London, shuttled to 
and fro on regular British Railways commuter trains. Famil- 
iar with such stultifying rhythms from an impressionable 
age, Alan Watts decided early that this lifestyle was not for 
him—and indeed he succeeded in forging a very different 
one for himself. 


Walking up from the little red brick railway station 
at Chislehurst, I realised that the area was now much more 
built-up than it had been in Watts’s youth, yet among the 
faceless modern developments there still remained the sub- 
stantial suburban villas that as a young man he no doubt had 
passed innumerable times on his way home after a fascinat- 
ing evening in the esoteric salons of London, his head buzz- 
ing with new ideas. Then, he would be often walking in the 
dark, his way sometimes perhaps lit by a pale moon, the 
wind whispering in the trees. 


I eventually managed to locate Holbrook Lane, where 
he had been born and brought up. This is also where he had 
lived until he was twenty-two or twenty-three years old, so 
the bulk of the items collected in this volume were written 
while this was still his home. A row of semi-detached cot- 
tages presented themselves to me, the lower storey of each 
built of good red brick, the upper storey pebble-dashed. Each 
also had a trim pocket-handkerchief front garden secluded 
from the road by a wooden fence. They were neat and 
respectable, but very small, tiny in fact, and easily dwarfed 
by their more imposing neighbours. 


3 


Introduction 


Holbrook Lane had also been built up since Watts’s 
boyhood and the houses had been renumbered, so I found 
it difficult to locate what used to be Number 3: Rowan Tree 
Cottage. I knocked on various doors and asked if anyone 
knew the precise house in which Alan Watts, the well-known 
writer on religious subjects, had lived. Each time I was 
greeted with a blank expression and ‘‘Never heard of 
him... ”’ I reflected on the irony of this; had I mentioned 
the name in the appropriate parts of San Francisco, say, it 
would have elicited a far more positive response. 

Eventually I did manage to work out which was the 
former Number 3. The rowan tree in the front garden had 
gone, and there was no way I could see the long back gar- 
den that had been Laurence Watts’s pride and joy, and which 
Alan, who as a boy had frolicked by the hour in its herba- 
ceous abundance, described in his autobiography as ‘‘flu- 
tant with birdsong.”’ It used to back onto a girls’ school (and 
still does, I fancy). 

From Chislehurst, I caught a local bus to nearby Brom- 
ley, where I had an appointment to meet Alan’s cousin and 
boyhood playmate Joy Buchan. Bromley is one of those 
suburban dormitory towns that lack all colour and charac- 
ter, as though, in its insatiable hunger, the nearby metropolis 
has syphoned off all its potential along with the energy of 
the bulk of its inhabitants. It is a place one passes through; 
not the sort of place one visits. 

Alan Watts and his parents had in fact been obliged 
to move to Bromley when for a short time they had fallen 
into financial difficulties. Harry Buchan, Joy’s father, owned 
some property, and he let them have the use of a house here, 
so Rowan Tree Cottage was temporarily let, and Emily did 
embroidery work to support the three of thenr. During this 
period, a regular Sunday ritual was a visit to Joy’s family 
home for tea and supper. There would also be singing— 
both hymns and secular songs—in which one and all would 
take part. 


4 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


‘Both my uncle and his son had fine voices and I can 
hear them now singing Rejoice in the Lord Alway and my 
uncle singing Kipling songs as well,’ Joy has written in a 
memoir of Laurence Watts. 

It was during these soirées that Joy Buchan got to 
know her cousin Alan. She remembers him as a quiet boy 
at first, but fun-loving—full of tricks and always ready 
to entertain. 


“He was very clever with drawing,” Joy told me. ‘‘He 
could have a book with him and he‘d just sort of start draw- 
ing animals or all sorts of pin men. He could make them 
really come alive. He didn’t copy anything, he did it all 
out of his head. I just sat there fascinated. .. . And he used 
to be very keen on ju-jitsu too. He used to try things out 
on me, trying to make me completely powerless—but I 
managed to get out of the vice sometimes!”’ 


Even as a child, enjoyment of life was a priority for 
Alan: “‘T can see him in the cottage at Chisleburst, just let- 
ting off steam. He'd sing quite off the cuff; all sorts of dit- 
ties and things. A lot of nonsense rhymes, really. They were 
really fun. He made them fun... .”’ 


Alan was also always very kind to Joy. One day, for 
instance, she suffered an accident. He told her to relax on 
the sofa and not to worry—‘he was very, very good... .”’ 
She experienced this kindness again when she did secretar- 
ial work for him in London after his marriage to Eleanor 
Everett in 1938, and yet again when she was their guest in 
the United States at the time when Alan was Chaplain at 
Northwestern University in Evanston. 


Joy also recalled seeing oriental art objects in Rowan 
Tree Cottage, which we know were influential upon Alan’s 
development: “‘It had a lot of Eastern hangings and china. 
In the sitting room they got those big vases—some of them 
were Chinese and Japanese. And they had a little tiny 
dressing-room that my uncle and Alan used to use, and there 


5 
Introduction 


was a little Buddha on the mantlepiece in there. They also 
used to have joss-sticks and incense, I think... .” 


Joy Buchan was a kind and hospitable person, and it 
was a benign portrait of Alan Watts that she painted. There 
was something a little incongruous, however, about the 
memorabilia that she brought out: the American editions 
of his books—and the gramophone records that he had 
made, the sleeves of some of them designed in dated 
psychedelic graphics that evoked associations of California 
and the fast-fading hippie culture of the sixties (echoes of 
Jimi Hendrix and the Grateful Dead). How far away all that 
was from Joy’s comfortable but very English and respecta- 
ble drawing room in suburban Bromley; but in a way it also 
spoke eloquently of the contrasts that Alan’s life embraced 
and demonstrated how far he travelled from his origins. 


Alan’s education began at a kindergarten situated quite 
near the family home at Chislehurst. Then, in 1922, he 
became a boarder at St. Hugh’s, Bickley. His development, 
however, undoubtedly underwent a great leap forward 
when, in the autumn of 1929, he went to King’s School, 
Canterbury on a scholarship. King’s is reckoned to be the 
oldest and one of the most prestigious public schools in the 
land, and everything about it smacks of quality and tradi- 
tion. Its very situation is a remarkable one; it stands within 
the hallowed precincts of Canterbury Cathedral, the very 
heart of established religion in England. All around there 
is soaring Gothic architecture at its most impressive: towers, 
pinnacles, flying buttresses, vaulted crypt and cloister; and 
the very stone gives off a musty antique aroma that has taken 
centuries to culture. No school is more saturated in history. 


Now, the myth has arisen in the popular mind that 
English public schools, with their bullying all-boy 
atmospheres, sporting obsessions and spartan regimes, are 
awful places: forcing-houses devoted to the mass-production 
of authoritarian brutes and to crushing the spirits of the sen- 


6 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


sitive and the creative. Probably they are not ideal places 
for producing the most emotionally well-balanced people, 
but they do foster talent and it is usually possible for those 
not so inclined to find subtle ways of opting out of the 
prevailing sporting ethos and of developing their own 
interests. Indeed, if their interests are cultural, artistic, or 
spiritual, kindred spirits can usually be found among the 
teachers and the other pupils: sympathetic, well-informed, 
and/or talented souls ready to actively encourage and assist 
the flowering of individual potential. 


Thus it was in Watts’s case. Like another distinguished 
old boy of King’s, the writer Somerset Maugham, he has the 
standard disparaging things to say about the place in his 
autobiography, but in fact being there gave him a new con- 
fidence, and his interest in the spiritual traditions of the ori- 
ent became something really strong in the quasi-ecclesiastical 
atmosphere of the place. 


We have mentioned how oriental artefacts back home 
in Chislehurst helped to foster this special interest in the 
young Alan Watts. Later, reading the Fu Manchu novels of 
Sax Rohmer and Lafcadio Hearn’s literary gleanings in 
Buddha-Fields? quickened it. It was further encouraged by 
Francis Croshaw, the urbane father of a boyhood chum, and 
by other friends. Then quite by chance Alan one day opened 
a book that Croshaw had lent him,} and in it he discovered 
something that was to alter the course of his life. It was a 
yellow pamphlet published by a group in London that called 
itself the Buddhist Lodge. He promptly wrote off to the 
Lodge, became a member, and began to subscribe to its jour- 
nal, Buddhism in England (now The Middle Way). This was 
in 1930. In the same year, he formally declared himself to 
be a Buddhist. Far from being horrified and rushing to extir- 
pate this pernicious Eastern infection, the staff and boys at 
King’s (Patrick Leigh Fermor, the war-hero and writer was 
one of them‘) took the whole thing perfectly in their 
stride—but then, it’s considered healthy for an English gen- 


7 
Introduction 


tleman to cultivate a few eccentricities—they add colour to 
his character. He even got encouragement. When in 1932 
the powers-that-be at King’s were asked to send two 
representatives to a religious conference to be held in Hay- 
ward’s Heath in Sussex, they selected a chap with the highly 
appropriate name of Parsons and... Alan Watts. 


Watts began his remarkable lifelong career writing 
upon oriental spirituality while still at King’s School. In 1931, 
his very first article (with which we begin this anthology) 
appeared in Buddhism in England. Unfortunately, however, 
we have not been able to trace any unpublished material dat- 
ing from this very early period. Nor have we been able to 
find items bearing Watts’s name in any King’s School publi- 
cations. He appears to have been more active there as a public 
speaker than as a writer. He held the post of Hon. Secretary 
of the Debating Society and also of the Caterpillars Club, 
the junior branch of the Marlowe Society. 


The Buddhist Lodge, of which Alan Watts was now 
a member, had been founded in 1924 by an eminent Eng- 
lish barrister named Christmas Humphreys (1901-1983), the 
author of that fateful yellow pamphlet, and his future wife 
Aileen—or Toby and Puck as they were affectionately 
known. At first it had come under the umbrella of the 
Madame Blavatsky’s Theosophical Society, but later it took 
on an autonomous life of its own. It became the Buddhist 
Society, London in 1943, and then in 1952 contracted its 
name to simply The Buddhist Society. As such it is known 
to this day. 


Travers Christmas Humphreys was a tall and impos- 
ing figure with a distinguished beak of a nose and an 
authoritative voice that he had moulded into a marvellous 
oratorical tool. He had won national fame for himself in the 
Old Bailey, London’s principal criminal court, as a leading 
prosecuting counsel in many important murder trials. In 
those days, of course, the Death Penalty was still in force, 


& 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


and so the shadow of the gallows loomed over and intensi- 
fied the drama of these proceedings. Yet, incongruously 
enough, this barrister who in his professional life often found 
himself dealing with the sinister—and often gory—details 
of violent crime was also the country’s leading Buddhist and 
personally against execution as a form of punishment. Many 
have found this apparent contradiction hard to explain, but 
Toby himself managed to work it out. Broadly he would 
argue that someone had to do the job, and he tried to do 
it fairly. If there was any doubt about a man’s guilt, then 
he would not push the case; and always he tried to look 
coolly at the facts and not be swayed by emotion. 


It was the First World War and the trauma of a beloved 
elder brother’s death in action that precipitated Toby on the 
religious search that soon brought him to Buddhism via The- 
osophy. He was always very much a Theosophist at heart, 
however, and his Buddhism was of a rather intellectual sort. 
He laid particular stress on the notion of rebirth, which, 
no doubt, helped ease the pain of his brother’s death: it 
allowed Toby to believe that he had not been utterly anni- 
hilated but would return to the world again in a new body. 


I had the pleasure and honour of working with Toby 
Humphreys during the last three years of his long and 
productive life, and I remember once asking him about Alan 
Watts—did he remember him first coming to the Lodge? 


‘‘Oh, yes, indeed,’ he replied, settling back in his chair 
in the inner office at 58 Eccleston Square, the Society’s head- 
quarters in London. ‘‘He was quite remarkable. We first heard 
about him when he wrote to us from King’s School. We 
assumed from the tone and content of his letters that he must 
be a senior master at least. But then when he at last showed 
up at a meeting with his father—that would have been 
around 1932—we were surprised to see that he was still not 
out of his teens . . . but be was actually talking Zen... .”’ 


Toby laid special emphasis on the last words and shot 


9 
Introduction 


me a penetrating look that intimated that I was to under- 
stand that the young Watts had not been talking about Zen: 
Zen itself had been issuing from his lips. 


Watts was clearly a kind of wunderkind and right from 
the start of his association with the Lodge he displayed both 
an almost uncanny talent for understanding highly elusive 
oriental spiritual ideas and a comparable talent for putting 
those ideas across to Westerners in ways that made them 
readily comprehensible. Toby could only account for these 
precocious talents by appealing to the notion that Watts had 
developed his intuition, a faculty which Toby believed ena- 
bled a person to have insight into the most profound mat- 
ters, in previous incarnations. He had thus arrived in the 
world already highly developed spiritually. 


So Watts began turning out a steady stream of arti- 
cles and pamphlets, and at twenty produced a full-length 
book, The Spirit of Zen, which was the first of a long line 
of titles that sold remarkably well, though mainly on the 
other side of the Atlantic—in America. Toby Humphreys was 
a fine writer, too, with a similar talent for stating religious 
ideas simply and clearly, and also for making them come 
alive for the ordinary reader. He wrote many books that 
brought a great many people into initial contact with Bud- 
dhism. This, plus his activities as a speaker and broadcaster, 
made him a great Dharma-spreader: a disseminator of Bud- 
dhist ideas. 


Alan Watts very much followed in Toby Humphreys’s 
footsteps as a great Dbarma-spreader—and herein lies their 
special historical importance. Over the next fifty years, tens 
of thousands of Westerners were to come to take a serious 
interest in Buddhism after reading a book by either one or 
the other of them. America was Watts’s particular sphere 
of influence; as the late Edward Conze, the Anglo-German 
Buddhist scholar, remarked in his memoirs (though with a 
critical edge): 


10 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


Most of my American students first became 
interested in Buddhism through Alan Watts. It 
is true that they had to unlearn most of what 
they had learnt. It is equally true that he put 
out the net that caught them in the first place. 


Watts has other claims to distinction. He was well 
ahead of time in seeing the virtues of Buddhism and East- 
ern spirituality generally; also in advocating a return to the 
mystical roots of spirituality, and the integration of sex and 
spirituality. He also saw where useful cross-connections 
might be made between religion and psychotherapy. He was 
a professed pacifist too, and he showed great courage by 
attempting to live out his spiritual convictions in his own 
life at a time when the world, monolithically materialistic 
as it then was, was by no means sympathetic to what he was 
trying to do. He was indeed a sort of natural priest, but one 
who sought original ways of discharging his vocation (or 
dharma). Perhaps he did not get things entirely right, but 
then how many pioneers ever do? And is there not great vir- 
tue anyway in just having made the attempt? 


When Alan Watts left King’s School in 1932, he did 
not go on to Oxford or Cambridge as would have been the 
normal course for a public school boy. Instead his father 
pulled a few strings and got him a bread-and-butter job with 
the Metropolitan Hospital Sunday Fund. In his spare time, 
however, he set about getting an offbeat education for him- 
self. He made numerous friends in the Buddhist world of 
London and around its fringes and inveigled himself into 
a coterie or two. It is probably fair to say, however, that the 
Buddhist Lodge was his spiritual home. 


In those days, Buddhist Lodge meetings were held in 
the Humphreys’s London house, Number 37 South Eaton 
Place, about five minutes’ walk from Victoria Station in the 
prestigious Belgravia district with its imposing stucco 


11 
Introduction 


facades and columned entrances. Toby and his wife Puck 
were charming and hospitable hosts, and together had 
created an elegant environment furnished with all manner 
of tasteful oriental bric-a-brac that the young Alan Watts 
found quite fascinating. In Toby Humphreys he also found 
a significant guru-figure, though his influence was not only 
religious. The two of them had cultural interests in com- 
mon too and, for instance, used to like to toff themselves 
up in cloaks and white gloves and strut off together to the 
ballet at Covent Garden toting silver-topped canes. ‘‘The 
mind boggles at this couple of show-offs making their way 
through life,’ snaps the acerbic Dr. Conze®; but there is no 
doubt some truth in it. Humphreys and Watts were both 
endowed with more than a touch of the showman (Toby’s 
London club was the Garrick)—but then that helped them 
enormously in their respective vocations as disseminators 
of oriental spiritual ideas. 


Vasa Lindwall, who attended the Lodge at the time, 
recalls Watts coming to meetings at South Eaton Place. He 
was often accompanied by his father, who himself became 
Treasurer of the Lodge, and was invariably well-dressed and 
well-mannered. This accords with a photograph taken of 
him at the time which shows him as very much the dapper 
young-man-about-town, a sparse moustache on his upper 
lip, urbane cigarette in hand and well-cut suit (no trace what- 
soever of the latent bohemian that was to subsequently 
emerge in California). Mr. Lindwall also recalls that he spoke 
quietly but with great authority for his tender years, and 
personally gave him one piece of sound advice that he val- 
ued greatly: ‘‘Don’t jump out of the Christian box only to 
get trapped in the Buddhist box.’ 


The years immediately following 1932 were golden 
ones for Alan Watts. He went on from one triumph to 
another, producing articles, pamphlets, and books with 
seemingly effortless brilliance. He was also a remarkable pub- 
lic speaker. In short, his trajectory seemed set for the very 


12 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


highest achievements. The year 1936 was undoubtedly his 
annus mirabilis—‘that year of true grace in my life’’, he 
calls it in his autobiography. His first book came out then; 
he attended the World Congress of Faiths and met Dr. D. 
T. Suzuki for the first time; and he took over the editorship 
of Buddhism in England from the journal’s founder, Arthur 
C. March. He was then still only twenty-one years old. He 
retained that editorship until he left British shores two years 
later in 1938. 


All but a couple of the works reprinted here first 
appeared in Buddhism in England. Spanning in all about 
seven highly creative years, this represents a very substan- 
tial body of work, for besides major articles, some of which 
were thematically linked and later reissued as pamphlets. 
Watts also published editorials, book reviews, poems, news 
reports, and much else besides. Not all of his contributions 
to the journal can be definitely attributed to him, for he did 
not sign all his pieces, and he also used pseudonyms, such 
as ‘‘Interpreter’’ and ‘‘Ronin’’. 


Despite the substantial nature of this body of work, 
it does not by any means constitute all of Watts’s literary 
output during the period. He also contributed articles and 
book reviews to The Modern Mystic, The Occult Review, and 
The Sufi; also to Dmitrije Mitrinovic’s New Britain and The 
Eleventh Hour. A volume is in preparation that will com- 
prehensively anthologise these. 


NOTES 


1 Joy Buchan recalls that Watts's senior and junior were at one time very keen 
on collecting butterflies. Buddhism, with its injunction against killing, puta stop 
to that. 

2. Lafcadio Hearn (1850-1904) was born on a Greek island of an Irish father 
and a Greek mother. He came to the United States before be was twenty, gravi- 
tated to printing and journalism and in 1890 went to Japan on an assignment 
for Harper's. An existing interest in Buddbism was intensified; be also became 
interested in Shinto. He made Japan his bome for the rest of his life, married a 
Japanese lady and in 1895 took Japanese citizenship. He delighted in Japanese 
folklore, particularly in stories of the supernatural. His books include: Kwaidan; 
Kotto; Gleanings in Buddha-Fields; and Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan. 


13 
Introduction 


3. Specifically this book was Edmond Holmes’s The Creed of the Buddha; the 
yellow pamphlet was by Christmas Humpbreys; ref. the 1973 Vintage Books paper- 
back edition of Watts's autobiography, p. 84. 

4. Patrick Leigh Fermor was about a year younger than Watts and was eventu- 
ally sacked (expelled) from Kings for walking out witha girl—a crime no doubt 
compounded by the fact that she was of low social status (viz, a greengrocer’s 
daughter). There are numerous mentions of bim in Watts's autobiography, nota- 
bly on pp. 118-119 of the paperback edition mentioned above. 

5. Edward Conze, Memoirs of a Modern Gnostic. Sherborne, Dorset, 1979, vol- 
ume 1, p. 74n. 

6. ibid. p. 74n. 


14 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


16 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


A BUDDHIST 
IN THE 
PRECINCTS 


PART ONE 


The piece with which we begin this anthology, ‘‘Ultimate 
Reality,’ appeared under Watts’s name in the January 1931 
issue of Buddhism in England. It is, so far as we have been 
able to find out, his first published article and must have 
been actually written in 1930, when he was a mere fifteen. 
Although at the time he was a cloistered scholar living in 
the shadow of the great Bell Harry Tower of Canterbury 
Cathedral, the piece clearly shows that he has already 
become totally disillusioned with Christianity and hardened 
against its central notions of a personal God and an eternal 
soul. He in fact goes so far as to draw up his ‘‘case against 
God,’ basing his indictments largely upon what he calls ‘“‘the 
conclusions of modern philosophy and science.’ He also 
passionately attacks the trivial manner in which religious 
matters are treated in the contemporary West. But if things 
are amiss, from which direction will redemption come? 
There is no doubt here: from the East, where an ‘unknown 
reality’’ has been discovered. This is that ‘‘unborn, unorigi- 
nated, uncreated, unformed”’ of which the Buddha spoke— 
and what is more, there is a way of approaching it. That he 
exclusively credits the East for this discovery shows that as 
yet Watts knows little or nothing of the English mystics. 


‘Ultimate Reality’’ is in fact a spirited little piece, naive 
in parts perhaps, but quite remarkable to have been written 
by so very young a person. There are inevitably suggestions 
of influence here and there—of Theosophy, for instance— 
and an impressive array of writers and thinkers, both East- 
ern and Western, are referred to or quoted—a useful device 
for adding authority to the piece. All in all it shows Watts 
to be quite amazingly well-informed and insightful—and 
vastly ahead of his time. 


We know from Watts’s own account that early encoun- 


19 
Part One 


ters with examples of oriental art were a vital formative 
influence. His mother had obtained a few pieces through 
her work at a school for missionaries’ children in Sevenoaks 
(county of Kent), and her son’s interest developed from there, 
amplified by his reading of Lafcadio Hearn and other writers. 
The first record of a public talk that has come into our hands 
informs us that on November 27, 1929, when he was four- 
teen, he delivered a paper to the Caterpillars Club at King’s 
(of which he was also Hon. Secretary) on the subject of ‘‘The 
Romance of Japanese Culture.’’ Apparently, ‘‘He dealt with 
Japanese religious manners and customs, and especially with 
their art, and provoked a lively discussion,’ [italics mine]. 
This took place in the room of Watts’s housemaster, Alec 
Macdonald, the deviser of a system of musical notation 
“similar to the Hindu’ of whom Watts writes very 
enthusiastically in his autobiography. Then two years later, 
in October 1931, he was expatiating to the members of the 
Marlowe Society on the Zen poet Basho in a paper entitled 
‘*Two Eastern Poets,’ which also included reference to Omar 
Khayyam. Both poets believed in an Impersonal God, Watts 
contended, but ‘‘while Omar Khayyam regarded this God 
as a hard master to be forgotten in the wine-cup, Basho pre- 
ferred to realize it in himself—to tune his soul to the Rhythm 
of the Universe, and so to attain to perfect happiness.’’? Watts 
also touched on the technique of Japanese verse and the var- 
ious emotions that it is intended to convey. 


But even before he read this paper to the Marlowe 
Society, another major article on the same theme had 
appeared in the February 1931 issue of Buddhism in 
England under Watts’s name. It was entitled ‘‘The Influence 
of Buddhism upon Japanese Art,’ and is reprinted in this 
section. What is astonishing about this particular piece is 
that the young Watts contrives to write with such unwaver- 
ing assurance and authority—the veritable young expert!— 
about things that he only knew about from pictures and 
books. And he ends with such a flourish too: a vivid pur- 


20 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


ple passage delivered with all the stops out that evokes the 
scene in an Eastern temple. It is an arresting little cameo 
but overcharged with a spirit of high romance that gives it 
away at once as the work ofa young writer. A pleasant touch 
is the edifying little story of Rikiu’s hand-washing bow] that 
he drops into the essay earlier on. To convey a point by 
means of a concrete illustration rather than risk losing it in 
airy abstraction is a very Zen device; the skilful use of such 
devices was to become an important aspect of his literary 
style. 


It is undoubtedly true that besides having a very gen- 
uine priestly vocation, Watts also had a highly developed 
aesthetic side to his nature. He was, in short, something of 
an artist. Words of course were his principal medium, both 
written and spoken; but he was also an accomplished cal- 
ligrapher in both the Eastern and the Western styles. 
Endowed in this way with a fusion of religious and artistic 
talents, he was very well qualified to appreciate the relation- 
ship between religion and art: how the two spring ultimately 
froma common source and how, therefore, art, in the right 
hands, can be a truly religious activity and can fully express 
the deepest truths of religion. 


After the piece on Japanese art, there was a long hia- 
tus of nearly two years before Watts again published any- 
thing substantial in Buddhism in England. In the interim 
he did, however, participate in a debate that took place in 
Our Forum, the correspondence column of the journal. Dr. 
G. E. Halstead had contributed a long and thoughtful arti- 
cle entitled ‘‘A Rationalist View of Buddhism’ to the October 
1931 issue. The Editor, A. C. March, invited readers to send 
in criticisms of this, and Watts duly took up the invitation 
and contributed the letter that is reprinted in this section. 
In a subsequent issue, A. C. March himself entered the fray, 
commenting at length on Halstead’s article and also taking 
issue with a couple of points that Watts had made in his 
letter: 


2! 
Part One 


And Mr. Alan Watts echoes the same question 
when he says that Ultimate Reality is beyond 
human standards of justice. But we are not 
assuming “‘human standards of justice’ when 
we assert that a Law of unerring justice rules 
the universe? 


What we are asserting is that the universe is 
a cosmos not a chaos, that it is ruled by invi- 
olable Law and not by the arbitrary decrees 
of a personal and therefore fallible deity... . 


And: 


. when Mr. Watts asks, ‘‘Who am I that I 
should attain Nirvana?” he fails to realize that 
the “T’’ that attains is the outcome of aeons 
of striving. 


A second letter from Watts, also reprinted in this sec- 
tion, appeared in the March/April 1932 issue of the journal 
in response to these cavils. Both this and the earlier letter 
are very insightful. They cut through all the prevailing waf- 
fle and home in on the central issue: that in absolute terms 
there is really no “‘I,”’ no personal entity here. If a person 
has seen this fact, then he will not waste his time worrying 
about rebirth and attaining Nirvana. This of course is the 
classic stance of the Zen school as it came to its first great 
flowering in China: the central experience of Enlightenment 
is all-important, for like a great sword it slices cleanly 
through the Gordian knot of mental agitation, and at once 
the practitioner is liberated. 


The pamphlet, An Outline of Zen, was published by 
the now defunct Golden Vista Press in 1933. Against Watts’s 
signature to the Preface the name ‘‘Canterbury’’ appears, 
so we have included it in this section of King’s School writ- 
ings. It represents the first of what Watts himself termed his 
‘impudent’ attempts to ‘‘clarify and popularise’’ the Zen 
writings of D. T. Suzuki. The First Series of Suzuki's Essays 


22 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


in Zen Buddhism had been published in London by Luzac 
in 1927 and Studies in the Lankavatara Sutra followed in 
1930, the year in which Watts says that Christmas Hum- 
phreys introduced him to the writings of this venerable Jap- 
anese sage. This introduction must have been by 
correspondence, as the two did not actually meet until 1933, 
when Watts began attending Buddhist Lodge meetings.} 
Watts did not meet Suzuki until the session of the World 
Congress of Faiths held at London University in 1936. 


Watts was, in time, to disown this little pamphlet as 
one of the less successful creations of his salad days, later 
writing that it was then ‘‘happily out of print’’ and else- 
where that it was both ‘‘out of print and out of date.’’ It was 
subsequently superceded by his first full-length book, The 
Spirit of Zen, published by John Murray in 1936, and in 1947 
by another pamphlet published by the Buddhist Society, Zen 
Buddhism: A New Outline and Introduction. Then of 
course in 1957 came his most influential book on the Zen 
school of Buddhism, The Way of Zen. 


We have also included in this section an exuberant 
piece on the same subject, ‘“The Essence of Zen,’ which 
is an attempt to strike at the heart of this notoriously elu- 
sive subject by means of high-spirited flourishes. It is idealis- 
tic, romantic, unmistakably a piece of juvenilia. Perhaps 
Watts strove when writing it to adopt what he felt to be the 
true Zen spirit: wholehearted, unhesitating, more in tune 
with the heart than with the critical thinking mind. It rather 
reads like that now. There are also, however, indications here 
of themes that were to be developed later: that religion is 
about Life (Watts himself uses the capital L) and that in his 
unredeemed (i.e. unenlightened) state, man is the victim of 
the ‘“‘warring opposites’ within his own nature. This sug- 
gests that he had already been exploring the new psycho- 
logical notions that were being discussed in the intellectual 
circles of the day. These were to increasingly engage his 
interest—and indeed one of the great projects of his life was 


23 
Part One 


to integrate the two: the religious notions of the East and 
the psychology and psychotherapy of the West. Although 
‘‘The Essence of Zen’’ did not appear in Buddhism in 
England until the January/February 1933 issue, it must have 
been written during the previous year, possibly before he 
left King’s. We have, therefore, included it in this section. 


The poem ‘‘Shambhala’’ appeared in the December 
1932 issue of The Cantuarian, the King’s School magazine, 
under the pseudonym, ‘‘Ronin’—ronin being a Japanese 
word signifying a masterless samurai.4 We know for certain 
that Watts is the author, because he later reprinted the poem 
in Buddhism in England under his own name. Shambhala 
is a mysterious Buddhist kingdom mentioned in Tibetan Bud- 
dhist texts and associated with the Kalachakra Tantra and 
the related Initiation. Tibetan Buddhists regard the Kalachak- 
ra as the apogee of the Buddha’s teaching, and an aura of 
great esoteric secrecy and redemptive anticipation surrounds 
it. Thus Shambhala is charged with powerful mythological 
associations. Some Theosophists and other romantic esoteri- 
cists and occultists were greatly enamoured of the idea of 
Shambhala in the early part of this century, and it is per- 
haps from their writings that Watts came to know about it. 


This concludes the section of Watts’s early writings 
drawn from his King’s School period. We have, however, also 
included in the Appendices to this volume the report pub- 
lished in Buddhism in England of the religious conference 
for public schools that took place at Hayward’s Heath in Sus- 
sex in 1932. Watts attended this as one of the two represen- 
tatives of the King’s School, his companion being a pious 
boy with the very appropriate name of Parsons, who, as 
though to confirm his priestly vocation, used illicitly to 
indulge in a smoking mixture named Parson’s Pleasure. The 
conference was presided over by no less a person than Wil- 
liam Temple, then Archbishop of York, later of Canterbury. 
The report that we reprint gives a verbatim account of 
Watts’s contribution to the proceedings. 


24 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


NOTES 


!. The Cantuarian, December 1929. p.150. 

2. ibid. December, 1931. p.459. 

3. The earliest entry in the Buddbist Lodge Visitor's Book bears the date 30/3/33. 
A strange address is given: River Cottages—and an undecipherable name, possi- 
bly Chipstead. In the Membership Book, Watts is recorded as having joined the 
Lodge on 19/5/30 and his father on 11/4/32. 

4. Aronin might be a samurai whose clan lord had died or who had been expelled. 
Unlike other samurai, uho wore their hair in topknots, he let bis bair bang down. 
Nowadays the word is used for students who fail their final exams and business 
executit'es u'bo go commuting from company to company without having any 
Special loyalties. 


25 
Part One 


ULTIMATE REALITY 


From Buddhism in England 
January, 1931 
e 


“Expenditure of force leads to outward decay, 
Spiritual existence means inward fulness. 
Let us revert to Nothing and enter the Absolute, 
Hoarding up strength for energy. 
Freighted with eternal principles, 
Athwart the mighty void, 
Where cloud-masses darken 
And the wind blows ceaseless around 
Beyond the range of conceptions. 
Let us gain the Centre, 
And there hold fast without violence, 
Fed from an inexhaustible supply.” 

Ssu K’ung-T’u 


We are not beings, but becomings. The aim and end of 
becoming is being; being is real, becoming transitory. Yet 
in becoming there is Being; Being is the ultimate; Being is 
pure; Being evolves; becoming is evolution. 

We are now in an age of change, when old beliefs are 
passing away and giving place to the conclusions of mod- 
ern philosophy and science. ‘‘Orthodox’’ religion is totter- 
ing under the blows of research, both mental and physical, 
and each year more and more men and women begin to real- 
ize the impossibility of their old faiths in personal deities 
and immortal souls. It may be asked what leads philosophy 


26 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


and science to abandon these beliefs; the answer is simple. 
There are three great objections put forward by philosophy 
and science against the idea of a personal, loving, ruling 
God: first, why should He allow such a catastrophe as the 
Great War or cause hurricanes to destroy thousands of 
lives?—second, a belief in a ruling diety must necessitate 
the belief that he causes rain, thunder, drought and other 
natural phenomena, but science shows that such phenomena 
are caused by high or low pressure systems which also have 
natural causes, so cause follows cause in natural order; no 
power intervenes to change their course. The third and last 
great objection is this: a personal God must have endless 
faculties among which he must be able to foretell the future. 
Now, if he knows what is going to happen, the course of 
events must be fixed, and to admit this would be to admit 
oneself a fatalist. Surely the future is open for every man 
to do as he will in as far as Karma permits him? The whole 
idea of a personal God is anthropomorphic; can the Infinite 
be personified? Now as regards the belief in an immortal 
soul, science shows that we have no souls but our charac- 
ters, which are based on physical organs; they are not immor- 
tal, for they are subject to continual change and at death 
they cease to exist—in a certain sense. When re-birth takes 
place, nothing passes from body to body except Karma; in 
the next body, Karma regenerates a similar character and con- 
sciousness. ‘‘Character is immortal—not the same identical 
character, but the result of conduct in character—good or 
bad—ever tending to the ultimate character of unalloyed and 
simple goodness.”’ [Professor Beal.] 


The trend of modern philosophy is to show that in 
this Universe there is but One Reality which is Being; all 
else is becoming, for everything is continually changing, and, 
very slowly, all is moving to good. This is evolution. It is 
a scientific fact that everything progresses, however slow 
may be its advance, and one may well ask why this is so. 
It is because we are all manifestations of Being, only we do 


27 
Part One 


not realize it; our separate, craving ‘‘self’’ is not our real 
‘Self.’ Our real ‘‘Self’’ is impersonal, infinite, and one with 
the real ‘‘Self’’ of all becomings; it is the very Norm of exis- 
tence; it is that of which the Universe is the outward expres- 
sion. This unknown Reality is like Lao-Tzu’s 
Tao—evolutionary yet effortless, passionless and impersonal; 
it is just the essence of the Universe. 


“Before beginning, and without an end, 
As space eternal and as surety sure, 
Is fixed a power divine which moves to good, 
Only its Laws endure. 
It will not be contemned of anyone, 
Who thwarts it loses, and who serves it 
gains, 
The hidden good it pays with bliss, 
The hidden ill with pains.”’ 
[Arnold: Light of Asia.) 


He who acts against the progress of evolution must 
suffer, he who acts with it must progress accordingly. 


Finally we may say that the material Universe has no 
absolute existence. Matter is the sum of our sensations, which 
are phenomena of Mind. Scientists are beginning to see that 
matter is a conglomeration of forces—these forces are moral. 
The Universe is an emanation of the Universal Mind, our 
minds contribute to it, our actions contribute to it even as 
do the atoms of our bodies contribute to our bodies. 


“What you call atoms are really combinations, 
unstable aggregates, essentially impermanent, 
and therefore, essentially unreal. Atoms are but 
Karma.” {Lafcadio Hearn.] 


“The aggregate actions of all sentient beings 
give birth to the varieties of mountains, rivers, 
countries, etc. ... Their eyes, nostrils, ears, 
tongues, bodies——as well as their gardens, 


28 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


woods, farms, residences, servants, and 
maids,—men imagine to be their own posses- 
sions, but they are, in truth, only results 
produced by innumerable actions.”’ 
[Kuroda: Outlines of the Mabayana.| 


Above are two quotations which show that the mate- 
rial Universe is but Karma and that ‘‘burnt-out suns are re- 
kindled by the passions of men.’ 


The idea of the Unknown Reality is new to the West; 
it is found in the ideas of recent philosophers such as Her- 
bert Spencer; Emerson hints at it*; but it was known in the 
East over two thousand years ago; it was a favourite theme 
of the Upanishads of Ancient India. The West is only just 
beginning to see it has yet much to learn, especially at the 
feet of Sakyamuni, the Great Sage—the Buddha. 


One of the West’s great faults is that it is too trivial, 
especially over religious matters. They must needs bother 
about all manner of myths connected with Jesus and con- 
sider belief in them of the utmost importance, while they 
pay little attention to what is really important and that is 
His teaching. As if some august deity chose to reveal a spe- 
cial, absolute and authoritative law to men, or rather, to only 
a small part of mankind! When will they soar above this 
blindness? When will they be reasonable enough to cast off 
a belief which only brings bigotry and persecution in its 
wake? As if it matters what a man believes as long as he lives 
well—and Buddha taught that he who lived well would real- 
ize Truth. That Truth cannot be described with words, and 
those who have realized it intuitively have left such small 
inklings of it as what is written above—not as conclusions, 
but as convictions. 


“see “Xenopbanes” and “The Over-Soul” 


29 
Part One 


‘There is, O Bhikkus, an unborn, unoriginated, 
uncreated, unformed. Were there not, there would be no 
escape from the world of the born, the originated, the 
created, the formed.’ [1ti-vuttaka. | 


Mahayana Buddhism has divided the approach to Nir- 
vana into several stages which it calls heavens. They are not 
heavens in the Western sense of the word, but rather states 
of mind and meditation. The first of these stages is known 
as ‘‘Luminous Observation of Existence and Calm Medita- 
tion upon Existence.’ Observation is luminous in the sense 
of throwing light upon Existence. Passing through this stage 
the thinker enters into the sphere of ‘‘Luminous Observa- 
tion of Non-Existence and of Calm Meditation upon Non- 
Existence.’ The thinker is as yet in supersensuous realms, 
he must ever strive higher through the state of ‘‘Meditation 
upon the Abandonment of Joy.’ Thence it is only a short 
step to the state of ‘‘Calm Meditation upon the Abandon- 
ment of all Joy and Pleasure,’ and it is here that the super- 
sensuous spheres end. But he has not yet reached Nirvana, 
for he must abandon all ideas of personality, and in doing 
so he enters the state in which only the idea of ‘‘Infinite 
Space’”’ survives; again, ‘‘Infinite Space’’ melts into the idea 
of ‘‘Infinite Reason,’ but even this idea is illusion. There 
follows the idea of ‘‘Infinite Nothingness,’ but even this stage 
has been attained by means of personal thought; Nirvana 
is yet to come. With the entry into the state called ‘‘Neither 
nameless nor not nameless,’ personality vanishes and with 
it all ideas; the candle of Karma flickers and dies out, the 
becoming ceases to become: it is absorbed into the Ultimate 
Reality, into the ‘‘Peace which passeth all understanding.’ 

“Om, mani padme, om! The Dewdrop slips into the 
shining sea!”’ 


30 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


THE INFLUENCE OF BUDDHISM 
UPON JAPANESE ART 


From Buddhism in England 
February, 1931 


Of all religions, Buddhism is the greatest promotor of art. 
The glorious achievements of Chinese and Japanese artists 
have been inspired by Buddhism; the wonderful pictures of 
Wu-Taotzu, depicting Amida looking down upon the world 
with passionless tenderness, will never be forgotten as long 
as there is any love for art. 

Buddhism came from China to Japan in the sixth cen- 
tury C.E. Japan had not produced any artists of note before 
this time, and with the coming of Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis 
from China, the Japanese, who have great talent for learn- 
ing, began to learn how to draw and paint in the Chinese 
style. The finest Japanese works of Buddhist art are done 
in what is known as the ‘‘classical style.’ 


Close by the sea among the ruins of an old temple in 
Japan sits a mighty figure of Amida. As he sits he smiles the 
smile of Perfect Peace. The Ultimate Reality is personified 
by Amida, and in this beautiful image we see the pure nature 
of the Noumenon. The face of this Buddha is set in an 
expression of passionless tenderness, for the Ultimate is a 
‘‘Power which moves to good,’ all things are manifestations 
of it and it is, like the Chinese Tao, devoid of passion. In 
this way the Bhutatathata may be compared with Tao. Once 
a temple sheltered the Buddha, but now it has been swept 
away by earthquakes and tidal waves, but the Daibutsu still 
sits inwrapt in the Peace which passeth all understanding. 


3/ 
Part One 


Looking upon the scene, the sage would say: ‘‘Transient are 
all component things, but Reality shall not pass away, there- 
fore know Reality and be no longer subject to decay.’ 


Japanese Art ever expresses the Noumenal by means 
of the phenomenal, so that the common people can under- 
stand the Truths of Buddhism. The deepest Truths can also 
be read from this Art. Christians may assert that Amida is 
a gilded idol, but in reality he is the symbol of ‘‘Suchness,”’ 
the actual image is.merely an illusion, a personification of 
the impersonal. All Japanese Buddhas are seen sitting or 
standing upon lotus flowers, for the lotus is the symbol of 
the ‘‘Wheel of the Law.’ This flower is a predominant fea- 
ture of Japanese Art, for, runs the proverb: ‘‘The wise man 
born in a poor man’s hovel shall be liked unto the lotus 
which groweth out of the mud.’ 


Japan is famous for paintings, carving, ceramics, 
gardening, architecture and sculpture: all of these arts have 
either come from China with Buddhism or else have been 
deeply influenced by Buddhism. However, there is still an 
art not so widely known in the West because no European 
has ever understood it: the art of the tea-ceremony (cha-no- 
yu). When tea was first imported from China it was used 
by the Zen (Dhyana) priests to keep themselves awake dur- 
ing their midnight meditations. It also became at a later date 
the subject of this most wonderful aesthetic ceremony. The 
cha-no-yu takes place in a tea-house (chaseki), which is a 
small, frail, one-roomed building, usually set in the middle 
of a garden. In the tea-house is hung a kakemono (hanging 
scroll), on which has been pasted some wonderful picture 
or a specimen of calligraphy; on a small table at the foot 
of the kakemono is placed a flower or some object of real 
art which is to be the object of the guests’ silent admira- 
tion. When all is prepared, the guests come to the house 
and drink tea in the manner which the rules of the ceremony 
prescribe, and then they meditate in silence upon their aes- 
thetic surroundings and go away feeling better men for their 


32 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


spiritual exercise. No soldier might take his sword into the 
peaceful tea-house, for all was to be of the good, the beau- 
tiful and the true. The pathway up to a tea-house is described 
thus in a Japanese poem: 


‘A cluster of summer trees, 
A bit of the sea, 
A pale evening moon.” 


Japanese gardens owe much of their beauty to Bud- 
dhism. The priests and garden artists of old used to express 
moral ideals in the arrangement of gardens. Rikiu, the great 
tea-master, had a garden by the sea; when showing his guests 
to the tea-house, they would pass through the garden, but 
the sea was carefully concealed from them until they reached 
a small stone bowl where they washed their hands before 
the ceremony. The sudden sight of the vast and silvery sea 
contrasted with the sight of the small bowl in which they 
were about to wash, and they consequently thought of a 
similar contrast between themselves and the vast Cosmos. 


Some Japanese pictures which appear at first sight to 
be drawn in the ordinary manner with bold strokes of the 
brush are really made up of minute ideographs—the words 
‘‘Namu Amida Butsu!’ repeated over and over again, here 
massed, here scattered, to represent shade and light. ‘‘Is our 
universe so composed?—an endless phantasmagory made 
only by combinations. . .of units finding quality and form 
through unimaginable affinities;—now thickly massed in 
solid glooms; now palpitating in tremulosities of light and 
colour. . .yet each unit in itself a symbol only, a character, 
a single ideograph of the undecipherable text of the Infinite 
Riddle?’’* There is one such picture of Amida standing upon 
clouds, with the moon at the back of his head forming an 
aureole. Such work must have taken hours of painstaking 
labour by loving hands in some temple—long ago. 


* Lafcadio Hearn: Gleanings in Buddha Fields. 


33 
Part One 


In the Buddhist temples of Japan are to be seen many 
marvelous kakemono, screens and carvings; the temples are 
veritable treasure-houses of Buddhist Art, especially those 
of Kyoto where is the famous temple of Nishi Hongwanji. 
The whole building is marvellously adorned with beauti- 
ful kakemono, sliding screens, coffered ceilings, fantastic 
wood carvings and floral designs upon the paper walls— 
all made up of the familiar lotus flowers, plum trees, pines, 
bamboos, peonies, birds, chrysanthemums, peacocks, fans, 
landscapes by famous painters, and dragons among clouds. 
In some temples are to be found pictures showing events 
in Sakyamuni’s life, carried out in marvellous detail; there 
are paintings of the Nehanzo (entry into Nirvana), where 
crowds of men and animals are seen weeping—every face 
is drawn in detail—and great is their grief. Then there are 
pictures of the various hells and heavens, and the tortures 
for the wicked are inconceivably horrible. Yet all the 
heavens, hells, angels, devils, gods and goddesses with which 
Buddhism abounds are but personifications or symbols of 
states of mind and of good and evil principles. To condemn 
developed Buddhism on the ground that its numerous “‘dei- 
ties’’ are hopelessly polytheistic and idolatrous is merely 
to show ignorance. Maybe these personifications have fallen 
into abuse, yet it must ever be borne in mind that truth is 
to be found in all this seeming unintelligible mass of cor- 
ruption. Personification of this kind is almost certain to fall 
into abuse, yet it has offered countless subjects for Japanese 
Art, and let us remember when we next look upon any of 
these beautiful images or fantastic pictures that they are full 
of spiritual meaning if only we are willing to look for it. 
Amida stands for Ultimate Reality, Shaka (Gautama) for the 
historical founder of Buddhism, Kwannon for Mercy, Fudo 
(Achala) for Wisdom, and Jizo for Love; all are manifesta- 
tions of Amida, the Supreme Buddha. 


Far-Eastern Art is essentially ‘‘spiritual’’; to Western 
eyes it usually appears ‘‘unreal’—but it must be remembered 


34 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


that the artist does not draw the actual object before him, 
but the ‘‘spirit’’ of it. To use a slang phrase, he ‘‘catches the 
spirit of it’’ Hiroshige never drew an actual representation 
of a landscape, but his colour prints give the same aesthetic 
impression as the landscapes to which they belong. This 
refers chiefly to painting, for the Japanese can make models 
of animals which are so realistic that they are often mistaken 
for the actual animal. So it is with the religious side of Jap- 
anese Art; all the drawings of Buddhas are but ‘‘catchings 
of spirit,’ and they truly represent that state of Perfect Peace 
putting upon their countenances that sublime expression 
of passionless tenderness which is characteristic of Japanese 
Buddhas. 


In all countries the best art is devoted to religion, and 
it is only in the East that a philosophical religion and a 
spiritual art meet: witness the effect! 


The last boom of the great bronze bell has died away, 
and from without in the stone-flagged temple court can be 
seen the candles flickering on the altar. Above are the sweep- 
ing copper roofs overshadowed by a great gnarled pine; on 
all sides rise mighty trees shutting off the sanctuary from 
the outer world. There comes the elusive smell of incense 
and from within is heard the weird, measured chant: 


‘‘When every phase of our mind shall be in accord 
with the mind of Buddha,. . .then there will not be even 
one particle of dust that does not enter into Buddhahood.* 
Namu Amida Butsu!’ 


The temple fades, the Buddha sits alone smiling on 
his lotus, he too fades, and then comes emptiness and yet 
not emptiness—an unutterable feeling of void. 


* Engaku-Sho. 


35 
Part One 


TWO LETTERS 


From Buddhism in England 
Nov.—Dec., 1931 


To the Editor of ‘Buddhism in England.” 
Sir, 

The article in your last issue by Dr. Halstead raises 
some points which, especially to the student of Zen, are of 
great interest. He writes: ‘‘The conviction that Justice is at 
the heart of the Universe would be for mankind a comfort- 
ing one; but is there the faintest reason for thinking that it 
is a correct conception?”’ My interpretation of the Zen idea 
has not led me to think so; I understand the Ultimate Real- 
ity to be something quite beyond these human standards of 
justice and injustice, good and evil. Karma is not necessar- 
ily just, according to our ideas; Karma is merely the fact of 
cause and effect and in its ultimate sense is Buddha. Every- 
thing is transient except Karma, which is the direct 
manifestation of Reality. For though ‘“‘things’’ change they 
are aspects of the Eternal Karma which has nothing to do 
with good or evil. 


But now we come on tothe question of Rebirth; this 
is something about which we know absolutely nothing, and 
Dr. Halstead is rash to be so dogmatic about it. Science is 
not yet in a position to make any decisions upon these 
things. But, in any case, no true Buddhist should worry him- 
self about such matters. Supposing my personal existence 
does not continue, what of it? The only possible answer to 
this is: ‘‘Oh, but I shall not have a chance of attaining to 
Nirvana.’ Here I will quote Dr. Halstead again: ‘‘Nature her- 


36 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


self is both path and goal, method and end.’’ Does this not 
remind us of the words of Dhyana Master Hakuin (Cloud 
Men of Yamato): ‘‘How wondrous! How wondrous! There 
is no birth-and-death from which one has to escape, nor is 
there any supreme knowledge after which one has to strive’’? 
What am I that / should attain to Nirvana? The whole point 
of Buddhism is to concentrate upon Nirvana—to actualize 
the fact by treating all things as Buddha—and to eliminate 
the consideration of ‘‘I’’ altogether. 


Alan W. Watts 


To the Editor, ‘‘Buddhism in England.”’ 
Sir, 

Over one point, at any rate, the difference between 
us seems to be a matter of words. You say that in asserting 
that justice is at the heart of the Universe you are not assum- 
ing human standards of justice; the difficulty lies in the word 
“‘justice’—whether we take it to mean action in accordance 
with human standards of right and wrong (there can be no 
other standards for the two are purely relative), or whether 
we take it to mean action in accordance with the Law of 
Cause and Effect, namely, that any event must result from 
and give rise to other events. I assume that you conform to 
the latter interpretation—so do I, and we may agree, I hope, 
that on this point the difference between us is cleared up. 


But then you go on to say that I fail to realize that the 
being which attains to Nirvana is the outcome of aeons of 
striving towards that end. I am not quite sure whether you 
have understood me here, so let us go through the argument 
leading up to those words of mine: ‘‘Who am I that I should 
attain to Nirvana?”’ I pointed out that Dr. Halstead was rash 
to reject the doctrine of rebirth as science was not really 
in a position to speak on this subject, and I went on to say 
that no Buddhist should trouble himself over the question 
as to whether he would be reborn or no. The state of mind 


37 
Part One 


of one who worries about rebirth is this: ‘‘I am as yet an 
imperfect being; supposing that when I die I be utterly anni- 
hilated, I shall never be able to attain to Nirvana.” This state 
of mind is highly dangerous in that it constitutes personal 
and selfish desire for Nirvana. The Buddhist should concen- 
trate on the fact that Nirvana, Buddha, the Infinite, Reality 
or whatever you like to call it—is. He should not worry about 
being reborn that 4e may attain to it, because there is no 
“he’’ that can attain to it—there is just Buddha. If only he 
could see the fact, he has attained to it already; let him put 
all his faith in Reality and in so doing lose all sense of self 
within the Eternal Peace of the Infinite. Let him say to the 
Buddha-nature: 


Shine forth thy light that I may truly know that ev’ ry- 
thing encompassed by Infinity is but a transient as- 
pect of the Mighty Whole. . . . That soon I lose the 
sense of self within the all-embracing Peace of God, 
and act the while rememb’ring that whate’er I touch 
or see is but the Infinite enclosed in finite form. 


I remain yours, 
Alan W. Watts 


AN OUTLINE OF ZEN BUDDHISM 


Published in London: 
THE GOLDEN VISTA PRESS 
Fetter House, Fetter Lane, E.C.4 


Preface 


During the last few years there has been an increasing 
interest in the West in that branch of Buddhism known as 


38 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


Zen. This cult whose name is quite unknown to the vast 
majority of Europeans and Americans has been one of the 
most potent influences in moulding all that is best in the 
cultures of China and Japan, and it is amazing that it is not 
even mentioned in some of the histories of those countries. 
It is almost as great a mistake to leave out the consideration 
of Zen ina history of Japan as to omit Christianity in a his- 
tory of England. The reason for this ignorance is that until 
quite recently the exponents of Zen were averse to spread- 
ing their doctrine abroad in the written word, for the relig- 
ion is based entirely upon personal experience and no real 
idea of its truths can be given in words. Recently, however, 
various Far-Eastern writers—among them the noted Dr. 
Suzuki—have made known the methods of this remarkable 
Way of Life which is responsible for many of those things 
which amaze Westerners from ju-jutsu to that exquisite taste 
which characterises Chinese and Japanese art. 


Many hold Zen to be the root of all religion, for it is 
a cult devoid of specified rites and ceremonies, all the usual 
impedimenta of organised worship being quite foreign to 
it. Zen centres around the basic fact of all mysticism—the 
oneness of life and the inward, as opposed to the outward, 
existence of God. But the word God is misleading, because, 
as will be seen, the Western conception of a Deity is also 
foreign to Zen. 


The aim of this booklet is firstly to act as a guide to 
the Western student who desires to form some idea of the 
basic principles of Zen before going on to read the larger 
works on the subject, of which a list is given at the end. 
And secondly it is to point out the way, to offer the rudi- 
ments of the Path, to those whose search for Truth has been 
blinded by the dogmas, creeds, systems and ceremonies 
which choke the road of true religion. 


Alan W. Watts 
Canterbury, 1932 


39 
Part One 


ORIGINS 


Zen is the Japanese form of the Chinese Ch‘an—a corrup- 
tion of Dhyana, a Sanskrit word whose nearest English 
equivalent is Meditation. This is hardly a correct translation 
of Dhyana as interpreted by the exponents of Zen, who 
regard Meditation as a constant attitude of mind rather than 
a contemplative exercise, this latter coming under the head- 
ing of za-zen—a practice for the cultivation of the intuition. 


The cult was brought from India to China by Bodhid- 
harma in the sixth century of the Christian Era (A.D. 527), 
and so came under the influence of a highly practical peo- 
ple who purged it of much that was unnecessary. The Chi- 
nese turned Zen into a way for everyday life, whereas it had 
once been confined to hermit and recluse. Its great beauty 
is that it can be practised in the home and requires neither 
priest nor rite, prayer nor ceremony. ‘‘Those who wish to 
train themselves spiritually,’ says Wei Lang, ‘‘may do so at 
home. There is no need for them to stay in monasteries.’”! 
Yet there are certain aspects of Zen which require personal 
contact with a master and these will be dealt with later. 


TEACHINGS 


What is Zen? There can be no final and satisfactory 
answer to this question in intelligible words. Zen is the con- 
quest of dualism and the inward realisation of the Buddha- 
nature which is the raison d @tre of all things. Zen has been 
summed up thus: 


‘A special transmission (of knowledge) 
outside the Scriptures; 

No dependence upon words and letters; 

Direct pointing to the soul of man; 

Seeing into one’s own nature.”’ 


'From The Sutra of Wei Lang (Hui-neng). 


40 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


The true essence of all things is the Eternal Principle 
of which all phenomena are manifestations—in Sanskrit it 
is called Tathata (Suchness) and it is quite impossible to 
apply to it any form of logical analysis. It is recorded in the 
Vimalakirti Sutra that a company of Bodhisattvas were 
invited by Vimalakirti to express their views on this Ulti- 
mate Reality. Many ideas were put forward, until Manjusri, 
one of the company, asked the host for his view. The answer 
was complete silence, whereupon Manjusri exclaimed: ‘‘Well 
done! Well done! The Principle of Non-duality is truly 
beyond letters and words.’ Again we are told of a certain 
teacher who was about to preach a sermon when a bird 
started singing nearby: when it had finished he announced 
that his sermon had been preached and went away. On 
another occasion a wise Confucian visited a master of Zen 
and asked for an introduction to Buddhism. He received only 
vague replies and on questioning further the teacher said 
‘Iam keeping nothing back from you.’’ The Confucian was 
sorely puzzled, but sometime later he was walking with this 
same teacher in a garden, and as they passed some beauti- 
ful flowers the master said: “‘Isn’t the scent glorious, can 
you smell it?’’ ‘Yes.’ ‘‘ You see,’ said he, ‘‘I have kept noth- 
ing back from you.’ The purpose of this terse mode of teach- 
ing is to show how ridiculous it is to seek Reality outside 
the universe—outside our everyday concerns. Why? Because 
it is manifest in every single thing! All component things— 
men, mountains, rivers, flowers, trees—all are fleeting as 
dreams and empty as shadows. This arises, that becomes and 
then crumbles away into dust; one thing remains and that 
is the Law of Karma—the Law of coming and going—of 
Cause and Effect. All that ever was has been and shall be, 
proceeded from a cause and gave birth to an effect—this is 
Karma—all is Karma, and Karma is the direct manifestation 
of the Eternal Principle. Don’t look for God above the skies 
or fast within the walls of monasteries—He is here, there, 


4l 
Part One 


everywhere—in part as well as in whole. Buddha-nature' is 
just as much on the point of a pin as in the greatest of moun- 
tains. ‘‘That subtle Being of whom the whole universe is 
composed, tat tuam asi—That art thou!’’ But how is this 
to be turned from a mere theory into a living fact? 

True meditation is a constant attitude of mind—not 
an exercise occupying only a few moments of the day; this 
is the teaching of Zen. Ideas alone are profitless; they must 
be tried in the fire of everyday realities, thus it has been said 
that he who talks much about the Law and makes no effort 
to put it into practice is no better than the cowherd who 
counts only the cattle of others. Zen is not a theory, not a 
religion in the ordinary sense of the word—it is an 
experience—a way for everyday life, and in the practice of 
it we are not concerned with such misleading conceptions 
as those of ‘‘self,’ of ‘‘merit’’ or of ‘‘attainment.’’ He under- 
stands Zen who can live without thought of self, who has 
given up all attachment to things; when he walks he reflects: 
‘There is a walking’’; when he works he considers: ‘‘There 
is a working’’; in this manner he cultivates the universal as 
opposed to the personal attitude to life. To regard Existence 
from this impersonal point of view is the essence of Wis- 
dom, for it leads to calm and to knowledge of That which 
is. The mind is no longer swayed by selfish desires, and thus 
it resorts to that Inner Principle which dwells in all things; 
to the Awakened. It is all in all, found by the giving up of 
self and by the cultivation of this universal attitude towards 
life. It is by attachment to things that misery arises, and he 
that wishes to tread the Path must know that they are 
unreal—transient and fleeting. Thus he will regard them 
impersonally, the while reflecting: ‘‘This arises, that 
becomes, yet in essence all remain unchanged, for their Inner 
Principle, being universal, can never be said to come or to 


'The word ‘‘Buddbha"' in this use does not refer to the bistorical personage; tt is 
rather the Heart of Buddha or The Eternal Principle. 


42 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


go.’ All the while It stays unmoved, and so it is that the sage 
comes to identify himself with It, for by adopting this frame 
of mind he naturally reverts to his true nature. And so he 
passes beyond both good and evil, joy and pain; his out- 
look, being impersonal, is not fettered by false ideas. It is 
from the personal outlook that illusions arise. The quality 
of All never changes, neither does the quality of him who 
has passed beyond self. And what is this Inner Principle? 
It is the All, the Real, the Veiled—understood only by the 
Awakened; vain is it for those still in the bonds of illusion 
to discuss It. Know then: you have that Principle—universal 
in character—within you; release It and you will understand: 
this is the secret of Zen. 


The truth of what is said here cannot be proved by 
reason and logic; experience is the only proof—therefore 
let us give up all selfish attachments and put our ideas to 
the test, otherwise they are worthless—fit only to be cast 
upon the dung-heap. Above all let us not mistake the writ- 
ten word for the object of our search—it is only a finger 
pointing the Way; let us not mistake the finger for the Way. 


Zen teaches us to face the facts of life—pleasant and 
unpleasant—with supreme equanimity. We are told to fear 
nothing—to be disturbed by nothing. Prepare for the event 
by all means; make sure that you act rightly under the 
circumstances—but regard it impersonally and so penetrate 
to the true nature of things which is beyond all dualisms. 
Says Shakespeare: ‘‘There’s nothing good or ill but think- 
ing makes it so.’’ It is only when we consider the effects 
an event has upon ourselves that we begin to think of it as 
good or evil, as pleasant or unpleasant; this is the root of 
selfishness. 


ZEN METHODS 


‘‘Thou thyself must tread the Path; Buddhas do but 
point the Way.’ It is for this reason that Zen places no trust 
in the written word; Enlightenment can only be gained by 


43 
Part One 


personal experience and no amount of intellectual puzzling 
will ever bring us to the Goal. The Dhammapada says: 
‘‘Purity and impurity are personal concerns; no one can 
purify another.’ It would be utterly futile to try to explain 
the glories of a sunset to one born blind, so to those who 
ask: ‘‘What is Reality?’’ the answer must be ‘‘Silence—and 
a finger pointing the Way.’ 

There is a Zen saying: ‘‘Buddha or Devil—ignore him 
just the same’—nothing must stand in the way of the seeker 
after Enlightenment. To become attached to a Buddha is just 
as foolish as to become attached to a demon. Zen master 
Rinzai, in a famous sermon, said: 


“O you followers of Truth, if you wish to obtain 
an orthodox understanding (of Zen), do not 
be deceived by others. Inwardly or outwardly, 
if you encounter any obstacles kill them right 
away. If you encounter the Buddha, kill him; 
if you encounter the Patriarch, kill him;.. . kill 
them all without hesitation, for this is the only 
way to deliverance. Do not get yourselves 
entangled with any object, but stand above, 
pass on, and be free.” 


Ananda, the most intimate of the Buddha’s disciples, 
was one of the last to attain to Enlightenment because he 
was so attached to the person of his master. Rinzai exhorts 
us to kill that attachment by looking at life impersonally, 
thus identifying ourselves with the universal Buddha-nature. 


Hence the insistence of Zen upon the ‘‘direct method” 
of teaching, that disciples may not become attached to words 
and letters. In the Diamond Sutra? the Buddha points out 
that things are not really things, they are only called 
‘‘things’’; words are only embodied ideas—they are not facts. 


'Essays in Zen Buddhism, by DT. Suzuki. 
*Prajna Paramita Sutra. Frglish translation, by Wm. Gemmell. 


44 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


Zen aims at establishing contact with the facts without allow- 
ing ‘‘ideas’’ to slip in between. Once we start thinking of 
the effects of an event upon our persons we begin to regard 
it selfishly; as soon as this tendency is conquered the 
Buddha-nature becomes to us a reality—we realise it within 
ourselves. In the 7a@0-teh-King we read: ‘‘Aim at being imper- 
sonal and maintain the greatest equanimity,’ and again in 
the Sutra of Wei Lang: ‘‘Our essence of mind is intrinsi- 
cally pure; all things, good or evil, are only its manifesta- 
tions, and good deeds and evil deeds are only the result of 
good thoughts and evil thoughts respectively.’ And again: 
‘‘Dbyana means to be free from attachment to all outer 
objects and Samadhi means to attain to the inner peace.’ 
Don’t stop to argue about life—that's not the way to under- 
stand it; all the time you've been thinking it has slipped away 
from you; jump into the stream and flow with it; cultivate 
the impersonal serenity of the Buddha-nature and so become 
that Buddha-nature. And yet you are really Buddha-nature 
all the time! 


PARADOX 


Zen abounds with paradoxes of this kind—‘Enter Nir- 
vana, but you are really there already!’’ They are confusing 
to the uninitiated, but a little ‘‘meditation’”’ will soon show 
things in a different light and then, after much practice, will 
come the flash of satori! —the foretaste of Nirvana. Once 
you try to express the truths of Zen in logical terms there 
arise paradoxes and seemingly nonsensical sayings. Here is 
an example: *‘A student once asked the Patriarch (Wei Lang) 
what sort of man could get the keynote of the teaching of 
Wong Mui (the fifth Patriarch). ‘He who understands the 
Buddhist Dharma,’ replied the Patriarch. ‘Have you, sir, got 
it then?’ asked the student. ‘I do not know the Buddhist 
Dharma, was his reply.’ (Quoted from the Sutra of Wei 


See belou. 


45 
Part One 


Lang). An Emperor of China once asked the Bodhidharma 
what was the main principle of his holy doctrine. The sage 
replied: 


“In vast emptiness there is nothing holy.” 
The Emperor was highly puzzled and said: 
“Who is it then that stands before me?’ 
“I don’t know.” 


Even more perplexing is the ‘‘sermon’’ of Dhyana- 
master Goso, who, having taken his seat in the hall (zen-do), 
looked over one shoulder then over the other, held up his 
staff and cried: ‘‘Only one foot long!”’ ‘“‘What’s ina name?”’ 
the Truth is there whatever you say! 


SATORI 


By far the most important event in the life of Gau- 
tama the Buddha was his Enlightenment under the Bo tree 
(528 B.C.). Here he received that flash of spiritual illumina- 
tion which in Zen is called satori—a sudden awakening of 
the intuition to Ultimate Truth. The religious history of China 
and Japan abounds with instances of satori, but for all that 
it is by no means easy to realise. A famous instance is of a 
monk, who, worried by the lack of any convincing realisa- 
tion, retired to a lonely cottage to work contentedly in a 
small garden. One day while he was at work a stone flew 
up and hit a bamboo: suddenly the whole Truth dawned 
upon him and he went back to his teacher who was over- 
joyed at his success. 


A favourite answer of the Zen masters to a question 
on Buddhism is a slap on the face, dealt not out of anger 
or contempt, but in the hope that it will induce the flash 
of satori. It may be the most trivial incident that lights the 
flame—the sound of a bell, toothache, an itch, a clock 
striking—anything that rouses the receptive mind trained 
by meditation. When the mind has cultivated the habit of 
regarding things impersonally such trivial happenings will 


40 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


form the climax of the exercise; they will finish off and fix 
the experience gained in a position whence nothing can 
remove it; the soul is tuned to the Eternal Rhythm, and 
passes beyond life and death, beyond all the pairs of oppo- 
sites. And yet the man loses none of his faculties: this has 
been proved by long experience. 


ZA-ZEN 


The nearest equivalent in Zen to meditation as under- 
stood in the West is the practice of za-zen—a form of intense 
concentration upon various problems (ko-ans). Westerners 
will probably prefer to use more straightforward types of 
ko-ans than those used in the East. A typical example of the 
latter is this problem: ‘‘You clap your hands; it makes a 
sound. What is the sound made by the clapping of one 
hand?’’ Another: ‘‘If the many are reduced to the One, to 
what is the One to be reduced?’’ Yet another famous ko-an 
is that known as Joshu’s Mu: ‘‘What is no-thing-ness: that 
which is devoid of all differentiation?’’ But something of 
this kind will be found more suitable for Europeans: ‘‘Fore- 
going self, the universe grows I.’’ Or: ‘‘The Mind is the great 
slayer of the Real. Let the disciple slay the Slayer.’ These 
ko-ans should not be considered intellectually; their pur- 
pose is to cultivate the use of the intuition. Instead of 
meditating upon them with the reason one should rather 
‘‘soak’’ in them—use them as rungs upon which to climb 
to higher understanding. Do not worry out their truth, but 
accepting them as final see what consequences they involve; 
look at them from every point of view until the mind is 
thoroughly saturated in them. Then will come the flash of 
intuition showing the problem in a clearer light. 


When meditating the spine must always be held erect, 
the legs crossed and the hands touching; these three fac- 
tors are absolutely essential. There is no need to acquire the 
correct lotus-posture (sitting with feet placed on the thighs, 
soles upwards), for the practiser may either sit or kneel— 


47 
Part One 


but the spine must be erect, the legs crossed and the hands 
touching. The position must be comfortable so that noth- 
ing can disturb the exercise of concentration. Let go all wor- 
ries and excitements; shut yourself completely off from the 
outer world and give yourself up to perfect equanimity. 
When the mind has thus been brought under control, take 
up the ko-an and begin to consider it. Each one must find 
his own way of ‘‘concentrating’’ on the ko-an; it is only by 
practice that ‘‘results’’ can be obtained. 


A WARNING 


The Western student is advised to avoid all Raja or 
Hatha Yoga practices in meditation unless he is under the 
guidance of a properly qualified master. Pranayama or 
breath control is highly dangerous to anyone attempting to 
practise it on his own; the usual fate of such people is mad- 
ness. Many of the asylums are filled with those who have 
taken up dangerous spiritual and physical exercises; avoid 
all practices the result of which you cannot reasonably fore- 
see, and be warned never to meditate in order to gain per- 
sonal power or for the sake of self-aggrandisement. The 
motives of the Zen student must be absolutely unselfish, and 
it is essential that he be living an absolutely pure life, other- 
wise his efforts will result in libertinism or antinomianism. 
The only kind of Yoga in which unguided Westerners should 
indulge is Karma Yoga—the Path of Action whereby the dis- 
ciple is taught to do good deeds without any personal 
motive. In all Zen monasteries the discipline is almost 
militaristic in order that strict morality may be ensured. 


LIFE IN A ZEN MONASTERY 


The motto of the Zen monasteries is ‘‘no working, 
no eating’; for the monks are engaged for much of their 
time in agricultural operations. Attached to most institutions 
is a farm where all work, even the masters, for in Zen man- 
ual labour is regarded as an important element in medita- 


48 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


tion. Besides this it helps to keep the monks from moral 
degeneration and laziness—the curse of monasticism. The 
result is that the inmates are happy and contented; they are 
simple industrious people—not religious maniacs who seek 
only that ‘‘other world”’ and are blind to the beauties of this. 
The Zen monk is not afraid to laugh—not afraid to enjoy 
life in a reasonable way; nor does he shrink from contact 
with the unenlightened, shutting himself away from ‘‘this 
world of vanities’—he goes on living right in the midst of 
it, yet remains supremely unattached and pure. His life is 
not wrapped up in the solemn pomp of religious rites, nor 
in the repeating of endless prayers; it is the simple, hard- 
working existence of the poor farmer or woodman who at 
the same time does his best to act as ‘‘guide, philosopher 
and friend’ to the rest of the world. 


The routine of work is broken by special periods for 
hearing sermons from the master and for za-zen, which is 
usually practised in the dormitory. The presiding monk— 
or it may be the master—lights a stick of incense to help 
him keep an eye on the time and at a given signal, after the 
reciting of a sutra, za-zen begins. Should any monk fall asleep 
during the exercise he is woken by a smack on the back from 
an attendant! A signal is then given for relaxation and another 
period may be begun after a few minutes. 


During the day there are three meals: breakfast, which 
is held early in the morning, lunch, held at about ten o’clock, 
and medicinal food in the evening. Students are not really 
supposed to eat after mid-day, but climatic conditions in 
China and Japan render it necessary. Meals are eaten in 
silence, being accompanied by special meditations; they are 
characteristically Zen and have something in common with 
the famous Tea Ceremony (cha-no-yu) of old Japan. The 
whole meal is conducted in the spirit of: ‘‘There is an 
eating’— ‘There is enjoyment,’ etc., the notion of ‘‘I’’ being 
carefully avoided. 

49 
Part One 


At times the master interviews each monk separately 
to give him instructions or to set him ko-ans upon which 
to meditate. There is no regard paid to ceremony once the 
monk is in the presence of the master, who will resort to 
blows if necessary; he will seldom waste words. But this 
system is more suited to the Eastern temperament than to 
the Western, and most Europeans will consider it somewhat 
out of date. But as long as the four principles quoted under 
the heading of ‘‘teachings’’ are adhered to almost any sys- 
tem will do; Western students will have to make up one for 
themselves. But let no one consider the life in a Zen mon- 
astery to be pure drudgery; it is not all working at crops, 
for it has produced great artists and poets. Zen encourages 
almost every trade; while in primitive communities these 
may take the form of agriculture, manufacture of household 
utensils, painting or carving; there is no reason why the Zen 
method should not be extended to engineering, medicine, 
scientific research or ‘‘office work.’’ Moreover it is possi- 
ble to introduce Zen into almost every form of sport as in 
the cases of ju-jutsu and kendo (Japanese fencing); though 
both these sports are really practice in fighting, Zen does 
not regard them as such but treats them purely as exercises. 
The core of Japanese chivalry (bushido) was Zen, it made 
the soldier fearless in the face of death, and when he had 
to kill the action would be treated as a duty—without any 
ridiculous emotion and without personal hate. But because 
of this let no one think that Zen encourages fighting; it 
comes into a world where wars exist, treats them as a tem- 
porarily necessary evil and teaches men how to fight that 
their mental equanimity may not be disturbed. Yet the true 
disciple of Zen will abstain from all bloodshed. 


ZEN AND ART 


Zen Buddhism is responsible for much of that exqui- 
site taste which characterises the art of China and Japan; for 
that quiet blending of colours so restful to the eye, and for 


50 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


that charm of design which seems to catch the spirit of 
nature better than any Western realisms. And this form of 
art has a deeper lesson to teach than that which attempts 
to copy nature or to suffuse her forms with strange, fantas- 
tic, ideas. We find hints of satori in Japanese poetry—as in 
this epigram of Basho’s (1644-94): 


“The mountain its cool, 
The moon in the water, 
The depth of my soul!’ 


Just three elusive ideas, perhaps without much meaning for 
us, but full of the deepest wisdom for one who has had a 
like experience. These three lines will compare with a poem 
by Kobori Enshiu describing a garden: 


‘A cluster of summer trees, 
A bit of the sea, 
A pale evening moon.” 


We have all seen it pictured thousands of times on lacquer 
boxes, hanging pictures, delicate vases and massive 
screens—but next time we see these things let us remem- 
ber something which will make them infinitely more 
interesting. Remember that the artists of China and Japan 
painted each flower, each bird, each mountain, each as a 
symbol of the nameless Reality manifest in Karma. They 
knew that it was impossible to convey any real idea of the 
Ultimate with words, so they covered their plates and vases 
with exquisite symbols of It. These great artist and poet 
philosophers—cloud-men as they called themselves— 
finding that all things were, in themselves, symbols of the 
Unknown Reality, tuned their hearts to the rhythm of the 
waterfall’s song, to the beat of the passing seasons, to the 
Eternal Law of the circling stars. 


EAST AND WEST 


Though the East has much to learn from the West in 


51 
Part One 


the way of science and commerce, the West has much to 
learn from the East in the realms of religion. We have in our 
search for Truth contented ourselves with plunging into the 
depths of complicated metaphysics—a cul-de-sac which has 
led, and will lead, us nowhere. As soon as one metaphysi- 
cian produces a theory another disproves it and no one is 
any the better. What has the world to gain from all the Ber- 
keleys, Hegels and Bradleys of the West? They lead people 
into a maze of conflicting propositions, which, though 
interesting, are only fit for use as mental exercises. On the 
other hand the East has to offer us a set of philosophers— 
mystics if you like—who are all agreed upon one central fact 
and who are thoroughly and honestly convinced of its Truth. 
This central fact can only be understood by experience— 
and when that experience has been felt, he who has felt and 
understood it always leads a beautiful life thereafter. Zen does 
not lose itself in unprofitable arguments 


“Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will and 
Fate, 
Fixed fate, free will, foreenowledge absolute.”’ 


Western metaphysicians are trying to untie a veritable Gor- 
dian Knot—perhaps they will one day realise that they are 
wrestling with the wrong knot after all and might as well 
begin all over again. Only a few—among them Bergson— 
have seen that the intuition is to be looked to for all real 
knowledge of ultimates. Did not the Buddha discourage all 
the metaphysical speculation which flourished throughout 
India in his time; he said ‘‘Nirvana is’—realise this for your- 
selves by becoming unattached, for that is the only way to 
Understanding. 


The West is sorely in need of a really practical 
religion—even if only for the few. If the many must still wor- 
ship at the altars of superstition one can only hope that better 
education will, in time, bring them to a state when they can 
look to higher things. Many there are whom the Christian 


52 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


Churches have ceased to satisfy and they have had to with- 
draw from communal religion altogether failing to find any 
sect good enough to meet their needs. To such people the 
East offers the Art of Zen—not really a sect, not ‘‘yet another 
‘ism,’ but what many hold to be the root of all religious 
experience. Zen is practical mysticism, incorporating none 
of those unhealthy sex emotions found in some Christian 
and Hindu cults. Zen loves not the shade of the cloisters but 
the fresh air of the mountain tops. 


THE PURPOSE OF ZEN 


Yet what is the purpose of religion? What is the use 
of all these labours to eliminate selfishness? How often is 
it asked: ‘‘Why should I be good? Why can’t I enjoy myself 
while there's life and leave the rest to chance?’’ In answer 
to this question the Buddha bade us look at the world 
around—at the world where selfish craving is worshipped 
as a god. However optimistic we are we must admit that 
Life is certainly not as good and free from Suffering as it 
might be; yet the optimist, though he has been able to con- 
quer sorrow to some degree, is yet inclined to see no mis- 
ery where in truth it abounds. He often tries to make out 
that life is not so bad after all, but in so doing he attempts 
to gloss over facts which must be faced if happiness is to 
be found for the majority of mankind. Moreover his out- 
look is essentially selfish, as he takes only his own attitude 
to life into consideration. But there are two kinds of 
optimists: he who is really blind to the facts of life and 
rejoices in his own smug, self-satisfaction, and he who has 
the strength of will to smile under all difficulties. This last 
kind of man does not try to make out that life is really lovely 
and pleasant—he knows it is not, but he also knows that 


“The mind is its own place, and of itself 
Can make a hell of beav’n, a heav’n of hell.”’ 


The true optimist is filled with compassion for his fel- 


53 
Part One 


low beings whom he knows to be burdened under the 
weight of events which he himself has learnt to throw Off. 
Let those who think that life is really ‘‘quite a pleasant show”’ 
travel about outside the sphere of their daily concerns; let 
them learn to understand the lot of those less fortunate than 
themselves and to have compassion; in so doing they will 
learn the great truth of Buddhism that life is filled with 
Suffering which arises out of selfish craving. It is from this 
that Zen seeks to deliver us—from the ceaseless round of 
birth and death lasting throughout enormous periods of 
time. For the Awakened have passed beyond the concepts 
of Space and Time into ‘‘Nirvana, where the Silence ends.”’ 
It is written: ‘‘He who hath overcome Time in the past and 
in the future must be of exceedingly pure understanding.’ 


The attainment of Enlightenment and Buddhahood is 
not a means to an end; It is the End itself—the very highest 
Goal to be reached by cosmic evolution; It is the Alpha and 
the Omega of Existence, beyond change and decay, good 
and ill, Space and Time. When thou canst see the Whole 
as if thou wert that Whole, then shalt thou understand. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


The Religion of the Samurin, KAITEN NUKARIYA. Luzac, 1913. 10S. 

Essay's in Zen Buddbism, DT. SUZUKI. Luzac, London, 1930. 17s. 6d. 

The Sutra of Wei Lang (Hui-neng). Yu Ching Press, 1930, Shanghai. Limited edi- 
tion. 3s. Gd. 

Studies in the Lankavatara Sutra, DT. SUZUKI. Kegan Paul, London, 1930. 20s. 

The Buddha's Golden Path, DWIGHT GODDARD. Luzac, London, 1930. 4s. 

The Garden of Vision, ADAMS BECK (Fiction). 10s. Gd. 

The Japanese Spirit, Y. OKAKURA. 

The Cloud-men of Yamato, GATENBY. Murray. 3s. Gd. 

Zen, der lebendige Buddbismus in Japan, OHASAMA and FAUST. 


Also articles in the following periodicals: 


Buddbism in England; The Eastern Buddhist; The Hawaiian Buddbist 
Annual; The Aryan Path, etc. 


54 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


THE ESSENCE OF ZEN 


From Buddhism in England 
Jan.-Feb., 1933 
@ 


The essence of Zen lies in one’s attitude to Life. Most peo- 
ple adopt what may be called the personal attitude—they 
look upon events with reference to themselves; they call 
things good or bad simply because they affect their persons 
in such and such a way. But the Zenshuist looks at Life imper- 
sonally; he sees things as things—that is all there is to it! 
It is only when we consider the effect an event has upon 
our lower, personal selves, that we call it pleasant or 
unpleasant, good or ill, but the Zenshuist does not consider 
things in this way. He finds the Buddha-nature by giving him- 
self up to supreme equanimity—that calm, balanced and 
unruffled state of mind wherein all the ‘‘pairs of opposites’ 
merge into One; wherein the distinction between “‘self’’ and 
‘“‘not-self’’ vanishes and all things are seen as being just so. 
For him events just happen—they are thus—he is concerned 
only with facts, not with ideas about facts. He at-ones him- 
self with the stream of Life and does not attach to any par- 
ticular wave in that stream. Why strive after a part when 
you have the Whole? When he does anything he merely sees 
that there is a doing of it; he does not separate himself from 
Existence by thinking ‘‘I do’; all actions, whether his own 
or other people’s, just happen—they are perfectly natural. 
He moves: there is movement; a bird moves: there is move- 
ment. So the teaching of Zen about the Kosmos may be 
summed up in the words ‘‘There is.’’ And seeing thus the 
Buddha-nature of things the Zenshuist treats all with love, 
reverence and respect, humbling himself in the presence of 


55 
Part One 


the Universe. He gives up all idea of self: there is just 
Reality—his own person is of no account—, and in this 
supreme act of self-surrender he realizes that state of spiritual 
freedom which is Nirvana. ‘‘Nothing is mine—not even 
myself—all belongs to the Universe.”’ In this way he culti- 
vates the impersonal attitude to Life, beyond ‘‘I’’ and ‘‘not 
I,’ good and evil, joy and pain. For once you annihilate the 
distinction between subject and object, once you pass 
beyond the ‘‘pairs of opposites’’ and see all things in terms 
of Reality—as being just so, then you find that peace of soul 
called Samadhi—that sense of sublime non-attachment and 
selflessness which lies at the heart of Zen. 


SHAMBHALA 


From The Cantuarian 
December, 1932 


Let the Past be forgotten as a long-vanished cloud, 

And the wrong of former years be buried in the shade 
Of Long Ago. Let us waken to the Future’s trumpet-call, 
And shout a mighty challenge to the stars, and ride 

To the Kingdom of Shambhala with the banner of the Just. 
Take heart, O Blessed Conquerors, the Advent is at hand 
When Maitreya shall lay his hand upon the world and sooth 
The troubled hearts of living things with messages of Peace. 


Ronin 


56 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


58 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


YOUNG BRAHMIN 
ABOUT TOWN 


PART TWO 


This part anthologises the writings that Watts contributed 
to Buddhism in England after he had left King’s School in 
1932, down to the middle of 1936, when he assumed the 
editorship of the journal himself. During this period, he was 
working in the daytime in the City of London for the 
Metropolitan Hospitals Sunday Fund, but the evenings were 
his own, and he was then free to pursue his own interests 
in religion, psychology, and allied subjects. By his own 
account—see the ‘‘My Own University’’ chapter of his 
autobiography—he put his spare time to good account. Like 
Cinderella, however, late each evening he had to leave what- 
ever fascinating situation he might be in and hurry to catch 
the last train back to Chislehurst, for he was still living at 
his parents’ home. 


The first piece in this section, ‘‘The Buddha’s Path to 
Reality,’ appeared in the March/April 1933 issue of Buddhism 
in England. \t has a trace of romanticism about it, but the 
bulk of its propositions are reiterations of accepted, main- 
stream Buddhist teachings: that the Buddha always main- 
tained a proverbial ‘‘noble silence’’ when asked about the 
nature of ‘‘Ultimate Truth;”’ that this Reality is to be found 
within ourselves, in the quiet mind—did the young Watts 
always heed his own injunctions?—and not by means of 
intellectual speculation. Nothing strikingly new or creative 
is encountered, however, until about three-quarters of the 
way through he embarks upon an extended poetic analogy 
of the religious life being like the ascent of a high moun- 
tain. The climber leaves behind ‘‘the lowlands of Desire”’ 
and at last reaches the peak, where he bathes in ‘‘the bound- 
less blue of Eternity.”’ Presumably, during the course of the 
climb, he has sloughed off the trammels of personal attach- 
ment that in mundane existence made him feel separate from 


6l 
Part Two 


the rest of life. Christmas Humphreys was much enamoured 
of this analogy. It crops up a lot in his writings; for instance: 


I dislike flat walking on a Way. I prefer to 
climb. I want the wider view, the selfless air, 
the light (reference lost). 


He also used to have an enlargement of an early pho- 
tograph of the North Col of Mount Everest hanging promi- 
nently in his bedroom at his home in St. John’s Wood in 
north London, and he even called his last anthology of 
poems The Mountain Side. 


The last part of ‘‘The Buddha’s Path to Reality’’ is a 
rather youthful and idealized evocation of the equanimity 
of buddhas—not of course to be confused with mere cold- 
ness or indifference—as they sit ‘‘undisturbed amid the tur- 
moil and conflict of existence .. . all idea of self... set 
aside. . . .’ Watts even has the audacity to commandeer the 
great fifty-two foot high bronze Buddha of Kamakura, the 
Daibutsu, in order to enhance the aesthetic effect of this 
section. 


‘The Sutra of Wei Lang’’ appeared in July/August 1933 
as the fifth in a series of articles on the Buddhist scriptures 
then being published in Buddbism in England. ‘‘Wei Lang” 
is in fact the Canton dialect form of ‘‘Hui Neng,’ the name 
of the great Sixth Patriarch of Zen Buddhism, who lived in 
China C.E. 637-713. His ‘‘Sudden’’ school is to be distin- 
guished from the ‘‘Gradual’”’ school of Shen-hsiu, his fel- 
low pupil under Master Hung-jen. Shen-hsiu’s school soon 
went the way of all flesh, but the two major schools of Zen 
Buddhism surviving in Japan down to the present time— 
the Soto and the Rinzai—both trace their lineages back to 
Hui Neng. The title of Watts’s article is in fact identical with 
that of an English translation of the sutra (also known as 
The Platform Sutra) that was made by Wong Mou-lam and 
published in Shanghai in 1930. Copies of this were imported 
throughout the 1930s by The Buddhist Lodge, which even- 


62 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


tually brought out a revised version of its own with a new 
title in 1940. It was undoubtedly this translation that Watts 
used. 


The first part of this piece is a straightforward expo- 
sition of fact, which Watts does with characteristic lucidity 
and skill. A little later on, however, he launches into rather 
highfalutin prose, and, to this writer at any rate, there are 
passages here that read like quintessential Christmas Hum- 
phreys, especially when claims that the sutra is essentially 
a work for the intuition that ‘‘cannot be understood by the 
application of logical and ratiocinative methods,” and that 
it is really a vast Roan in which the reader must saturate 
himself until at last, in a blinding flash of Truth, the mean- 
ing is revealed. 


The last part of the article basically recapitulates many 
notions that we have already encountered elsewhere in 
Watts’s early writings on Zen: the need to cultivate dispas- 
sion and generally to take things ‘‘as they come—dquietly and 
naturally.” This is in fact the only way to live: free of self. 
The closing remarks are very much Watts: Enlightenment 
is not to be gained by fleeing from the world into trance 
states or quietism but through ‘‘a certain attitude to life’’ 
which can be applied in all situations. The final quotation 
reveals what this open secret is: 


Whether you are in activity or under rest, 
abide your mind nowbere.... 


The September/October 1933 issue of Buddhism in 
England published the first part of Watts’s first major series 
for the journal: ‘‘Buddhism in the Modern World.’ In this 
and the three subsequent issues, Watts addressed himself to 
what he regarded as four topics of vital contemporary impor- 
tance: humour (or the lack of it), politics, sex (Something 
taken far too seriously, he contended) and war. In 1934, John 
M. Watkins! of the famous religious and occult bookshop 
in Cecil Court, just off the Charing Cross Road in London, 


63 
Part Two 


reissued the series in pamphlet form, though with one 
important deletion, which we shall consider in due course. 


In his introductory remarks to the series, Watts sounds 
an apocalyptic note. Civilization has lost its way and the bab- 
ble of conflicting voices propounding all sorts of ‘‘new- 
fangled beliefs and opinions’’ threatens to lead the world 
into an “‘orgy of moral conflicts and religious strife.’ All hope 
is not lost, however. If men would only heed the teachings 
of Buddhism—and put them into practice—then salvation 
is possible. By ‘‘Buddhism’’ Watts does not so much mean 
the religion as conventionally understood, but rather the 
‘age-old Wisdom Religion’ preached by the line of buddhas 
stretching back into the mists of time. This wisdom is by 
no means obsolete. Quite the contrary, in fact; it is still very 
much a living force and highly relevant to the modern age. 
Indeed, men ignore it at their peril. 


In a sense Watts is writing here very much as a child 
of his time. Grim memories of the dreadful events of World 
War I haunted the contemporary consciousness, which at 
the same time had to witness the inexorable build-up towards 
the second conflagration. To paraphrase Carl Gustav Jung: 
the whole world longed for peace and yet the whole world 
prepared for war; mankind seemed powerless against 
mankind—and the gods merely showed the way of Fate. In 
other words, the old optimistic Victorian belief in the essen- 
tial goodness of the human race and the ability of Progress 
to solve all problems had been smashed. Mankind was in 
the grip of dark forces that it neither understood nor could 
control. Economic depression contributed additionally to 
the prevailing sense of doom. 


How timely, therefore, that a young philosopher like 
Watts should address himself to four of the key ‘‘problems”’ 
of the day—and how ahead of his time for him to take a 
spiritual perspective and to argue that Buddhism might con- 
tain keys to ‘‘solutions.’’ As he makes clear in his introduc- 


64 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


tory remarks, however, he is well aware of the enormity of 
the task that he is taking on. He also seems concerned to 
preempt the critics who might leap to challenge his creden- 
tials or take issue with him for being over-dogmatic or over- 
critical, for exaggerating or failing to be ‘‘sweetly reasona- 
ble.’ All of which suggests that some sympathetic friend, 
Christmas Humphreys, perhaps, or A. C. March, the editor 
of the journal, may have taken young Watts aside and, in 
a kindly way, suggested that he restrain his literary panache 
a little. And Watts has listened. But having done so, he is 
still determined to go ahead and say what he has to say, for 
‘Buddhism is not a religion of compromise.”’ Rather, it is 
a religion that is prepared to really lay the hard truth of any 
matter on the line. 


A Strange line at the end of the first paragraph of the 
introductory remarks talks of ‘‘that inevitably far-off time 
when the Universe shall enter Nirvana.”’ Strictly speaking, 
the Universe never left Nirvana. Nor did human beings ever 
do so. It is only because we are deluded that we believe that 
we have. Moreover, as Nirvana is timeless, it is nonsensical 
to talk of a ‘‘time’’ when the Universe shall be restored to it. 


‘‘Buddhism and the Need for a Sense of Humour,’ the 
first part of the series, is an early recital of what was to 
become a major Watts theme, one to which he was to return 
again and again throughout his life. Essentially it is a cri- 
tique of the puritan disposition, which in the West at any 
rate has come to dominate most of religious life. It was also 
one of the personal struggles of Watts’s own life to throw 
off the incubus of puritanism and break through to a light- 
ness and sheer joy in living that seemed not merely to have 
been lost but to be actively resisted by many dominant ele- 
ments in Western society. But he is cautious here. It is not 
his intention, he reassures his readers, to advocate a swing 
to the opposite extreme. He is not recommending frivolity 
or licentiousness. Rather, he is for steering a middle course 
between ‘‘Grundyism’’?, on the one hand, and ‘‘unrestrained 


65 
Part Three 


self-expression’”’ on the other. Is he really being frank here, 
one wonders, or merely keeping a certain diplomatic dis- 
tance from the proponents of ‘‘self-expression’—presumably 
the new breed of psychoanalysts—so as not to alienate the 
readership? 

The burden of the item is that humour is vital to the 
religious life because it confers a sense of proportion, in par- 
ticular a sense of proportion as regards the importance of 
the individual self, the ‘I’. Puritans, on the other hand, are 
po-faced precisely because they are so anxious about their 
own individual salvation. This is at once both highly egotisti- 
cal and highly absurd: ‘‘I’’ want to save myself, whereas, 
in fact, salvation consists precisely in being relieved of the 
burden of that ‘‘I’’ that wishes to be saved. Humour then, 
used in a kindly way, can be a marvellously liberating and 
spiritually healthy tool. 


And so to Part 2: the item on politics. Here Watts 
adopts the classic Western Buddhist stance that Buddhism 
is primarily concerned with spiritual rather than worldly 
matters; strictly-speaking, therefore, politics lies outside its 
ambit. That having been said, Watts goes on to argue that 
what really matters anyway is the spiritual quality of the 
individuals who collectively constitute a particular state, not 
the system by which that state is organised. Effective solu- 
tions to the world’s problems can, therefore, only be effec- 
tively approached on the individual level: by each person 
undertaking spiritual work on themselves. To approach from 
the other level, from the mass or ‘‘sociological’’ level, by 
making changes in the machinery of state, is not only use- 
less but often counter-productive. The more state machin- 
ery, in fact, the more the individual is enslaved; also, the 
less able to order his own life effectively, thus requiring more 
interfering state agencies to organise his life. The item ends 
with a clarion call to one and all to begin treading the 
Buddha's path to ‘“‘self-mastery,’’ for ‘‘if Buddhism can only 
teach us to rise superior to mere organisation and machin- 


66 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


ery, it will have done much to resolve the political and eco- 
nomic problems of today.’ 

Unfortunately, in the first paragraph, Watts rashly 
asserts that it would be perfectly possible to adhere to fas- 
cism, among the other political -isms, without being out 
of accord with the Buddha’s teachings. This elicited a sharp 
rebuke in the next issue of the journal from a reader who 
quoted a nastily bellicose statement by Benito Mussolini to 
prove that Buddhism and Fascism were not as happily com- 
patible as Watts had maintained. Printing the letter, the edi- 
tor, A. C. March, invited Watts to comment, adding that 
‘Perhaps he would also include the political ideals of the 
Nazi and Soviet regimes in his explanation.’ Watts, in a sub- 
sequent letter, declined to do so, however, on the grounds 
of insufficient knowledge, adding: 


If the ideals of Herr Hitler and Stalin are sin- 
cere and just they will have their reward; if 
not—well, it must be left to Karma. It is not 
our business to judge or “‘punish’’ them. 


He was, however, obliged to concede the main point 
of the reader’s letter; he had been, he said, under the impres- 
sion that Signor Mussolini’s ideas were ‘‘moderately sane’’ 
but the quotation had dispelled that illusion. He thanked 
the reader for ‘‘adding to my knowledge of world affairs,” 
and then went on: 


I understood Fascism as a political system 
embodying the corporate state and the office 
of dictator, and it must surely be true that in 
a country of practising Buddbists, ruled by a 
practising Buddhist, this system would work 
perfectly well. 


However, he had not intended the article to imply that 
Buddhism was compatible with ‘‘any of the queer forms of 
political lunacy which from time to time blight the minds 
of men”: 


67 
Part Two 


For instance, it would be absurd to say that 
Buddbism is com patible with a policy whereby 
citizens were forced to be injected with typhoid 
microbes to give unemployed doctors some- 
thing to do, compelled to eat enormous quan- 
tities of cheese every morning to get rid of a 
cheese ‘‘glut,’’ to rob and murder to give work 
to the police, or to dance the polka in public 
halls all night in aid of the Unemployed Danc- 
ing Mistresses Union. Anyone introducing such 
a system would be called mad, but I think his 
scheme would be a good deal saner than that 
of anyone who set up war (or to give it its 
proper name, ‘‘Mass Murder of Civilians’’) as 
a noble ideal. War wasn't so bad in the days 
of chivalry, but nowadays statesmen have no 
sense of sportsmanship3 in their dealings with 
other countries and can never be relied upon 
to “keep the rules.”’ 


Watts concluded his letter of reply by quoting 
Christmas Humphreys and Lao Tzu in support of the general 
pacifist line of argument that had evolved as he had gone 
along. 


Many might be surprised at the extent to which the 
young Watts shows himself—indeed openly declares— 
himself to be politically uninformed and innocent in this 
last letter. But then, his general lifelong stance was an apo- 
litical one. He knew that every kind of state was basically 
unsympathetic to the kind of man he was: one who wants 
to heed his own counsel and generally go “in my own way.” 
On the other hand, he was at this time either involved with 
Dmitrije Mitrinovic, or about to become involved with him. 
Mitrinovic was a Yugoslav then living in the Bloomsbury 
area of London who was one of Watts’s early gurus. Specif- 
ically, Watts classifies him as a ‘‘rascal-guru’’ of the same 


68 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


ilk as G. I. Gurdjieff.4 He was a great occultist and esoteri- 
cist, with ancillary interests in psychology. But he also had 
strong political and social ideas as well, and he went so far 
as to set up a movement, the New Britain Movement, and 
to start two journals—New Britain and The Eleventh 
AHour—to advance those ideas. ‘‘The historical importance 
of Mitrinovic was that he tried to save Europe from Nazism 
and economic insanity,’ Watts wrote. On the face, it seems 
uncharacteristic of the essentially apolitical Watts to have 
worked on both these journals and to have tried to sell them 
on the streets of London—unless he was prepared to buy 
into the whole package for pragmatic rather than ideologi- 
cal reasons. 


The minor flurry that the item on politics sparked off 
in the correspondence columns of Buddhism in England 
was a storm in a teacup compared with the controversy occa- 
sioned by the next installment of ‘‘Buddhism in the Mod- 
ern World.’ But then, who would have been surprised? The 
title of the item was ‘‘Buddhism and Sex.”’ 


The important thing to bear in mind when reading 
this piece is that Watts, like so many of the young men of 
this less permissive era, passionately wished for an erotic 
consummation that proved to be frustratingly elusive. By 
his own account, it was at least three years more before he 
at last achieved it. What he has to say here is, therefore, 
informed more by theory than by practice—but then, as we 
have seen, Alan Watts never found himself overly inhibited 
by such limitations. 


In the main, “Buddhism and Sex”’ deals quite skilfully 
with what was at that time a very sensitive subject. Watts 
again argues for a sensible middle way course: one that 
avoids the dangers of repression on the one hand and of 
overindulgence on the other. He both castigates his times 
for its obsession with sex and also takes a characteristic side- 
swipe at the puritans. He furthermore wisely defers to the 


69 
Part Two 


Buddha's requirement of celibacy for monks and nuns, con- 
ceding that such a course might indeed be necessary on the 
higher stages of the Path; and it is not repression but sub/i- 
mation, hence perfectly healthy. On the lower stages of the 
Path, however, some form of sexual expression may be quite 
in order, even beneficial, and he cites those ancient myths 
that see in it the authentic pursuit of a kind of wholeness. 


So far so good. Nothing to bring a blush to even the 
most modest cheek. But then in the final paragraph he over- 
plays his hand rather when he praises the oriental attitude 
to prostitution—or at least his somewhat idealized fantasy 
of what that attitude might be. This rather ill-conceived lit- 
tle sally prompted a spirited lady of marked feminist ten- 
dencies named A. Beresford Holmes (with whom Watts 
crossed swords on more than one occasion in the columns 
of Buddhism in England) to take up her pen and compose 
an outraged letter of reply which appeared in the next issue 
of the journal. Mr. Watts, with his ‘‘typically masculine 
view,’ had, she contended, been tempted to ‘‘view every- 
thing Eastern in a rosy light.’’ In the West, reasonable efforts 
had been made towards the emancipation of women by 
gradually equalizing their position vis-a-vis men, but in the 
East, the position was infinitely worse: there women were 
“sexual slaves.’ Mrs. Holmes went on: 


One hears many excuses for prostitution, but 
itis a new one on me that it is done artisti- 
cally in the East, and is, therefore, less perni- 
cious. Vice is vice, and I do not see how anyone 
professing Buddhist ideals can advocate or see 
anything artistic in prostitution, which 
degrades both women and men.... 


And she concludes: 


For my part, I prefer to place my reliance upon 
the teachings of the Buddha. ... There is a 


70 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


wholesomeness about Buddhism, a refreshing 
cleanness and absence of eroticism. So many 
religions become tainted with sex feeling, some 
become distinctly phallic, but Buddhism is sin- 
gularly free from sex interests, and that is 
because it is essentially a spiritual religion. If 
Buddha, with his great wisdom, enforced 
celibacy on both Bhikkhus and Bhikkbunis, we 
may rest assured that he saw it was necessary 
for all those who really wish to live the 
Spiritual life. As for the dilettantes and those 
who live the life of the ordinary householder, 
they will find that as their interest in spiritual 
truth grows in intensity, so will their lower 
desires become purified and attenuated until 
they cease to have any power over the 
awakened will. For those who are attempting 
to live the spiritual life, better, far better, that 
they should err on the side of starving their sex 
nature than by thinking it will offer them a 
solution of cosmic problems (sic) by indulging 
it. It is much more likely to land them in ter- 
rible difficulties. 


While a lot of Ms. Beresford Holmes'’s letter may strike 
the modern reader as rather Grundyish, some of her criti- 
cisms were quite well-aimed. A rather more shrill letter of 
criticism from the pseudonymous ‘‘Nemo”’ was also printed 
at the same time. It declared: 


The mass of people in India are effete and 
degenerate through sexual depravity, and the 
same is true to a great extent in China. 

Mr. Watts should read Cities of Sin, by H. de 
Leeuw, published last year, in which a full 
account ts given of the traffic in women in the 
Orient and its relation to the drug traffic. ... 


ra | 
Part Tivo 


One wonders if Watts took ‘‘Nemo’s’’ advice and read 
the book—and, if he did, what he thought of it. The same 
correspondent also launched into a heated diatribe against 
the ‘‘insidious doctrines’ of Freudian psychology, ‘‘which 
may weaken our struggle with this hydra-headed monster”’ 
(i.e. sex), HeShe went on: 


The teaching that it is more dangerous to sup- 

press one’s sexual appetites rather than yield 
to them is the teaching of sexual perverts and 
is wholly contrary to the self-control taught by 
the Buddba.... 


Fortunately, the young Alan Watts was not left alone 
to be devoured by hostile critics for having had the audacity 
to speak out on the “‘ever-interesting topic.’’ One broad- 
minded reader, H.N.M. Hardy, found his article “‘excellent”’ 
and commented: 


We Buddhists are taught to face the facts of life 
and, therefore, for us, prudery is a weakness, 
a form of wilful blindness, out of which we 
Should educate ourselves. 


He did not, however, agree with Watts’s assertion that 
the Buddha had not dealt adequately with the subject of sex, 
“for His very silence . . . shows . . . that He attached no spe- 
cial importance to it, and left the question to be settled by 
those concerned.” 


Looking back on ‘‘Buddhism and Sex’’ from a perspec- 
tive of more than fifty years, it has to be recognised as a 
pioneering piece of work. For despite Mr. Hardy’s conten- 
tion, Buddhism offers little guidance on sexual matters, and 
Buddhist writers seem to have been reluctant to deal with 
the subject. Watts, in fact, is one of the exceptions to the 
rule. The truth is that Buddhism, in contrast, say, to Islam 
or Judaism, takes a negative view of the relationship between 
man and woman and broadly hints that those seriously 


72 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


interested in fulfilling their spiritual potential to the highest 
degree should cut it out of their lives completely. Thus, 
indeed, the monastic community, the Sangha, forms the 
core of the religion, and its members are required to be 
strictly celibate. It is true that there latterly arose kinds of 
religious who were allowed to marry—certain types of Tibe- 
tan lamas, for instance, and Japanese Zen priests—but on 
the whole the basic disposition of Buddhism is to polarise 
over the matter of sex: if one is seriously interested in liv- 
ing the religious life one foregoes having a sex life, if one 
wants a sex life one foregoes having a fully realised spiritual 
life. This sort of polarisation is challenged by some West- 
ern Buddhists today who would like to see both sides of 
human nature, the spiritual and the instinctual, given fair 
expression. This integration was something that Watts was 
to advocate in his later writings, though he seems to opt for 
a more orthodox position in this early essay. As a person 
who usually tried to carry through his intellectual convic- 
tions, he also attempted to live out this ideal in his actual 
life. Whether he got it right, though, is open to debate. 


Finally, to return to that last controversial paragraph: 
when ‘‘Buddhism in the Modern World’”’ was eventually re- 
released in pamphlet form, that offending item had been 
duly deleted, a fact welcomed by A. C. March when he 
reviewed the publication in Buddhism in England—‘so no 
one now need hesitate to pass these views of a modern Bud- 
dhist on to their friends, whatever their age or sex may be.”’ 


The spirit of debate that ‘‘Buddhism and Sex’’ had 
sparked off in the correspondence columns of Buddhism 
in England was carried on by the next and final part of the 
series, ‘‘Buddhism and War,’ though here concord prevailed. 


As we have already noted, war was a matter promi- 
nent in every thinking person’s mind during that uneasy 
interregnum between the two devastating World Wars, and 
the question of pacifism inevitably became a keenly debated 


73 
Part Two 


topic. It was even debated in the Oxford Union, where the 
House decided that in the event of another war its mem- 
bers would not fight for King and Country. While still a 
schoolboy at King’s, Canterbury, Watts had participated in 
a similar debate in the Debating Society in October 1932. 
He spoke against the motion, That in the opinion of this 
House conscientious objection to fighting for one’s coun- 
try is unjustifiable. At the time he was Hon. Secretary of 
the Society, and said: 


... that the moral victory of a community of 
conscientious objectors over an aggressor 
would be so great that it would always be 
remembered as one of the greatest things in 
History and an example to future generations. 
The concept to ‘‘turn the other cheek”’ is for the 
brave man, while the coward is the one who 
wants to ‘‘hit bim back.’’4 


When the House divided, the votes fell equally for 
each side, but then the President used his casting vote in 
favour of the motion. 


In ‘‘Buddhism and War,’ Watts again takes a pacifist 
line, but an extreme one that is explicitly critical of those 
casuists who declare themselves ideologically opposed to 
killing but who, when the chips actually go down, are 
usually able to find some high-minded reason for taking up 
arms against the common foe. This really will not do, Watts 
insists. If one is opposed to war, if one is convinced that 
killing does not merely solve nothing but is actually wrong 
in itself, then one must desist from it absolutely and right 
now. One cannot honestly defer one’s pacifism to a 
hypothetical ideal time in the future when the world is ready 
for it. 


Watts readily concedes that he is not proposing a 


‘path of roses’ but an extremely thorny one: ‘Safety is not 
offered, nor even success for those who start upon the 


74 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


adventure, but only suffering, frustration; scorn and abuse.’ 
One must be fully prepared to sacrifice one’s own life, to 
see one’s women raped and one’s children massacred—and 
one must be prepared to go even further than such merely 
Passive acceptance: one must counter hatred with active 
love. This kind of utterly selfless love alone can generate 
the karmic force that, gathering momentum, will eventu- 
ally overcome hatred and inaugurate the millennium of per- 
fect peace. 


The correspondents to Buddhism in England were 
generally sympathetic to these arguments, though ‘‘S.FW.”’ 
did believe that there was such a thing as a just war and that 
it wasn’t such a bad thing to want to protect one’s wife and 
children against atrocities. He also strongly hinted that Watts 
wasn't really facing up to the “‘realities of life’’ and that he 
was falling into ‘‘some delusions which theorists are apt to 
fall into.’ In another thoughtful letter, James Tempest, while 
appreciative of the article, drew attention to the root causes 
of war: dark forces like ‘‘war psychosis’’ and ‘‘mob feel- 
ing,’ that lie hidden in the human heart, even in the hearts 
of professed pacifists, and which only require the right com- 
bination of circumstances to bring them out. 


As we shall see, Watts was to return again and again 
to the theme of war during his writings in the period covered 
by this volume. He remained always true to the pacifist ideals 
that he had first publicly propounded in the Debating Soci- 
ety at King’s school, and towards the end of the 1930s, when 
it did appear that war was inevitable, he stood firm by his 
intellectual convictions and departed for the United States 
rather than face conscription and fight in a forthcoming war 
against Hitler. He was criticised for this, as pacifists are 
always criticised, but it is only fair to say that his action was 
perfectly consistent with all his declared statements on the 
subject of war. 


In retrospect, we may look back on ‘*Buddhism in the 


75 
Part Two 


Modern World”’ in its final pamphlet form as Watts’s most 
substantial achievement down to 1934. It shows him emerg- 
ing as an independent voice, confident and eloquent, able 
to orchestrate balanced arguments and expound them with 
lucidity and vigour. There are all the signs of quite amazing 
precocious talent here, but little giveaway tokens of immatu- 
rity, too: in particular, a natural youthful tendency to be 
rather airily idealistic and to say things that derive more from 
theory than from practice. In short, marvellously mentally 
agile though he is, Watts cannot completely disguise his 
inevitable lack of experience. 


‘Is Buddhism Serious”’ is a brief report that Watts him- 
self submitted to Buddhism in England giving the gist of 
his address at the 1935 Wesak Meeting. This meeting was 
the high point of the Buddhist Lodge’s annual calendar and 
celebrated the Birth, Enlightenment and Death of the Bud- 
dha. Based on the traditional Theravada Buddhist festivity, 
it was held on or as close to the date of the full moon of 
May as possible. In 1935, it was held on May 17 at the Cax- 
ton Hall, a municipally-owned complex of venerable wood- 
panelled meeting rooms of various sizes in the Westminster 
district of London, not far from the Houses of Parliament. 
The Caxton Hall is perhaps best remembered in history as 
the place where General Dyer, the instigator of the Amrit- 
sar Massacre, was assassinated by an Indian patriot. 


At Wesak Meetings, it was usual for a shrine to be set 
up with a Buddha-image on it and the people attending 
would bring flowers to decorate this. A number of distin- 
guished speakers would speak from the platform under the 
chairmanship of Christmas Humphreys. In 1935, these 
included a Sri Lankan gentleman named Dr. B. E. Fernando, 
a Mr. Charles Galloway—and Mr. Alan Watts. For some rea- 
son, however, perhaps lack of space, when the meeting was 
reported in Buddhism in England, while verbatim reports 
of all the other speeches were printed, similar treatment of 
Watts’s speech was deferred until the following issue. It is 


76 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


actually a very lively and witty little piecé that recapitulates 
arguments already propounded in the section on humour 
in ‘‘Buddhism in the Modern World.’ No doubt delivered 
from the platform with Watts’s usual panache and show- 
manship, it probably went down very well with the 
audience. 


I have heard it said that the young Watts was quite 
outstanding as a public speaker—that indeed he was second 
only to Christmas Humphreys himself in this respect, which 
is high praise indeed, for Humphreys was a past master of 
the art. Humphreys’s style had been honed to near perfec- 
tion in the courtrooms of the Old Bailey, during his time 
as First Treasury Counsel. On the public stage he became 
a kind of actor, extemporizing from rough notes in a beau- 
tifully modulated and authoritative voice, now explaining 
a point delicately, now putting over a persuasive argument 
with impeccable logic, moving into lyrical mood to 
introduce a quotation from one of the Masters, then quite 
suddenly and unexpectedly raising his voice to startle his 
audience into full attention for a key point. It was perfor- 
mance admittedly, but performance in the grand manner of 
an Irving or a Tree—and it always worked like magic on the 
audience. As Humphreys was Watts’s chief guru back in the 
mid-30s, it is fair to assume that he was the model upon 
which his young and enthusiastic protege based his own ora- 
torical technique. 


The final piece in Part Two is ‘‘The Genius of China,’ 
which is a brief report on the International Exhibition of 
Chinese Art held in 1935 at Burlington House, London, 
under the auspices of the Royal Academy of Arts. We know 
from Watts’s autobiography that he was kindly presented 
with an official pass for this ‘‘absolutely sensational exhi- 
bition’’ by his friend Robert Holland-Martin, the Chairman 
of Martin's Bank, and that he visited it ‘‘day after day, try- 
ing to understand and absorb the mood beneath Chinese art 
forms.” Part of the fruit of those many hours of contempla- 


77 
Part Two 


tion is presented here, and while the towering sixty foot high 
Buddha in the main gallery still occupied a commanding 
position in Watts’s memory when he came to write his 
memoirs over thirty-five years later, this report clearly shows 
that, at the time, he was more deeply impressed by the spon- 
taneity and lightness of the Sung Dynasty paintings, whose 
half-suggested forms were for him highly suggestive of the 
Golden Age of Chinese Zen art. 


NOTES 


1 Toby Humpbreys introduced Watts toJobn M. Watkins in the early 1930s. Wat- 
kins' son, Nigel, was also active in The Buddbist Lodge at this time and became 
one of Watts's early mentors. As Watts wrote in bis autobiography. ‘‘Nigel not 
only became my bibliographer on Buddhism, comparative religion and mysti- 
cism, but also my most trusted adviser on the various gurus, pundits, and psy- 
chotherapists then flourishing in London. ... [He] is worth at least twenty 
academically accredited professors. Instead of giving lectures and seminars, be 
simply tells you what to read.’ 

2. Grundyism. Mrs. Grundy ts the conventional personification of Anglo-Saxon 
prudery. 

3. The notion of ‘'sportsmanship”' ts elemental to the English public school ethos, 
which essentially sees the whole of buman life in terms of games, notably the game 
of cricket; bence come phrases like ‘‘it's not cricket” and ‘‘playing the game.”’ A 
Sportsman is a decent sort of chap who sticks to the rules and does not seek to 
gain any sort of ‘unfair advantage’ for himself by dastardly under hand methods. 
4. G. 1. Gurdjieff was a Russian from the Caucasus who propagated a curious 
esoleric ‘‘system"’ in the West in the early part of the present century. This system 
was clearly based on traditional Sufi teachings and practices, with borrowings 
from elsewhere. Gurdjieff was highly charismatic—the writer Katherine Mans- 
field fell under bis spell—but he was also sensual and enigmatic; hence, many 
find it difficult to decide whether be was an authentic spiritual teacher or some 
kind of opportunist or poseur exploiting the deep hunger in the West for spiritual 
instruction for less than pristine molives—or indeed whether he was a combina- 
tion of the two. 


78 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


THE BUDDHA’S PATH 
TO REALITY 


From Buddhism in England 
March-April, 1933 


We are told that when the Buddha was questioned on points 
of Ultimate Truth he maintained a ‘‘noble silence’; he knew 
that it is one of the supreme follies of mankind which tries 
to limit the Eternal by expressing it in finite form, which 
tries to condition that which is Nameless and Formless by 
ideas and words. And the attempt to limit the Infinite in this 
way always fails. Carlyle wrote in his Sartor Resartus: ‘‘Man’s 
Unhappiness, as I construe, comes of his greatness; it is 
because there is an Infinite in him, which with all his clever- 
ness he cannot quite bury under the Finite.’’ A Buddhist phi- 
losopher summed up Gautama’s teaching on the Ultimate 
in the words ‘‘Nirvana IS,’ for the furthest he ever went in 
his definition of the Infinite was: ‘‘There is, my brothers, 
an Unborn, Unoriginated, Uncreated, Unformed: were there 
not the Unborn, Unoriginated, Uncreated, Unformed, there 
would be no emancipation from the world of the born, the 
originated, the created, the formed.’ He deemed it sufficient 
to know that Nirvana, Reality, or whatever you may call it, 
IS, but at the same time he emphasized that this fact cannot 
be appreciated until we have advanced some way on the 
Path. 


In the few things which the Buddha said about Real- 
ity we can find no indication of the fact that he saw It as 
a Deity such as that preached by conventional Christianity— 
the personal Being who rules over the Universe as does a 


~\) 
Part Tiwo 


king over his realm; Buddhism is not a ‘‘God-fearing”’ 
religion—such would be quite incompatible with the great 
command: “‘Be ye lamps unto yourselves, be ye a refuge unto 
yourselves, take to yourselves no other refuge.’ Voltaire once 
made the witty observation that as God created man in his 
own image, so man had been returning the compliment ever 
since, for the personal God is a man-made idea—at best only 
an idea. Reality is a fact, based on experience, not primi- 
tive speculation. Sir Henry Maine writes: “‘It is now clearly 
seen by all trustworthy observers of the primitive condition 
of mankind, that, in the infancy of the race, men could 
account for sustained or periodically recurring action only 
by supposing a personal agent.’ This belief is an outcome 
of the instinct of fear—the fear of the cave-man who did 
not see in thunder and rain and wind the working of univer- 
sal law, but the hand of a being like himself, only more 
powerful, who might be “‘bribed with blood”’ and brought 
to suit his actions to man’s convenience. Such was the ori- 
gin of selfish prayer, of which Buddhism knows nothing, 
for true prayer consists, not in asking for material benefits, 
but in tuning oneself to the Rhythm of Life. 


Where is Reality to be found? Where are we to seek 
this Rhythm of Life? Where else but in ourselves, for the 
Path and the Goal are within this body of ours ‘‘six feet in 
length, with its sense impressions and its thoughts and 
ideas.’’ All Knowledge, say the Zen masters, is in our essence 
of mind, all the wisdom of Buddhas past, present and future, 
we can find in ourselves if only we know how to get at it. 
And the Way to this Knowledge is simply to learn to see 
things as they are, in other words to know Reality. While 
the mind is fettered by selfish ideas we can only have dis- 
torted views of things; we think of my body and your body, 
whereas they do not really belong to you or me at all—they 
belong to the Universe, and to understand this is to free one- 
self from attachment. It is this idea of personal possession, 
this idea of attachment which is at the root of all illusion 


80 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


and suffering, and while it occupies our minds we can never 
hope to see things as they are. The Eightfold Path was con- 
structed to show man the way to equanimity—the state 
which alone can contemplate Truth. All ideas of attachment 
are therein set aside, and the multitudinous phases of exis- 
tence are seen as being just so—free from the illusion of self, 
beyond pleasure and pain, joy and sorrow. ‘‘Ignore the dis- 
tinction between subject and object,’ says the Sutra of Wei 
Lang, ‘‘and let the essence of mind and all phenomenal 
objects be in a state of Thusness’—of being Real and True. 
And in the Tao-teh-King we read: ‘‘Thus it is that the highest 
form of man keeps his personality in the background, and 
yet it asserts itself; treats his own existence from an objec- 
tive point of view, and yet preserves that existence. It is not 
that he possesses no individuality, but it is in this way that 
he is capable of developing his individuality.’ 


Reality cannot be discussed; we cannot find out why 
it exists or anything about it by intellectual speculation 
which only leads the mind round in circles—it will never 
get us anywhere and in addition to this it is harmful to that 
tranquillity so necessary for arriving at Truth. The first step 
is to understand ourselves; one of Low’s cartoons depicts 
an old scientist in a large room full of dusty books on the 
why and wherefore of Life, sitting in front of a mirror. And 
underneath is written: “‘The little thing that puzzles him is— 
himself.’ The Eightfold Path is the way to knowledge of self, 
for it teaches us our right place in the scheme of Things; 
it breaks us of the illusion that we are separate from the rest 
of Life, until we finally come to know ourselves, not as 
individual entities, but as aspects of the Real— ‘Seek in the 
impersonal for the Eternal Man; and having sought him out, 
look inward; thou art Buddha.’ Reality can be perceived only 
in the silence of the undistracted mind where no flow of 
jarring thoughts and ideas can cloud it from view; we must 
set aside all confusion and take a look round to see where 


81 
Part Two 


we are, just as a mountaineer pauses in his climb to see where 
he stands; as he ascends he gets further and further from 
the lowlands of Desire until at last he reaches the peak and 
looks up into the boundless blue of Eternity; below he can 
see the earth laid open as a map and he understands it— 
how trivial and unimportant were all his fears and wor- 
ries!—while above is the radiance of Nirvana, and gazing 
up into its awful infinitude he loses himself in the Eternal. 


But the calm and disinterestedness required of Budd- 
hists does not involve cold indifference to the sufferings of 
others; rather it means that we should not allow our minds 
to be influenced by circumstances and that we should be 
no ‘‘respecters of persons.’’ Lafcadio Hearn, gazing up at the 
smiling faces of Buddha-figures, used to hear them say: ‘‘I 
have the same feeling for the high as for the low, for the 
moral as for the immoral, for the virtuous as for the 
depraved, for those holding sectarian views and false opin- 
ions as for those whose beliefs are good and true, —the feel- 
ing of infinite compassion and understanding. At Kamakura 
in Japan there is a gigantic figure of the Buddha Maitreya 
sitting wrapt in contemplation among the ruins of a once 
magnificent temple. And there the Daibutsu (Great Buddha) 
has sat, tranquil and alone, ever since storms and earthquakes 
destroyed Minamoto Yoritomo’s splendid capital— 


‘Above the old songs turned to ashes and 
pain, 

Under which Death enshrouds the idols and 
trees with mist of sigh, 

(Where are Kamakura’s rising days and life 
of old?) 

With heart heightened to hush, the 
Daibutsu forever sits.”’ 


A veritable symbol of the Buddha-calm which remains 
undisturbed amid the turmoil and conflict of existence. You 
are bereft of all your worldly possessions? What is that to 


82 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


you—they were never yours. You have been buffeted and 
shaken by the storms of Life? Yet did your heart remain 
unmoved; all idea of self was set aside and you had no per- 
sonal feeling in the matter. You were not concerned as to 
whether events were good or ill, as to whether they affected 
you or another; you took them for what they were— 
universal law; you saw both the pleasant and the painful, 
the good and the evil, the self and the not-self without 
attachment, for your mind was smooth as a mirror, reflect- 
ing all but grasping nothing. 


THE BUDDHIST SCRIPTURES 
V. THE SUTRA OF WEI LANG 


From Buddhism in England 
July-August, 1933 
e 


The Sutra of Wei Lang has been called ‘‘the only sutra spo- 
ken by a native of China,’ for the designation ‘‘sutra’’ is, 
in every other case, applied only to the words of the Bud- 
dha or famous Bodhisattvas. Wei Lang, or (as usually and 
more correctly rendered) Hui Neng, was the thirty-third 
patriarch after Mahakasyapa, to whom the teaching of the 
Dhyana School was said to have been transmitted by the Bud- 
dha himself. This collection of his sayings is one of the most 
important texts of the Zen sect, which, although placing no 
reliance in the written word as a means of expressing Ulti- 
mate. Truth, yet recognizes the value of such a work as this 
as a guide to the beginner. 


The Zen (Dhyana) teaching was originally brought to 
China by Bodhidharma in 527 C.E., and though it has now 


83 
Part Two 


sunk into abeyance in that country, it still flourishes in Japan 
where it was introduced by Eisai and Dogen towards the 
end of the twelfth and the beginning of the thirteenth cen- 
turies. 

Wei Lang (638—713) lived in the T'ang Dynasty—the 
Golden Age of Chinese Buddhist culture—and while he was 
practising the doctrines of the ‘‘Sudden School’ in the 
South, Shang Siu was teaching the ‘‘Gradual School’’ in the 
North, but the former was the legitimate successor of Hwang 
Yan, the Fifth Patriarch in China, and much of the Sutra is 
taken up in explaining the differences between the two 
schools. Wei Lang spent most of his life teaching in the dis- 
trict of Tso Kai, using the Pao Lam Monastery as his centre, 
where he was accompanied by several hundred pupils under 
Vinaya Master Tung Yin, and all his sermons were collected 
together by one of his disciples—Tsung-pao—and this col- 
lection forms the Sutra, the full title of which is: Sutra Spo- 
ken on the High Seat of the Gem of the Law (Nanjio’s 
Catalogue No. 1525). 


The Sutra consists of ten chapters:—Autobiography, 
On Prajna, Questions and Answers, Samadhi and Prajna, 
Dhyana, On Repentance, Dialogues of the Patriarch, the Sud- 
den School and the Gradual School, Royal Patronage, and 
His Final Instructions. Selections from most of these are 
given at the end of this article. It would be quite impossi- 
ble for anyone to understand the teaching of this remarka- 
ble work at a single reading, unless prepared by a long course 
of meditation; it is one of those books like the Voice of the 
Silence, the Tao Teh King, and the Bhagavad Gita, which 
need constant study and thought. The Sutra of Wei Lang 
is essentially a work for the intuition; it cannot be under- 
stood by the application of logical and ratiocinative methods; 
the whole is one vast ‘‘koan’’ which must be read again and 
again until the mind is thoroughly saturated in it, and then 
perhaps one single sentence from it will bring to the reader's 
mind a flash of Truth, shedding its light on the whole book. 


84 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


It is to be regretted that there is as yet no translation of the 
Sutra which can conveniently be carried about in the pocket, 
for it is one of those works which one can study with great 
profit in spare moments—while in the train or waiting for 
an appointment—for it contains many paragraphs and sen- 
tences summing up the essence of the Zen teaching: 


Dbyana means, to be free from attachment 
to all outer objects, and samadhi means to attain 
inner peace. If we are attached to outer objects, 
our inner mind will be perturbed. When we are 
free from attachment, the mind will be at peace. 
Essence of mind is intrinsically pure; the rea- 
son why we are perturbed is simply because we 
allow ourselves to be carried away by the cir- 
cumstances we are under. He who is able to 
keep his mind unperturbed, irrespective of cir- 
cumstances, has attained real samadhi. 


The fact that we are slaves to circumstance is the root 
of all our suffering, for it distorts our view of Life and clouds 
Reality with the illusion of ‘‘self’’ The idea of looking at 
Existence from anything but an ego-centric point of view 
is, to the mass of mankind, highly unfamiliar; we are used 
to judging events by the effects they have upon ourselves 
and we consider them good or evil simply because they 
affect our persons in such and such a way. But Buddhism 
wants us to learn another way of looking at Life—the imper- 
sonal way, which sees all things in terms of Reality and is 
not concerned with these phantasms of good and ill, joy 
and pain. By giving up the mind to supreme equanimity one 
is able to see things without attachment: one does not think 
of my self and your self, of my house and your house, but 
seeing all these things as aspects of Reality, selfishness and 
attachment are eliminated altogether. In other words: when 
everything, even ourselves, appears to us as just so—as per- 
fectly natural—we shall no longer have any cause for attach- 
ment. 


85 
Part Two 


Towards all things, good or bad, beautiful 
or ugly, our attitude should be the same—we 
Should treat all of them as void; and even 
in times of disputes and quarrels we should 
treat our intimates and enemies alike and 
never think of retaliation. In the exercise of 
our thinking faculty, let the past be dead. If 
we allow our thoughts, the past ones, the 
present and the future ones, to link up ina 
Series, we put ourselves under restraint. On the 
other hand, if we let our mind attach to 
nothing at all times and towards all things, 
we gain emancipation. For this reason we take 
“non-attachment’’ as our fundamental prin- 
ciple. 


The Zenshuist lives in the eternal; he has no regrets 
for the past and no fears for the future; he takes things as 
they come—dquietly and naturally—and remains unmoved. 
This is the great principle of economy of mind, of concen- 
trating on the affairs of the moment without worrying about 
other things. When asked what Zen was, Master Poh Chang 
replied: ‘‘Eat when you are hungry; sleep when you are tired. 
People do not simply eat at table, but think of hundreds of 
things; they do not simply sleep in bed, but think of thou- 
sands of things.’ Or, in words more familiar to the West: 
‘‘Be not anxious for the morrow . . . sufficient unto the day 
is the evil thereof.’ Do not worry about what is going to 
happen on another day while you are engaged in the affairs 
of this, otherwise you put yourself under restraint. 


The Wei Lang Sutra contains a certain amount of verse 
offering great opportunities for the poet translator: would 
that we had another Edwin Arnold to render it into English 
verse! Unfortunately, much of this poetry suffers from literal 
translation, although some fine passages may be found here 
and there. 


86 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


Unperturbably and passively he .practises 
no virtue. 

Self-possessed and dispassionate, he 
commits no sin. 

Calm and silent, he gives up seeing and 
hearing 

Even and straight, his mind abides 
nowhere. 


Or again: 


Buddha-seeds latent in our mind 

Upon the coming of the all-pervading rain 
will sprout. 

The ‘‘flower’’ of the doctrine having been 
intuitively gras ped, 

The fruit of Enlightenment one is bound to 
reap 


This time a somewhat curious passage: 


The Kingdom of Buddhism is in the world, 

Within which Enlightenment is to be 
sought. 

To seek Enlightenment by separating from 
this world 

Is as absurd as to search for a rabbit’s 
horn. 


Throughout the whole Sutra is emphasized the futil- 


ity of seeking Enlightenment from outside. Wisdom is some- 
thing that grows by experience; that comes as a result of 
putting principles into practice. It cannot be had for the ask- 
ing. If you travel to the ends of the earth you will not find 
it; if you invoke all the gods in heaven you will not be any 
nearer to it, for you will be as foolish as the man who cries 


out for water in the middle of a river. 


“The wisdom of the past, present, and future 


Buddhas, as well as the teaching of the twelve canons, are 


87 
Part Tivo 


immanent in our mind.’ 


We must be lamps unto ourselves and endeavour to 
learn by our own efforts without seeking the help of the 
supernatural, for, in the words of the Dhammpada: ‘‘Purity 
and impurity are personal concerns: no one can purify 
another.” 


The Three Bodies (Trikaya) are inherent in 
our essence of mind, 

By development of which, the four Prajnas 
are manifested. 

Thus, without shutting your eyes and ears 
to keep away from the external world 

You may reach Buddhahood directly. 

Now, I have made this plain to you; 

And if you believe it firmly, you will for- 
ever be free from delusions. 

Follow not those who seek Enlightenment 
from without: 

These people talk about Bodhi all the time 
(but they never find it). 

Bodhi is to be found within our own mind, 

And there is no necessity to look for mysti- 
cism from without. 


Yet there is no need to shut oneself away from the 
world, or to indulge in the type of meditation which induces 
deep trances and delusive states of auto-hypnosis. Enlight- 
enment is not to be found through quietism, through banish- 
ing all thoughts from the mind (for this only puts one on 
the level of an inanimate object), but through a certain atti- 
tude to life which can be preserved as well in the solitude 
of the mountains as in the hubbub of the market-place. 


*‘Whether you are in activity or under rest, abide your 
mind nowhere. Forget the discrimination between a sage and 
an ordinary man. Ignore the distinction between subject and 
object. Let the Essence of Mind and all phenomenal objects 


88 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


be in a state of Thusness. Then you will .be in samadhi all 
the time.” 


BUDDHISM 
IN THE MODERN WORLD 


From Buddhism in England 
Sept.—Oct., 1933 


Buddhism and Humour 


Introductory Remarks. 


The West does not understand that Buddhism is a living 
religion, and not a cult of interest only to students of ancient 
myths and exploded philosophies. Buddhism is not to be 
treated like a museum curiosity, as a relic of the Past, which 
has long outworn its days and has no value for the Present. 
For the religion of the Buddhas is not just ‘‘yet another 
‘ism’,’ not one of hundreds of other creeds, but almost the 
father of them all, for it is the greatest representative on earth 
of the age-old Wisdom Religion which was born with Man 
and will not die until that inconceivably far-off time when 
the Universe shall enter into its final Nirvana. So far from 
its having no value for the modern world, we of the pres- 
ent day will put ourselves in a perilous position if we turn 
a deaf ear to our ancient Teacher, and listen only to fanatics 
and humbugs whose empty talk so often passes for religion 
and morals. To-day there is such a hubbub of conflicting 
teachers and moralists that the world does not know which 
of their many plausible philosophies to believe, with the 
result that it is in danger of forsaking religion and morality 


89 
Part Tivo 


altogether or else of wasting itself away in an orgy of moral 
conflicts and religious strife. And if our new-fangled beliefs 
and opinions are leading us into such a chaos, is it not right 
that we should listen once again to the oldest of all the 
philosophies! and give it a fair chance by putting its precepts 
into practice? It is small wonder that we derive no benefit 
from our modern ‘‘isms’’ when we have never even tested 
our ancient Faith by applying it to life. There are many who 
say that Buddhism is a failure because it was unable to save 
the East from the pitiable plight it is in to-day; we would 
ask our critics to think again—which of the two is the fail- 
ure, Buddhism, or Man who failed to put it into practice? 
And, moreover, what about the present condition of the 
West? Christianity was not able to save it from the War, or 
from its slavery to the outward forms of civilization. There 
is nothing to be gained by running down Buddhism, or even 
Christianity for that matter, for the fault is our own, and 
if we have disobeyed our instructors, they are hardly to 
blame. 


The modern world has many bugbears—some of 
which it recognizes and calls ‘‘Problems,’’ and some of 
whose existence it is ignorant—but there are four which are 
probably the most formidable, and it is of these that I am 
going to treat in a few short articles on Buddhism in the 
Modern World. They are: Too little sense of humour, poli- 
tics, sex (one that is taken much too seriously), and war. 
These articles are written to provoke thought and discus- 
sion on subjects which at the present time must be of con- 
cern to every Buddhist. The opinions offered are only 
tentative, and though based on fundamental Buddhist prin- 


‘In speaking of Buddhism as the ‘‘oldest of all the philosopbies,”’ we do not refer 
to the specific system laid down by Gautama so much as to the immemorial Bod- 
hidharma said to have been preached by a long series of Buddbas stretching back 
into the remotest past. Wei Lang (Sutra of W.L., p. 7/) gives the Buddbas of the 
present Kalpa as follows: (i) Kakusundha, (ti) Konagamana, (iii) Kassapa, and 
(iv) Gautama. Buddbas are supposed to arise by reason of cyclic lau’ about erery' 
5,000 years.—Vide Blavatsky, Secret Doctrine (TPH. edn.) i. 73 


90 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


ciples, such as ‘‘the middle way,’ the universal attitude to 
life, overcoming evil with good, and the need for master- 
ing one’s own mind, I lay no claim to the authority of Bud- 
dhism for my suggested application of these principles. For 
my own part, I am quite prepared, if necessary, to alter my 
views. So I] trust I shall be forgiven if I seem over-dogmatic 
or over-critical on some points, but it will only be for the 
sake of emphasis. If I exaggerate and fail to be ‘‘sweetly 
reasonable,’ it will not be because I am incapable of seeing 
the opposite point of view, but because at all costs I wish 
to be clear. Buddhism is not a religion of compromise and 
indefinite opinions; its teaching is plain and straightforward, 
and it makes no attempt to serve up distasteful and bitter 
facts in a palatable and easily digested manner. As H.P. 
Blavatsky wrote in her introduction to The Secret Doctrine 
(quoting Montaigne): *‘‘Gentlemen, I have here made only 
a nosegay of culled flowers, and have brought nothing of 
my own but the string that ties them.’ Pull the ‘string’ to 
pieces and cut it up in shreds, if you will. As for the nose- 
gay of facts—you will never be able to make away with these. 
You can only ignore them, and no more.’ And so when my 
own personal prejudices creep into what follows, as inevita- 
bly they will, the fault will be mine, and you are welcome 
to take them with a big grain of salt. 


I, BUDDHISM AND THE NEED FOR 
A SENSE OF HUMOUR 


There is a regrettable tendency in the West to associ- 
ate Religion with long faces, intense seriousness, gloom and 
morbid restrictions, with the result that Religion has gener- 
ally got a bad name. One often hesitates to use the word 
‘‘religion’’ on account of the depressing significance it car- 
ries with it, whereas in reality this negative puritanism is 
one of Religion’s greatest enemies. This does not mean that 
true Religion is frivolous and imposes no restrictions what- 
ever on man’s lower nature, but rather it steers, as in Bud- 


ol 
Part Two 


dhism, a middle path between the extremes of ‘‘Grundy- 
ism’’ and what some modern thinkers are pleased to call 
‘‘self-expression’—in other words, obeying every impulse 
and doing just as one likes for fear of harbouring any ‘‘repres- 
sion complexes.” But particularly in England and America 
the puritan extreme has been so much over-emphasised that 
we are in danger of breaking away from Religion altogether 
for fear of further restrictions and more ‘‘Grundyism,’ 
which are actually the outcome of taking oneself much too 
seriously and of failing to recognize that there is a very close 
connection between Wisdom and Humour. 


Though Humour is a word with many shades of mean- 
ing, many of them having no reasonable connection with 
Wisdom, there is one particularly subtle form of humour 
which is, sad to say, one of the rarest virtues in life because 
it is the most difficult of all the arts and the greatest secret 
of the wise man. It is not just the knack of being comic, 
nor yet amere hilarious state of mind; it is neither making 
fun of the oddities of other people, nor the ability to indulge 
in pleasantries, for, although these require a certain amount 
of skill, they cannot be compared to the sublime but elu- 
sive art of the real philosopher of humour. Someone has wit- 
tily observed that a sense of humour is an acute sense of 
proportion, and it is doubtful whether any other definition 
has come nearer to the truth. And this is where Humour 
is closely connected with Religion and Wisdom. For the Puri- 
tan’s intense desire to be ‘‘saved’’ makes him take himself 
too seriously, with the result that he is willing to undergo 
a morbid asceticism, to submit to all manner of pains and 
penances, not because they are beneficial to mankind, but 
because they are said to be necessary for ‘‘salvation,’’ and 
in so doing he loses sight of the fact not only that he is foster- 
ing an intense self-righteousness, but that the salvation of 
his personal self is a matter of no importance whatever. 
While we consider ourselves to be so important that we are 
ready to send all the joy out of religion in order to be 


92 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


‘‘saved,’’ we can have no true sense of proportion. For what 
is this personal self but a mere link in a long chain of perso- 
nalities stretching from the eternal to the eternal? To be anx- 
ious for its everlasting salvation and immortality shows not 
only a thoroughly bad sense of proportion, but a poor sense 
of humour, because the first test of a humorist is that he 
should be able to laugh at himself, and he is unable to do 
this until he has in some measure stepped out of his own 
personality. When he realizes how wrapped up he was in 
that odd creature called himself, and what a “‘bee in his bon- 
net’’ he had about his own importance, his first reaction will 
surely be to laugh. 


Let us take an illustration—that of a man slipping on 
a banana-skin and falling down in the street. Everyone enjoys 
the joke but himself, who, unless he has a true sense of 
proportion, will be annoyed at the loss of his dignity. But 
under the same circumstances the humorist would be able 
to regard himself objectively and share in the amusement, 
for the whole art of humour is to be able to see life whole 
without distorting it by imagining oneself the thing of 
greatest consequence. For it is impossible to laugh at any- 
thing unless it is seen from outside, and when one laughs 
at oneself it is the first sign that he is able to look upon him- 
self from a more universal point of view, instead of being 
boxed-up in the small, cramping and humourless sphere of 
his own importance. 


And this is just where Buddhism comes in. ‘‘Self is 
an error, an illusion, a dream. Open your eyes and awake. 
See things as they are, and you will be comforted.” For if 
self is an illusion it is certainly not a thing to be taken seri- 
ously. On the one hand it is foolish to long for its salvation, 
and on the other it is foolish to be ‘‘terribly in earnest’ about 
conquering it, because in so doing one treats it as a definite 
and important reality. In both cases one fails to see self as 
it is—a mere speck in the whirl of Samsara. Buddhism 
teaches us to burst the bonds of personality and, looking 


93 
Part Two 


upon our own destiny with the equanimity of the Eternal, 
to rise above a purely personal attitude to life and to culti- 
vate the universal attitude. To do this we must be able to 
stand aside from the chaos of our thoughts and emotions, 
to cease to identify ourselves with them, and in so doing 
realize a true sense of proportion. ‘‘Foregoing self, the Uni- 
verse grows I.” 


If you walk down a crowded street and watch the faces 
of those that pass, you will notice that almost every face 
is set in an expression of intense and worried pre-occupation 
and you will realize that the world is full of people running 
round in small mental circles without fully understanding 
that there is an immense universe of things outside their own 
worries and concerns with which they have never come into 
contact. It is this ridiculous confinement which a Buddhist 
sense of humour will destroy, for it will teach us to laugh 
at the proud little thing which thought itself so great, at the 
comic bundle of worries which imagined itself the most 
important thing in the world—the self. For laughter is the 
best weapon we can use against evil, because, as the saying 
goes, ‘‘it bears no malice,’ To oppose evil with violence is 
only to stir it up all the more, and violence is a game that 
evil can play much better than we can; but laughter is dis- 
arming and baffling—not the harsh and cruel laughter of 
the man who takes a pleasure in vice—but the gentle, lov- 
ing laughter of the sage who knows what a small thing evil 
is when itis seen from outside. It is the laughter of Under- 
standing on seeing the confused condition of Ignorance, yet 
as Understanding proceeds from Ignorance no malice is born 
by it, for the sage does not laugh because he finds pleasure 
in our weaknesses, but because he wants to make us see the 
humorous side of them. 


The modern world has a great need of laughing at 
itself, at a time when people are starving because there is 
too much food, going naked because there are too many 
clothes, becoming irreligious because there are too many 


94 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


religions, holding peace conferences and manufacturing 
armaments, saying one thing and doing another—never was 
there a more paradoxical and ludicrous state of affairs. Yet 
it is the old story of Trishna—selfish craving—whirling 
round in its small vicious circle until finally it narrows down 
to the centre, which is Man, and grips him in a choking ring 
of suffering. We have built up a civilization which we are 
unable to control, and, instead of being masters of our cre- 
ations, our creations have become our masters. 


BUDDHISM 
IN THE MODERN WORLD 


From Buddhism in England 
Nov.-Dec., 1933 


II. Buddhism and Politics 


As the chief interest of Buddhism is with spiritual rather 
than with temporal things, no specifically political princi- 
ples are embodied in its teachings, and for this reason it must 
be made clear that no one has the right to express an 
‘authoritative’ opinion on the attitude of Buddhism towards 
this particular subject. Therefore, in writing this article I 
lay no claim to the authority of the Dhamma for my ideas 
on the problem of government. The teaching is there for 
us all, but as our interpretations of it are almost bound to 
differ, its particular applications are matters of individual 
responsibility, and no one is in a position to dictate another’s 
duty in the actual practice of Buddhism. This is especially 
true in the sphere of politics, for Buddhism inclines neither 
to Despotism nor Republicanism, Constitutionalism nor 


95 
Part Two 


Socialism, Fascism nor Communism, Idealism nor Individu- 
alism, and one may adhere to any of these schools of polit- 
ical thought without being in disaccord with the Buddha's 
teachings. The Buddha would probably have agreed with 
Pope when he wrote: 


For forms of government let fools contest, 
Whateer is best administered is best, 


for it is not so much the form of state-organization that is 
of importance as the spiritual condition of individuals, upon 
which the welfare of the community depends. It is a tru- 
ism that the perfect state can never be made by legislation 
alone, for statesmen are unable, however wise they may be, 
to change anything beyond the mere machinery of govern- 
ment, which is in itself no more than a dead system of no 
value without the intelligent support of the community. 


It would seem that there is a tendency in human nature 
always to begin at the wrong end in approaching sociologi- 
cal problems, and this is particularly noticeable at the pres- 
ent time, when it is frequently imagined that an efficiently 
organized state is the same thing as a perfect state. Indeed, 
the delusion that progress is somehow inseparable from 
labour-saving devices, up-to-date educational establishments, 
super-cinemas, wireless, five-year plans, aeroplanes, town- 
planning, world-conferences and skyscrapers is one of the 
most wide-spread and absurd delusions of the modern 
world. Less ridiculous, but equally absurd delusions, are 
those which confuse peace with disarmament and leagues 
of nations, national prosperity with the gold-standard and 
credit, sound government with youth-movements and 
extremist dictatorships, chaos with capitalism, religion with 
belief, or freedom with leisure. The machine, the organiza- 
tion, the outward form, has so fascinated man that he has 
put all his faith in it, and in imagining that it can provide 
the solution to all the world’s problems he fails to realize 
that he is in the lamentable position of the doctor who 


96 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


thought he could cure chickenpox by cutting off the spots. 
As Matthew Arnold wrote in Culture and Anarchy over sixty 
years ago:— 


Faith in machinery is our besetting danger; 
often in machinery most absurdly dispropor- 
tioned to the end which this machinery, if it 
is to do any good at all, isto serve, but always 
in machinery as if it had a value in and for 
itself, What is freedom but machinery?... 

What are railroads but machinery? What is 
wealth but machinery? What are, even, reli- 
gious organizations but machinery? Now 
almost every voice in England is accustomed 
to speak of these things as if they were precious 
ends in themselves, and therefore had some of 
the characters of perfection indisputably 
joined to them. 


The state, just as the human body, works from within 
outwards, and it should be obvious that if man wants to con- 
trol the world he must start by controlling his own mind. 
For man is supposed to be able to look after himself by vir- 
tue of his being a man and not a sheep—to be herded about 
in a senseless flock. But so long as he refuses to order his 
own life he must submit to the clumsy, inefficient and 
desperate system of being ordered about, interfered with and 
pestered by legions of policemen, tax-collectors, busy-bodies, 
censors, and other ‘‘caterpillars of the commonwealth.’”’ But 
these officials are employed in a vain attempt to manage a 
vast and complex civilization which refuses to look after 
itself because of the responsibility involved in so doing, and 
which is incapable of behaving honestly without being 
threatened with prisons, floggings, death-penalties and fines. 
Under such circumstances it is small wonder that our civili- 
zation has reached a critical condition which defeats the best 
statesmen and economists in the world. It should need no 


97 
Part Two 


more statement than the fact that two and two make four, 
that the world’s body cannot be healthy when its soul is 
sick; so vast and complicated has civilization become, and 
so negligible has its spiritual development been in propor- 
tion, that the task of government, even when aided by 
tremendous numbers of officials, verges on the impossible. 
Moreover, the power which science has given us over nature, 
the power which has given us fast travel, newspapers, tele- 
phones, hospitals and our high standard of living, is by no 
means equal to our fitness for using it, and where we have 
not abused this power by turning it to warfare and oppres- 
sion, we have become so attached to it that its loss would 
seem a universal calamity. So dependent are we upon it for 
controlling the world and for ordering our own lives that 
we are slowly losing the ability to do these things for our- 
selves, and instead of mastering our creations we have 
become their slaves. 


Buddhism is par excellence the religion of mastery, 
for in its teaching that man should not attach his mind to 
externals it demands a mental control undreamed of in these 
days of dependence upon machinery. It does not ask us to 
destroy our machines; it does not preach any ‘‘back-to- 
nature’ fanaticism; it merely asks that we shall rise superior 
to all machinery—to the machinery of personality, politics, 
science and religion. Our minds and bodies are engines to 
be employed for a purpose; the idea of self—the combina- 
tion of skandbas—is a useful tool; but they are not ends 
in themselves, any more than the pen in my hand is an end 
in itself, and we must not be carried away by them, or be 
victims of the egoism which arises through attachment to 
any means of creation and expression. Thus if Buddhism 
can only teach us to rise superior to mere organization and 
machinery, it will have done much to solve the political and 
economic problems of to-day. But have its principles any 
chance of acceptance? Professor Dicey writes in his Law and 
Opinion in England: 


98 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


Success in converting mankind to a new faith, 
whether religious, or economical, or political, 
depends but slightly on the strength of the 
reasoning by which the faith can be defended, 
or even on the enthusiasm of its adherents. A 
change of belief arises, in the main, from the 
occurrence of circumstances which induce the 
majority of the world to hear with favour the- 
ories which, at one time, men of common sense 
derided as absurdities or distrusted as 
paradoxes. 


We have seen that circumstances have now arisen 
which make the cultivation of individual perfection more 
necessary than ever, but Christianity does not emphasize the 
need for producing more than one Christ, it does not attempt 
to train men of high spirituality because it inherits the fatal 
Western belief that greatness is born and not made. Beyond 
an attempt to ‘‘imitate’’ Christ it does not go; to try to equal 
Him would be irreverent and impossible. For it has an unfor- 
tunate doctrine that Jesus was the embodiment of an unat- 
tainable perfection, and therefore the majority of Christians 
will always be content to worship Him and be His slaves. 
The Buddha did not lay himself open so much to deifica- 
tion; he emphasized the fact that he was an ordinary human 
being who had become Enlightened through his own efforts. 
His precepts are not laws for his subjects, and he was not, 
and has never been thought of, as a king jealous of rivalry. 
For in reality these two sages invited men, not to bow down 
and worship them, but to sit beside them, and to revere 
them, if at all, not as gods but as elder brothers. If we can 
train ourselves, not by slavish imitation, to acquire the 
spiritual greatness of those who have led the way in show- 
ing us what can be done—if only a few can do this—then 
we may look forward with hope. 


Is there any need to quote the famous passage on Sov- 


99 
Part Two 


ereignty in the Chammapada?— ‘Better than a sovereignty 
over the earth, better than the heaven-world, better than 
lordship over all the worlds, is the first step on the Path of 
Holiness.’ Or in the words of Jesus, ‘‘Seek ye first the King- 
dom of God and His righteousness, and all these things shall 
be added unto you.” Much is said and written about the con- 
trol which man has gained over Nature, but Nature is only 
allowing us ‘‘a breath, a little scene, to monarchize,’ and 
the time draws on for the reaction. We have tried to gain 
mastery by violence, by trying to bend Nature to our uses 
with all the external machinery of civilization. It is the story 
of Frankenstein over again—we have created an unnatural 
monster which is slowly overpowering us—while there is 
yet another course to be taken, the Way of the Buddhas, of 
which it is said, ‘‘Help Nature and work on with her, and 
Nature will acknowledge thee as one of her creators and 
make obeisance.’’ 


BUDDHISM 
IN THE MODERN WORLD 


From Buddhism in England 
Jan.-Feb., 1934 


III. Buddhism and Sex 


It is difficult to find a cause for our modern obsession with 
Sex, unless it be a reaction from a period when the subject 
was held to be taboo. Yet although it is right to give this ques- 
tion a reasonable amount of study and investigation, it is 
given a prominence to-day which is out of all proportion 
to its importance. Almost every novel and film has a ‘‘sex- 


100 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


interest,’ a large number of books are published every year 
dealing exclusively with it, societies are formed to discuss 
it and even a school of psychology has been invented which 
finds in Sex the whole basis of our mental and physical life. 
But perhaps one of the most interesting features of the mod- 
ern attitude to Sex is the tendency to regard the sexual act 
and the phenomena connected with it as ends in themselves 
distinct from the ultimate outcome of the act, which is 
Reproduction. The ancient Greeks adopted a similar attitude, 
but for the most part human society has seen in reproduc- 
tion the only sanction for the existence of Sex, and has 
regarded sexual intercourse between man and woman as 
definitely immoral unless performed with a view to procre- 
ation. But so great an authority as Havelock Ellis finds in 
the actual sex-life of a man and his wife, and in the erotic 
phenomena which it involves, the basis of so much that is 
beautiful and noble in human life that this modern tendency 
would seem in some measure to be justified. But the ques- 
tion still remains as to what position Sex should hold in our 
lives, as to whether we should consider it more in its rela- 
tion to Love than to procreation, whether it is fundamen- 
tally material or spiritual, and lastly whether the highest 
form of man should marry or be a celibate. 


Probably the first question that will come to our minds 
is, ‘‘What is Sex?’’ To this Professor Crew replies in his 
Introduction to the Study of Sex: ‘*The layman may perhaps 
find an answer, but no biologist has yet given a sufficiently 
comprehensive and satisfactory reply. We do not know what 
sex is. Biology has not yet reached that stage of its develop- 
ment when it can describe the objects of its searchings.”’ It 
is not necessarily the union of two opposite forms of a simi- 
lar species to produce offspring, because there are forms 
of life which combine the two sexes in one individual, it 
is not solely an appetite, because it is to a great extent crea- 
tive; it is not the creative force of the Universe (although 
it may be a manifestation of it), because that force operates 


101 
Part Two 


in many ways that have no connection with the phenomena 
we associate with Sex. But for practical purposes we may 
be content to define it as the relationship between man and 
woman which has two aspects—the erotic and the 
procreative—and taking thus a Buddhist middle path we may 
proceed to an examination of other aspects of the subject. 


A far more important question for our consideration 
than the actual nature of Sex is the position which it should 
hold in our lives and the moral attitude which we should 
adopt towards it. It is generally agreed nowadays that to 
regard it as something definitely taboo and rather disgust- 
ing is a harmful attitude, because in repressing a normal 
manifestation of sex-energy it diverts it into undesirable 
channels often with disastrous results. Moreover there is no 
moral reason why we should be ashamed of a perfectly nat- 
ural act which is in no way insanitary or aesthetically offen- 
sive, why we should show signs of undue nervousness when 
it is discussed or even why we should consider it as some- 
thing too sacred to mention. And on the other hand it is 
highly undesirable to make an obsession of it, to think and 
talk of little else, to introduce it into all amusements and 
to take every opportunity of bringing it into prominence. 
This is equivalent to mere gluttony in eating, and signifies 
an utterly unbalanced mind when there are so many other 
things of interest in the world. For Buddhists there is again 
the middle path between prudery and obsession. Yet the idea 
of sexual taboo is certainly not a mere mental perversion 
which arises in an over-Puritanical age; it seems to be almost 
a fundamental instinct in human nature and is generally more 
developed in women than with men: Perhaps if we turn 
to the Eastern Wisdom we may find the real cause of taboo, 
in a theory which is not accepted in the West, but which 


'See Havelock Ellis, Man and Woman, p. 234, et seq. 


102 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


may yet prove to be one of the most interesting facts of 
biology.’ 

Before going on to consider the Eastern teachings on 
the origin and eventual destiny of Sex as we understand it, 
it must be remembered that the Buddha quite definitely for- 
bade all forms of sexual intercourse for those who took the 
bhikkhu’s vows and decided to devote their whole lives to 
treading the Path. “‘If the woman be old, regard her as your 
mother, if young, as your sister, if very young, as your child. 
The shramana who looks at a woman as a woman, or 
touches her as a woman has broken his vow and is no longer 
a disciple of the Shakyamuni.” The concentration required 
for treading the higher stages of the Path must not be 
divided; the whole mental force must be directed to the one 
end, and Sex is too strong a distraction to be allowed to exist 
alongside with the strenuous effort for self-purification 
which the attainment of Bodhisattvahood involves. So great 
is the purity required of the aspirant that at a certain stage 
he must not even touch other human beings and even cer- 
tain plants and animals. A certain Thibetan book dealing with 
this highly advanced religious training says, ‘‘A disciple has 
to dread external living influence alone (magnetic emana- 
tions from living creatures). For this reason, while at one 
with all, in his ¢2ner nature, he must take care to separate 
his outer (external) body from every foreign influence; none 
must drink out of, or eat in his cup but himself. He must 
avoid bodily contact (i.e. being touched or touch) with 
human, as with animal being.’’ Of course it will be raised 
in objection to this system that it destroys one of the most 
beautiful and vital aspects of human life—namely the love 
of man for woman—because in taking Sex out of the men- 
tal make-up of the perfect man one condemns it as a thing 


2See below on the division of the sexes. Several schools of Eastern philosophy bold 
that the earlier prototypes of man were dual-sexed, and it may be that the sense 
of shame ts partly due to an instinctive attempt to cover up Our present incom- 
pleteness. This. bowever, is only a tentative theory. 


103 
Part Two 


of no ultimate value. But it is mistaken to think of this purifi- 
cation as a suppression of Sex, for it is really a sublimation 
of Sex, the transmutation of this powerful energy from the 
physical to the spiritual plane and of individual to univer- 
sal love. Bodily contact with other beings gives way to 
spiritual union—the sage seems to hold aloof from others 
but is really in close harmony with all that lives, while the 
sensualist, though seeming to be in contact with others, is 
actually separated from them. It is a simple turning of the 
balance. 


The same idea is to be found in Yoga. The vital force 
(Kundalint) is raised from the sacral plexus (Muladhara), 
which is the sexual nerve-centre, and passed up the spinal 
canal (Susbumna) into the brain where it manifests its activi- 
ties on the highest plane of spirituality. Mahayana Buddhism 
hints at the same process—the sublimation of Sex from the 
physical to the spiritual—in its teachings on the Heavens of 
Desire.3 The higher the plane of existence the more spiritu- 
alized does sexual activity become; in the first heaven (Shi- 
Tenno-Ten) marriage is similar to marriage on earth, while 
in the second (Sanjiu-san-Ten) procreation is effected by a 
simple embrace and in the third (Emma-Ten) by the gentlest 
touch. So sublimated does the process become that in the 
sixth (Take-jizai-Ten) a new being may be produced simply 
by the power of thought. And in the meantime the love of 
man for woman, which indeed is beautiful, has become 
transformed into something so much more beautiful that it 
defies all power of description. 


But for ordinary beings such as ourselves, who have 
not yet attained such heights of perfection, some of the con- 
ceptions of Bhakti-Yoga will prove more interesting and use- 
ful. I refer to systems outside those outlined in the PaliCanon 
because most Buddhists will probably agree that the Bud- 
dha (from a modern point of view) did not deal adequately 


3See Lafcadio Hearn, Gleanings in Buddha-Fields, p. 208, 1927 edn. 


104 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


with the subject of Sex. Most primitive peoples give their 
children a far more thorough education in the subject than 
is given to-day, and it may be that for this reason the Bud- 
dha refrained from giving as detailed a treatment of the mat- 
ter as we should like.‘ But in Mr. Claude Bragdon’s recent 
book, An Introduction to Yoga (a book remarkable for its 
sanity and its avoidance of the dangerous aspects of the sys- 
tem), the reader will find much valuable information on the 
Yoga attitude to the relationship between man and woman. 
It is suggested that in every male there is a certain half- 
developed female element, and this incompleteness causes 
him to seek rectification by union with woman, and vice 
versa. This attainment of inner balance, this completion of 
the partly formed element, is held to be one of the stages 
on the Path, to be achieved by real and vital love for a mem- 
ber of the opposite sex. When the man has completed his 
feminine and the woman her masculine aspect the neces- 
sity for this type of love no longer exists and both are pre- 
pared for higher stages of the Path, and they will be born 
into conditions where the sublimation of Sex is compara- 
tively easy and harmless, having learnt the lesson which ter- 
restrial love has to teach them. This teaching is probably 
rooted in the belief common in many parts of the world that 
our distant ancestors were dual-sexed—an idea which may 
contain much esoteric truthS—and that at some far off date 
the sexes are destined to unite once again. In the words of 
Aristophanes, “‘After the division the two parts of man, each 
desiring his other half, came together, and throwing their 
arms about one another, entwined in mutual embraces, long- 
ing to grow into one; they were on the point of dying from 
hunger and self-neglect, because they did not like to do any- 
thing apart... Human nature was originally one and we 


‘See Ernest Crawley's Mystic Rose, and Seabrook's Jungle Ways. 
‘see Blavatsky's Secret Doctrine. 


105 
Part Tivo 


were a whole, and the desire and pursuit of the whole is 
called love.’’® 


In the East there has never existed a ‘‘Sex Problem”’ 
on the scale in which it exists in the West, and it is mostly 
for this reason that it has not been dealt with as fully as we 
might wish by the Eastern philosophers. Our puritanism has 
made us look upon Sex as something infinitely more seri- 
ous than our other natural functions; it has been regarded 
as something essentially ugly, as something pertaining exclu- 
sively to man’s lower nature. But in the East, though there 
too there are prostitutes and sexual excesses, man’s desire 
for a woman’s embraces is not looked upon as an evil. 
Courtesans exist just as caterers exist, and the Eastern courte- 
san is infinitely superior to the Western harlot because she 
is not a despised outcast, not a dealer in sin associating with 
those who imagine that they are doing something evil, but 
a person with a certain artistic charm. We do not feel 
ashamed of ourselves when we delight our senses with a 
beautiful picture; why should we feel ashamed when we 
delight them with a beautiful woman? The only evil in Sex 
comes through excess (as in eating or listening to music), 
but in the West we make an additional evil by an irrational 
and inconsistent condemnation of its pleasures. 


From Plato’s Symposium. 


106 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


BUDDHISM 
IN THE MODERN WORLD 


From Buddhism in England 
March-April, 1934 


IV. Buddhism and War 


Looking through some back numbers of Buddhism in 
England | found on pp. 21, 44 and 67 of Vol. VI, some 
interesting correspondence on the subject of Buddhism and 
War aroused by a paragraph in Prof. Suzuki’s Outlines of 
Mabayana Buddhism which reads: ‘‘The first Precept, for 
instance, forbids the killing of any living being, but the Bod- 
hisattva will not hesitate to go to war if he considers the 
cause he espouses is right and will ultimately be beneficial 
to humanity at large”’ This masterpiece of casuistry was 
replied to in a letter from ‘‘G.HLY.,’” provoking an answer 
from ‘‘Haereticus’’ who took up a position which seems to 
be popular among a large number of Buddhists—namely that 
in time of peace one should do all in one’s power to pro- 
mote peace-movements, but when faced with War it would 
be quite possible to fight in a just cause and still remain a 
Buddhist. Before I go any further with this interesting sub- 
ject I must make it quite clear again as in the article on Bud- 
dbism and Politics that I do not write with the authority 
of Buddhism as a whole behind me. The fundamental ideas 
expressed may be absolutely Buddhist, but ‘‘the string that 
ties them,’ my own application of them to modern prob- 
lems, my own reasoning, is not necessarily Buddhist, 
although I shall attempt to show that it is quite in accord 
with the spirit of the Dhamma. Buddhism does not, as 


107 
Part Two 


Haereticus points out, compel its adherents to accept any 
particular dogma. 


I fully realize that it is almost impossible to deal ade- 
quately with so controversial a subject as this in one short 
article, but in the hope of provoking further thought and 
discussion I shall try to lay down a few reasons why no true 
Buddhist should adopt the casuistical course of going to war 
“for the good of humanity,’ but why everyone who has the 
interests of his fellow men at heart should refrain from fight- 
ing under all circumstances. The usual pacifist arguments 
will not be used; they are hardly Buddhist arguments since 
their aim is either to produce a violent anti-war fanaticism 
by filling men with terror at the prospect of warfare aided 
by the latest scientific discoveries—in other words by pan- 
dering to the instinct of fear—or else by attacking patriotism, 
which is a merely negative argument, having no weight 
beside the contention that a man should work and fight for 
his own family or friends—a contention which is at least 
positive and human. To aim at instilling mankind with a vio- 
lent fear of war is to run a great risk of producing hysteria. 
If on the eve of a future war people were suddenly made 
to realize the horrors of a gas-attack from the air, there would 
be a panic resulting from hysterical terror; it is only one step 
from hysteria to violence and the old fallacy of ‘‘a war to 
end war’ which contains about as much sense as a crime 
to end crime, a debauch to end debauchery or a hate to end 
hatred. Nor will the sentimental, ‘‘sob-stuff’’ pacifism so 
common to-day find much sympathy among Buddhists. The 
path to Peace is not a path of roses but a path of thorns which 
sentimentalists will find difficult to tread; it will be hard 
enough for those who are not sentimental, for true Pacifism 
is the path of realists, of men who understand how great 
is the price to be paid for Peace and who are prepared to 
pay it at all costs. 


Taking Pacifism to mean the refusal to take part in any 
war whether fought in a just or unjust cause, we find that 


108 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


there are three main arguments against it. Firstly, that human 
nature being what it is, war is almost inevitable for the time 
being, and until such time as humanity is prepared for Peace 
aman must fight for his country in a just cause to preserve 
the status quo; secondly, that all those who wish for Peace 
should be ready to go to war with any nation which attempts 
to upset the peace by an act of aggression; and thirdly, that 
it is the duty of every man to protect, if necessary by slaugh- 
ter, his family and his friends from the tyranny of an invader. 
This last argument is the only one that is really formidable, 
because it is based on what is to some extent a noble motive 
and because it is a human argument, while the other two 
are little more than bad reasoning. As a typical example of 
the first I shall take a passage from Haereticus’ letter: ‘‘The 
true soldier is one who prepares for war only that he may 
be in a position to keep the peace. But until the world as 
a whole is ready for universal peace, it is only one out of 
touch with the realities of life who says ‘there never is a right- 
eous reason for war.’’’ If such a one is out of touch with 
the realities of life, Haereticus is out of touch with the faculty 
of foresight. He is one of that multitude of ‘‘idealists’’ who 
speak vaguely of the time when the world shall be ready 
for universal peace, of the time when human nature shall 
have made a decided change for the better, without realiz- 
ing that these changes are not brought about merely by 
preaching love for humanity or by organizing ‘‘leagues of 
nations,’’ but by setting an example by desisting from war 
and other evils bere and now whatever the sacrifice 
required. For compromise in this matter is useless; we must 
not talk peace to the world and then go and fight someone 
who doesn’t agree and who thinks it would be a good idea 
to upset our ideals by force. To give any strength to our argu- 
ments our conduct must be consistent with them. It is futile 
to say to the world, ‘‘We stand for universal peace, and any- 
one who doesn’t agree with us will be punished by war- 
fare,’ because war can never be a punishment and for two 


109 
Part Two 


reasons: first, that history has shown that a defeated nation 
never considers its punishment just because it is always 
under the delusion that it went to war for a righteous cause; 
and second, that warfare can never be permanently checked 
by counter-warfare. And this brings us to the second argu- 
ment against Pacifism, namely that Peace must be preserved 
by fighting those who attempt to disturb it. 


If someone swears at you in the street, do you stop 
him by swearing back? If you have tried this way, you may 
have noticed that so far from stopping the swearing, the vol- 
ley of abuse increases and that each side tried to get the mas- 
tery by making the language louder and coarser. It is almost 
exactly the same with war. One nation attacks and the other 
resists, perhaps checking it for the moment by inventing 
superior tactics or armaments. But the aggressor soon finds 
even better tactics and armaments, and so the competition 
continues until warfare becomes an orgy of destruction 
bringing ruin to both sides, and ceases to be in any way 
chivalrous or sportsman-like. Now let us suppose that one 
party refuses to fight, and not only refuses to fight but 
decides to meet the torrent of hatred with the only thing 
that can possibly overcome it—namely love. Supposing the 
aggressor is met with this challenge: ‘‘Come on, shoot me. 
It’s quite easy, and there’s nothing to be proud of because 
I'm not going to stop you. You won’t be able to boast to 
the world that you fought valiantly in a just cause and the 
war will bring you no glory. You can do your worst—enslave 
my men, rape my women and massacre my children. But 
you will only make a fool of yourself, gain a bad reputation 
and behave like the coward that you are!’ That nation would 
probably have to make terrible sacrifices, but its example 
would be a far greater victory for Peace than a humiliation 
of the enemy by armed resistance—that is, if humanity is 
susceptible to such an example. Yet even if this rebuke found 
no sympathetic response from the rest of the world it would 
not have been made in vain, for the slaughtered people 


HO 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


would come back to earth in the cycle -of rebirth to make 
that sacrifice again and again until humanity took their exam- 
ple to heart and followed it. But killing solves nothing. You 
may slay the bodies of evil men but their karma you cannot 
slay; you can only show them how to slay it for themselves. 
If you wipe out the offending nation with machine-guns and 
gas-bombs, that nation will return to earth with its karma 
unfulfilled and increased in intensity by resistance. It is like 
cutting back a hedge; the more you cut the harder it grows. 
And what a karma of war we have now inherited because 
we did not return love for hatred long ago! It is a law of 
mechanics that no force can be checked unless it comes into 
contact with another force acting in the opposite direction; 
armed opposition is not the opposite force to armed 
aggression—it is a kindred force—and the Buddha explained 
this over two thousand years ago when he said, ‘‘Hatred 
ceases not by hatred alone; hatred ceases but by love.’ 


And so we come to the final argument against 
Pacifism—the defence of innocent women and children. To 
call them innocent is to beg the question. If a man slays 
someone who attacks his wife, she is not innocent of that 
deed if she willingly saw him killed and made no attempt 
to stay her husband’s hand. And however much we may dis- 
like to admit it, the children too share in that guilt through 
evil karma created in past lives, which caused them to be 
born into such circumstances. So are we all just to sit down 
and be killed? It is not a matter of ‘‘just sitting down and 
being killed’’; it is not what we appear to do that counts, 
but what we think. If we ‘“‘turn the other cheek’’ to the 
enemy with thoughts of hatred in our minds we are no fur- 
ther than before; but if it is with thoughts of love our action 
is given an entirely different value. The Westerner will ask, 
“And what good can mere thoughts do?’’ The Buddhist 
knows that thoughts are the most powerful forces in the 
world, and that they count for far more than deeds, for ‘‘all 
that we are is the result of what we have thought; it is 


1 
Part Two 


founded on our thoughts; it is made up of our thoughts.”’ 
But let us make our actions consistent with them, and above 
all let us not be led into the delusion that our actions do 
not matter at all. 


Yet I do not imagine that these things can be brought 
about at once; a whole nation will not suddenly sacrifice 
itself in this manner, for such changes are only brought about 
by degrees and it remains for a few individuals to ‘‘set the 
ball rolling’ not only by preaching against evil, by starting 
movements against it, or by setting up high ideals—all these 
things must be done and we must not forget them in our 
enthusiasm for another aspect of the struggle—but in addi- 
tion we must deal with these evils here and now by daz- 
zling them with good, by returning love for hatred and not 
be content to wait until this can be done with safety. Safety 
is not offered, nor even success for those who would start 
out upon this adventure, but only suffering, frustration, 
scorn and abuse. It is a burden to be borne without thanks 
or reward, and strange to say, no one in the world can 
explain to those who have not shouldered the burden for 
themselves why it is at all worth bearing. Let him take it 
up who dares. 


However, Pacifism—in the sense of refusal to take part 
in warfare—is not by itself a solution to the problem. Indeed 
I may perhaps be guilty along with the vast majority of 
pacifists of giving it too much emphasis. For it must always 
be remembered that the principle which lies behind it— 
that of overcoming hatred with love—is of primary impor- 
tance, and we must not lose sight of the fact that Pacifism 
is not only a course of action to be adopted at the outbreak 
of war, but a constructive movement to build up Peace and 
to see that Peace is not regarded as an end in itself, but as 
a means to a more fruitful life. 


In Conclusion 


And so we come to the end of what has, of course, 


112 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


been a totally inadequate survey of but four of the great prob- 
lems which confront the world at the present day. But the 
articles were not intended as an exhaustive treatment of 
these vast subjects, nor even to provide solutions for the 
questions raised. As stated at the outset, their aim was to 
arouse further discussion and treatment of themes which 
modern Buddhists have been rather inclined to overlook in 
their zeal for studying Buddhist history and literature, and 
I trust they will move more capable writers with a wider 
experience of these matters than myself to make a special 
effort to show that Buddhism and the Wisdom of the East 
as a whole is not a dead system of doctrine or a philosophy 
for dreamers, but a living force which has a definite mes- 
sage for the modern world. Perhaps Buddhists who have 
expert knowledge in these various subjects will lend a help- 
ing hand, but at all costs we must prove the Dhamma to be 
a thing of the present and the future as well as of the past, 
by studying, discussing and writing on the problems of to- 
day from the Buddhist point of view. And finally (of course 
we have all heard this before) we must prove the value of 
Buddhism by living it. It is not sufficient to refrain from eat- 
ing meat, killing animals and fighting inwars or to make 
much ado about all the external behaviour of the Buddhist. 
The Buddha did not point out a Way for cranks, for those 
who are obsessed with virtues of secondary importance; he 
emphasized the fact that our first concern must be with our 
thoughts, and that it is far more important to be virtuous 
in the mind than to be anxious to show off our virtues in 
action. As is said in the 7ao-teh-King, ‘‘The highest Grace 
makes no pose of Grace, and for this reason really is Grace; 
whilst the lower quality of Grace may never divest itself of 
Grace, and yet never feels like true Grace.’’! It will be said 
that all this is so many platitudes, it is always being said and 
has been said much too often. I have often thought that 


'Tao-teh-King. Trans. Prof. Parker, p. 24. 


113 
Part Tivo 


‘‘platitude’”’ is a name given to an inconvenient truth in order 
to make it appear futile. If these old sayings seem trite and 
uninteresting it is probably because we have only accepted 
them as catch-phrases and have never troubled to see how 
much they involve. One is bound to tire of the mere repeti- 
tion of a truth simply because it is a string of words and 
little more; but only those who listen to these old sayings 
without thinking about them or putting them into practice 
will call them platitudes; they appear to be obvious and 
almost naive, but therein is their profundity, for the fool is 
too proud to examine simple things. 


I can think of no better conclusion for this series of 
articles than to quote a passage from Professor Radhakrish- 
nan’s Kalki which seems to sum up all that I have tried to 
say. He writes:— 


Man is neither the slave of circumstance nor 
the blind sport of the gods. The impulse to per- 
fection working in the universe has become 
self-conscious in him. Progress happened in the 
sub-hbuman world: it is willed in the human. 
Conscious purpose takes the place of uncon- 
scious variations. Man alone has the unrest 
consequent on the conflict between what he is 
and what he can be. He is distinguished from 
other creatures by his seeking after a rule of 
life, a principle of progress. It is by transform- 
ing ourselves that we shall be able to transform 
the world. The soul of all improvement, it bas 
been rightly said, is the improvement of the 
soul. 


Yet while we strive in this present time to make of 
ourselves fit instruments for the service of Man, it will be 
well for us to ‘‘consider the Tao of Old in order to arrange 
the affairs of Now.’ 


114 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


IS BUDDHISM SERIOUS? 


From Buddbism in England 
Sept.-Oct., 1935 


You may have noticed that those who talk most about their 
internal organisms are those who suffer from indigestion. 
In the best society this is ‘‘not done,’’ not because they feel 
that it is an indignity to possess anything so degrading as 
a stomach, but because they have better things to talk about. 
A glance at the daily papers is sufficient to show that soci- 
ety is unusually pre-occupied with its internal organism, for 
the most important columns are concerned entirely with 
the troubles of its economic stomach and the palpitations 
of its political heart. In fact the papers read so much like 
a gastronomic journal that I look forward to the day when 
it will be just as ‘‘not done’ to mention economics in polite 
society as it is to talk of one’s digestive mechanism in a 
drawing-room. Yet the obvious indigestion of society is 
rooted in the deeper indigestion of the individuals who make 
up the body politic. It is revealed in the individual’s obses- 
sion with his “‘ego.”’ For the distinction between ‘‘I’’ and 
“‘Life’’ can only arise when there is disharmony between 
the two, for if the ‘‘I’’ were in harmony with life we should 
no more be conscious of its existence than we are conscious 
of our internal organs when they are functioning in order. 
In the same way, if you would listen to music or read a book 
you must not allow the concept of yourself listening or read- 
ing to occupy the mind while it should be engaged on the 
music and the book. 


Now there is something comic about people who talk 
incessantly about their indigestion, for their disorder has 


115 
Part Two 


produced the illusion that the stomach is the most impor- 
tant thing in life, and it is incongruities of this kind which 
lie at the root of the comic. Little things are funny when 
they pretend to be big, and vice versa, and nowhere is there 
a more important instance of this than in the behaviour of 
the ego, which puffs itself up with the conceit that it is eter- 
nal and that it is the centre of the whole universe. Investi- 
gation will show that all religions which are concerned with 
the eternal salvation of this ego are grave and serious, since 
they are unable to teach men how to make light of them- 
selves, when it is believed that a man’s ultimate safety is the 
most important thing in life. 


Buddhism is par excellence the religion of seeing the 
joke about the ego, because it can see the comic side of this 
small illusion pretending to be a great reality. For Buddhism 
has a view of life which is based upon an acute sense of 
proportion, and to the extent that this is another name for 
a sense of humour Buddhism is by no means a serious relig- 
ion. Right from the start it dethrones the ego from its dig- 
nity by saying that it does not exist. It views the world from 
the intuitive mind which blends “‘I’’ and ‘‘Life’’ into a sin- 
gle harmony, while the ‘‘discriminative’’ mind cuts it up into 
intricate discords. As is said in the Lankavatara Sutra, ‘‘The 
discriminating mind is a dancer and a magician with the 
objective world as his stage. Intuitive mind is the wise jester 
who travels with the magician and reflects upon his empti- 
ness and transiency.”’ 


116 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


THE GENIUS OF CHINA 


Notes on the International Exhibition of 
Chinese Art 


From Buddhism in England 
Jan.-Feb., 1936 


At first you see only the top of its head, but as you go fur- 
ther up the steps into the exhibition galleries at Burlington 
House, the whole figure comes into view. It is a towering 
statue of the Buddha Maitreya (2360)* standing in the cen- 
tral gallery and looking down upon all who come into this 
treasure house of 3,000 years of Chinese Art. The head of 
this figure reaches almost to the roof and its weight must 
be immense because it is carved out of solid marble. But 
such was the genius of the sculptor that it appears to be light 
enough to stand on clouds, and the long slender body is 
so perfectly poised on its lotus pedestal that it looks as if 
it would rise at any moment into the ‘‘middle air’’ And from 
a height of nearly twenty feet one is gazed upon and 
refreshed by a face which tells of the peace past all under- 
standing. 


Is this just sentimental unreality? Certainly it is if one 
does not remember that this peace is only attained after 
tremendous struggle. Walk up to this figure and turn right 
into the Lecture Room where the Buddhist sculpture is dis- 
played. Here is a coloured pottery image of a Lohan (2438), 
similar in style to the one in the British Museum. He is look- 
ing slightly to one side, and if you stand so that you can see 


* Catalogue numbers are given in brackets. 


117 
Part Two 


straight into his eyes you will see not only peace and com- 
passion but profound insight and a vast reserve of power. 
If the figure were not so large it might easily be mistaken 
for a living man in a dim light, so natural is the position 
and so exquisite the workmanship. Yet this exhibition does 
not contain only things that are peaceful and quiet. At the 
far end of this room is a cast-iron figure of a temple guard- 
ian (2394). It is so rough that the artist has not even trou- 
bled to remove the marks left by the mould in which it was 
cast, but this only adds to its elemental strength. The face 
is almost negroid, the muscles are over-developed and one 
fist, grasping a loop of rope, is clenched against its huge 
chest. It is the absolute personification of force. 


Now pass into the next room and look to your right. 
High up in the near corner you will see a curious gilded 
image of the Buddha (640) with his chin resting on his hands, 
which are clasped over one knee. Nobody seems to pay very 
much attention to him, and while they are busy with all the 
other objects shown below him, he looks down on their 
heads with a huge grin. The person who arranged this exhi- 
bition (it was Mr. Leigh Ashton) must have a most pleasing 
sense of humour. 


Passing out of this room to the left we come to the 
first gallery of the Sung Dynasty. There are four galleries 
devoted to this Dynasty, and to appreciate them properly 
would require several days in each. Therefore I can only 
mention three or four of the astonishing collection of paint- 
ings produced by the artists of this Golden Age of Chinese 
Culture when Zen Buddhism was at its zenith. Firstly 
(although this is of later date than the Sung period) there 
is Ku An’s picture of ‘‘Bamboos and Rocks’’ (1130). This is 
so beautiful that I hesitate to say anything about it. Yet at 
the same time it has none of that cold beauty which is found 
in Western masterpieces. That is to say it is not so absolutely 
perfect and complete that there is no scope for the 
beholder’s imagination, for the particular genius of the Chi- 


118 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


nese painters was their power of suggestion. With a religious 
background of Taoism and Zen they held that the absolutely 
perfect was the same as the absolutely dead, for it was no 
longer capable of growth and development. Therefore the 
function of the artist is not to create a picture which is com- 
plete and finished in itself, but to suggest something which 
will rouse the beholder’s imagination and so initiate a liv- 
ing process. The picture does not end with the artist. With 
a few lightning strokes of his brush, without stopping to 
correct, delete or overpaint, and with a vital spontaneity 
he transfers the unceasing and elusive movement of Life, the 
Tao, to paper or silk. That movement goes on in the 
beholder’s mind where it leaves off in the picture, and the 
result is that the picture invites you to come and take part 
in its own life. It does not exclude you, making you a mere 
admirer, by being so complete that there is nothing left for 
you to do but to whisper, ‘‘How marvelous!”’ 


Thus, ‘‘Bamboos and Rocks’’ suggests a fierce blast 
of wind, sweeping through the leaves and scattering the 
mist. Then there is a long scroll by Ma Fen— ‘The Hundred 
Geese’ (1387)—which is carried out in the same spirit of 
suggestiveness. I cannot imagine a more satisfying picture 
of geese, and yet each one is executed with the greatest econ- 
omy of brush strokes; the pond over which they are flying 
is simply indicated by the presence of rushes and slight wavy 
lines where one or two geese swim and dive. Ma Yuan’s 
‘‘Boating by Moonlight’’ (1163) is again sublimely reticent, 
with the dim outline of a hill in the background and the 
frail boat resting on the mist-covered water. The moon is 
nowhere to be seen, yet it is undoubtedly there. You should 
also be careful to look out Mu Chi’s ‘‘Two Sparrows on a 
Bamboo Branch’’ (1117), Hsia Ch’ang’s ‘‘Bamboos Seen 
Through a Window” (1371), Ma Yuan’s ‘‘Gazing at the 
Moon’ (996), and Yen Hui’s ‘‘Indifferent to Cold and Snow”’ 
(1223). By this time you will have seen far too much for one 


119 
Part Two 


day,” although you must have a look at the ivory carving 
of the Taoist sage Hsu Yu (2943) in the Large South Room. 
He was so wise that the Emperor asked him to be Prime Min- 
ister, a request which he respectfully declined. When the 
imperial envoys had departed he was so afraid of the pollu- 
tion that might result from hearing such a message that he 
was careful to wash both his own ears and those of the ox 
on which he was riding. From the look on his face I should 
say he invented that story himself. At any rate, he’s certainly 
got some joke in his mind. 


* There are 3,080 exbibits 


120 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


PART THREE 


122 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


THE EDITOR 
WRITES ... 


PART THREE 


A wonderful year for the budding Alan Watts was 1936, and 
among the good things that fortune bestowed upon him then 
was the editorship of Buddhism in England. He was still 
only twenty-one but had a remarkable track record as a 
writer already, to cap which his first full-length book, The 
Spirit of Zen, had just been eagerly snapped up by John Mur- 
ray, the publishers, for their Wisdom of the East series. As 
for editorial skills, he had been developing those working 
both on Buddhism in England and on Mitrinovic’s The Elev- 
enth Hour, in addition, he had also been studying the typo- 
graphic techniques of the great Catholic artist-craftsman Eric 
Gill, whose enthusiasm for integrating sexuality and spiritu- 
ality may also have influenced him: In heralding Watts as 
the new Editor, Christmas Humphreys commented on his 
youth, but noted that, as he himself had only been twenty- 
three when he had founded the Buddhist Lodge, there was 
a precedent, ‘‘if not for like ability, at least for like 
enthusiasm.”’ He went on: 


As is to be expected, our new Editor is full of 
ideas for promoting the sales and importance 
of the Magazine, and we await with interest 
the opening number of volume eleven, which 
is timed for Wesak day. Valete, Mr. A. C. March. 
Salve, Mr. Watts. 


Among those whom Watts published in the journal 
during the next two years may be counted Dr. D. T. Suzuki, 
the man who arguably more than any other can be credited 
with first bringing knowledge of Zen Buddhism to the West; 
his American wife, Beatrice Lane Suzuki, whose special 
interest lay in Mahayana Buddhism in general; Christmas 
Humphreys; Sohaku Ogata, a Japanese who had been head 


125 
Part Three 


monk of a Zen Buddhist monastery in Kyoto and who for 
many years helped Western students of Zen in Japan; Clare 
Cameron (née Burke), basically a Christian, who neverthe- 
less worked and wrote enthusiastically for the journal and 
eventually took over the mantle of Editor when Watts finally 
departed for the United States; the great French mystic, 
Madame Alexandra David-Neel, who had travelled exten- 
sively in Tibet; Sir Francis Younghusband, in 1904 the leader 
of a British expeditionary force to Lhasa in Tibet, and later 
the founder of the World Congress of Faiths; G. Constant 
Lounsbery, an American lady Buddhist who founded Les 
Amis du Bouddbisme in Paris in 1929; Ronald Nicholson, 
one of Toby Humphreys’s contemporaries at Cambridge, 
who became sadbu Krishna Prem; Mrs. Caroline Rhys 
Davids, a pioneer Pali scholar; and a German refugee orien- 
talist and philosopher named Frederic Spiegelberg who in 
the 1950s was to invite Watts to join his American Academy 
of Asian Studies in San Francisco. Watts also published in 
part form a new translation of the Zao Te Ching by Ch’u 
Ta-kao, a Chinese who turned up at the Lodge. Nepotism 
crept in too: he published his own father, Laurence W. Watts, 
who had followed him into the Buddhist Lodge and who 
became its Hon. Treasurer. And of course he also published 
Alan Watts—and in quantity. The first issue that he edited, 
that for May/June 1936, in addition to an editorial, news and 
notes, carried a lengthy book review by Watts himself and 
two substantial articles. 


The assumption of the editorship was an auspicious 
moment for Watts to inaugurate a new series of articles in 
Buddhism in England, accordingly his first issue contained 
Part One of ‘‘On the Meaning of Symbols,” published under 
the pseudonym ‘‘Interpreter’’ In that and the subsequent 
three issues, he examined the symbols of the Lotus, Wind 
and Water, Fire, and Man, Woman and Child. When the series 
was later reissued as a pamphlet by the Buddhist Lodge, it 
was prefaced with the famous quotation from the second 


126 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


part of Goethe's Faust: 


Alles Vergdngliche 
Ist nur ein Gleichnis? 


The pamphlet was also dedicated to Richard Anthony 
Weeks, an old schoolfriend of Watts who had followed him 
into Buddhism. In his autobiography, Watts describes Weeks 
as ‘‘a still river, running at great depth,” and he recalls their 
pleasant strolls together in the Kent countryside or in the 
precincts of Canterbury Cathedral, when they discussed 
poetry, religion, philosophy—and magic, to which Weeks 
was particularly drawn. He later pursued this interest in ear- 
nest by joining a secret group in London, but got badly burnt 
when he woke up one night to find himself under the evil 
eye of a ‘‘Presence of unfathomable malice and horror.’ He 
promptly joined the Catholic Church, but when Watts met 
him many years later he had apparently got over the trauma 
and had transferred his loyalties to Sufism. 


‘‘On the Meaning of Symbols’’ represents the first 
major work by Watts that places primary focus on psychol- 
ogy, an area in which he was particularly interested from 
a young age. Indeed, the two main pillars of his life and work 
might be said to be Buddhism (especially Zen Buddhism) 
and psychology, and he made efforts to build bridges 
between the two, which he regarded as mutually com- 
plementary. By his own account, he had been reading the 
works of the great Swiss psychoanalyst, Carl Gustav Jung, 
while he was still at King’s school, and when he became 
a young brahmin-about-town in London, many of his men- 
tors and friends were either involved or interested in psy- 
chology. Dmitrije Mitrinovic, for instance, besides his other 
concerns, was studying the psychotherapeutic techniques 
of Alfred Adler and Trigant Burrow, and had evolved a primi- 
tive form of the encounter group. Watts participated in the 
sessions of one of these groups for some months, during 


127 
Part Three 


which ‘‘we resolutely destroyed and rebuilt each other’s per- 
sonalities.’’ Watts was also friendly with a ‘‘more-or-less Jun- 
gian’’ Dutch psychiatrist named Philip Metman, and with 
Eric Graham Howe, another psychiatrist with consulting 
rooms in London’s most prestigious medical enclave, Harley 
Street, and cosy living quarters in the mews behind.3 Watts 
was not on his roster of patients; Howe was just a ‘‘genial, 
dignified and reassuring doctor who let me in on his mind.” 
Howe wrote books: [ and Me and War Dance. Watts 
reviewed the latter in Buddhism in England, and his review 
identifies certain themes that can also be traced in ‘‘On the 
Meaning of Symbols;”’ 


The very existence of life depends on the exis- 
tence of opposites—joy and pain, living and 
dying, good and evil. The first form of aggres- 
siveness is to cling to one opposite and reject 
the other, to imagine that pain, death and evil 
are... ‘Bad Things’’ which must be crushed 
and eliminated with the greatest possible speed 
and thoroughness... . 


Dr: Howe's constructive theme is that we should 
learn, firstly, not to be so warlike towards the 
Devil—in other words to welcome and accept 
the dark side of life in the same way as the tree 
extends its roots into the dark earth.... 


There is also a ‘‘dark side’ in every human being: 


By ordinary moral standards this dark side 
includes much that is thought Bad, as for 
instance those uncontrollable impulses of fear, 
hatred and desire. Yet the author wisely points 
out that far worse than being afraid is the fear 
of being afraid, and the fear of the fear of 
being afraid. For this flight from fact involves 
us in what he terms “infinite regress,’’ an 


128 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


increasingly panic-stricken attempt to avoid 
the karma of our folly, to save ourselves from 
the salutary condition of accepting our guilt 
and imperfection. 


Watts’s essay on the meaning of the symbol of the 
lotus immediately raises the matter of duality, for the pris- 
tine flower that the eye beholds has its roots sunk deeply 
in the “‘primaeval slime.’’ So, too, our conscious life has a 
complementary unconscious that runs exceedingly deep. It 
embraces personal contents, plus racial and even cosmic ones 
as well. And just as the lotus needs its roots and draws 
nourishment from them, so too we must accept the entirety 
of the unconscious, including its apparently dark contents, 
for it is the wellspring of all that gives us life. All of which 
implies, of course, that it is foolish to strive after a kind of 
perfect but essentially disembodied spirituality cut off from 
the complementary earthly side of our natures. The truly 
transformative path is the path of wholeness: the one that 
integrates both the light and the dark sides, that puts each 
in right relation to the other. 


The essay on the meaning of the symbols of wind and 
water, on the other hand, stresses that life is process: always 
moving and essentially impermanent. The person who 
wishes for permanence, who yearns to possess any of the 
forms of life, will only succeed in killing the winged joy 
as it flies. The true sage is he who contemplates the dance 
of life and loves it for its ever-changing play of ephemeral 
forms. 


The third essay, on the symbol of fire, deals with pas- 
sion and desire—things that both give life and destroy it. 
Because of their destructive aspect, many fear them and seek 
to cut them out of their lives. This is as negative a response 
as it would be, say, to eschew the use of actual fire because 
of the possibility of getting one’s fingers burnt. Rather, the 
challenge is to learn how to use fire—and hence passion and 


129 
Part Three 


desire—correctly: to be masters of them and so allow their 
creative potentialities to flower. The ascetic path is for those 
who have become masters of passion and desire in this way, 
not for those who would run away from them in 
fear ...here again counsel for an integrated, holistic 
approach to life. 


In his preamble to the fourth and final essay in the 
series on symbols, on man, woman and child, Watts deals 
at length with the warring pairs of opposites that apparently 
bedevil human life. The agony is all of the mind’s making, 
he contends, for it is forever one-sidedly opting for one of 
any pair of opposites and striving to annihilate its comple- 
ment, thereby hoping to place itself in a controlling 
position—a futile undertaking in any case. What needs to 
happen is for the opposites to be harmonized. This can be 
done by accepting them and understanding their mutual 
dependence and their mutual creativity, for out of each pair 
a ‘‘Higher Third’’ may arise. In the case of man and woman, 
this is the child that gives meaning to their union. On a 
higher level, there is also a Holy Child that may emerge from 
the union of life and death. Acceptance and understanding 
of the apparently warring dualities brings mastery—but here 
the great danger of inflation arises. In order to avoid this, 
the sage renounces his victory and surrenders himself in 
humble acceptance of the world as it is. 


In reviewing the pamphlet version of the series, reti- 
tled Seven Symbols of Life, Christmas Humphreys com- 
mented perceptively on Watts’s style and originality (or lack 
of it) when he wrote: 


The writer, as readers of this Magazine know 
well, hasan unusual style ofhis own combin- 
ing an impetuous exuberance of diction with 
a stark clarity of thought, which causes one of 
two reactions. At times one is as suspicious of 
his whirlwind conclusions as of Shaw’s famous 


130 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


Prefaces; at other times he stumbles without 
warning on profound ideas which, if not new, 
at least are presented in a novel way, and 
therefore have the force of newness. The latter 
faculty is here exemplified. As studies of the 
inner meanings of universal symbols, only the 
first, the Lotus, is carefully worked out, and 
there is stuff in this which deserves a better 
resting-place than the usual limbo of old 
magazines’. ... 


Also in the first issue of Buddbism in England that 
he edited (May/June 1936), Watts started a new regular fea- 
ture, ‘‘Letters I Receive,’ which was intended as a vehicle 
for offering general replies to questions that had arisen in 
correspondence from readers. In those days the duties of 
the editor of the journal went beyond mere editorial mat- 
ters. He had to be a kind of spiritual Agony Aunt and give 
advice to isolated Buddhists on their problems: what to read, 
how to understand particular Buddhist teachings, etc. The 
first of these features was subtitled The ‘“‘What’’ and the 
“How’’ and dealt with a classic spiritual teaser: it is all very 
well to talk or write very plausibly about profound spiritual 
matters, but how is one to get beyond words and concepts 
and achieve genuine realisation in one’s own life? Actually, 
Watts does not seem overburdened with ready answers. In 
fact, he even goes so far as to admit that he’s still struggling 
himself. He does, however, hint that there’s virtue in the 
quest itself, and also throws in the old adage that we all have 
a Buddha in us—if only we can find it. 


In the ‘‘Letters I Receive’ feature in the next issue of 
the journal, Watts applied the notion of the warring pairs 
of opposites to War itself, which he says was then the mat- 
ter uppermost in people’s minds. He dismisses the more 
obvious explanations of the causes of modern war—that it 
may result from economic motives, for instance—and 


131 
Part Three 


instead declares that its principal cause is now psychologi- 
cal: the sudden explosion of collectively repressed irrational 
desires. In more primitive societies there were special rites 
that acted as safety valves for those desires, but they have 
been lost in modern society, which makes the impossible 
demand that its citizens be unremittingly civilized—with 
periodically disastrous results. Thus, people and societies 
swing back and forth between the poles of civility and bar- 
barity, peace and war, etc. There might be a solution, how- 
ever, Watts suggests, if instead of allowing themselves to be 
helpless victims of this pendulum situation, people were to 
withdraw to a ‘‘Higher Third’’: a centre of being detached 
from the opposites. This is the ‘‘place’’ (no-place?) where 
buddhas take their stand, and the idea is in fact quite cen- 
tral to Buddhism. It has also crept into Jungian and other 
psychoanalytic theory. Essential to it is the notion of being 
an observer—of being Buddha: ‘‘the one who knows.” Thus 
when material rises from the subconscious, instead of iden- 
tifying with it and being swept away reactively by it, one 
just allows it to rest in consciousness and it thereby loses 
its compulsive character. This is the proverbial ‘‘making the 
darkness conscious.” 


One of the especially exciting events that took place 
in 1936, that annus mirabilis for the young Watts, was the 
meeting of the World Congress of Faiths that was held at 
London University. The Congress was the brainchild of Sir 
Francis Younghusband, an old British Imperialist warhorse 
who in 1904 had won national glory as the conqueror of 
Lhasa. One might expect such a man to have been an insen- 
sitive and highly unspiritual jingoist, preoccupied mainly 
with swilling whiskey, abusing natives and slaughtering wild 
game. Actually, the opposite was the case. Younghusband 
was highly spiritual and sensitive; so much so, in fact, that 
he had a profound mystical experience while he was riding 
in the mountains just outside Lhasa, the Tibetan capital. He 
also had a deep respect for the spirituality of the peoples 


132 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


both of that country and of India, China, and Mongolia, 
among whom he had lived and worked. ‘‘Perhaps . . . I may 
have caught a little of the spirit of Buddhism,’ he wrote in 
‘A Message to the Buddhist World>”’ published at this time, 
recalling in particular the intense enthusiasm he had 
experienced reading a book on Buddhism while exploring 
in the Himalayas in 1889. When he had met a Russian 
explorer a few weeks later, he had insisted he take the book 
(it was Monier-Williams’s Buddhism) and have it translated 
when he got home. ‘“‘What has struck me in travelling 
through Buddhist lands and conversing with Buddhist peo- 
ple is the atmosphere of serenity and calm which surrounds 
them.’’ He had found this same gentleness and composure 
among the leading Buddhists of Lhasa. True, he admitted, 
he met three men who had been commissioned to curse him 
for a week; but when they found out that he had not come 
to destroy their religion their attitude completely changed: 


They were most warm in their attitude to me. 
They showed me round the great monasteries. 
They invited me to attend a service in the 
Cathedral [the Jokbang]. And on my leaving 
Lhasa, the Regent [the Tri Rimpoche of Gan- 
den monastery] presented me with a little fig- 
ure of the Buddha and asked me to think 
kindly of Tibet. 


Watts loudly publicized the Congress in the columns 
of Buddbism in England and proclaimed the Lodge’s whole- 
hearted support for it: 


... particularly because of the very realistic 
attitude of those who are responsible for it. For 
they declare that its main object is not an 
appraisement of the various religions, still less 
an attempt to merge them into one. It is a 
world fellowship in which each fellow will be 
allowed full play for his own distinctive 


133 
Part Three 


individuality, as only through recognizing 
differences can the closest unity be attained. 


Watts developed this theme in an address that he gave 
to that year’s Wesak Meeting. It was reprinted in the jour- 
nal as ‘‘The Truth that is More than Teaching,” subtitled ‘‘An 
Appeal to Buddhists on the Occasion of the World Congress 
of Faiths.’’ The Buddhists of the different schools and tra- 
ditions should appreciate that they are ultimately united in 
something larger and greater than the sectarian differences 
that appear to divide them at the relative level. But this isn’t 
to say that those differences should be swept away and that 
all Buddhists should merge in some standardized Buddhism. 
Watts sharply distinguishes here between unity and unifor- 
mity. Unity is not inimical to diversity; in fact it welcomes 
the flowering of individuated potential within a wider matrix 
which sees that ‘‘all forms have a common essence.’ Unifor- 
mity, on the other hand, is a manifestation of the totalitar- 
ian spirit® that would make everything boringly the same. 
That having been said, Watts goes on to counsel his readers 
not to place too much reliance upon the particular forms 
for which they have opted; also not to cling to beliefs. Bud- 
dhism is neither about belief nor does it encourage attach- 
ment to forms. It is ultimately about being liberated from 
all forms of clinging, including attachment to the Buddhad- 
harma itself. Thus, ‘‘That road is the best upon which we 
feel we need depend least, for that road leads to non- 
attachment, to freedom from dependence.” 


Reporting in the ‘‘News and Notes”’ section of the next 
(September/October 1936) issue of Buddhism in England, 
Watts remarked that time alone would tell in what measure 
the recent session of the World Congress of Faiths, which 
had by then been and gone, had been successful in achiev- 
ing the high ideals which it had set itself. In innumerable 
lesser ways, however, it had been a resounding success. 
Never, in fact, had ‘‘such a varied gathering of such highly 


134 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


intelligent and interesting people, people holding such 
diverse opinions and coming from so many different coun- 
tries .. . managed to work together for a fortnight with so 
little animosity and so much friendliness.’ It had also 
afforded those who had attended it a unique opportunity 
for widening their personal contacts—and for Watts him- 
self this meant one personal contact in particular. The World 
Congress had in fact allowed him at last to meet his primary 
literary mentor in Zen: Dr. D. T. Suzuki. 


Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki (1870-1966) was a great 
Dbarma-spreader and a great bridge-builder between East 
and West. Born into genteel poverty in Japan at a time when 
that country was undergoing great changes, various personal 
tragedies and difficulties had led him into Zen training at 
Engakuji, a temple in Kamakura, first under Kosen Roshi and 
then under his successor, Soyen Shaku. He had achieved 
deep insight into the meaning of the Roan Mu’ during the 
Robatsu Sesshin® held at Engakuji in 1896. He had then 
departed for the United States, where he lived from 1897 
to 1908, working for a religious publishing house. This gave 
him an opportunity for perfecting his English and studying 
Western religion, philosophy and culture, thus obtaining all 
the equipment necessary for introducing the West to the 
treasure-house of Mahayana Buddhism in general and Zen 
Buddhism in particular. He later returned to Japan but came 
back to the West many times during his long life—he lived 
to the age of ninety-five—and even when well advanced in 
years he undertook strenuous teaching programmes in the 
United States and Europe. 


Suzuki was sent to London in 1936 by the Japanese 
Government as a kind of cultural ambassador. He was then 
sixty-six years old and fairly stole the show at the great public 
meeting held at the Queen’s Hall on July 9, when the topic 
to which those invited to take the platform spoke was ‘‘The 
Supreme Spiritual Ideal:”’ 


135 
Part Three 


As he sat on the platform listening to those 
ahead of him speak, he seemed to be dozing. 
When his turn came, the chairman had to 
rouse him. This humorous distraction awoke 
the whole audience to attention for his speech. 
He started off by confessing that the phrase, 
“Supreme Spiritual Ideal’’ meant nothing to 
him. So instead of a lecture on Buddhism or 
Zen, he started describing a typical Japanese 
straw-thatched house. He spoke of how the 
large windows opened into the garden, of how 
the house and the garden are one, in fact, the 
whole house and its occupant were one unit— 
and “nature, you and I are one’: .. . He told 
about the trees, the fish, the water in the pool, 
the straw mats on the floor, the flowers, the 
hanging scroll on the wall. He implied that 
through simple daily things one could find a 
sense of oneness; for him the spiritual and the 
material were one. He ended with the famous 
story of ‘Joshu’s Stone Bridge,”’ which was but 
a wooden plank over a stream. For those pres- 
ent at the meeting, Suzuki's talk was their first 
experience of a living man of Zen. The impres- 
sion he left behind was one of a small, frail, 
elderly man with a memorable smile, infused 
with a spiritual joy in life. 


Suzuki was quite a hit with Watts too, who was 


impressed with the readiness of this venerable Japanese sage 
to listen to and learn from ‘‘those who know a mere frac- 
tion of what he knows,’ and with his very genuine 
humility—a humility that ‘‘does not grovel.’ Suzuki also had 
a simplicity that was blended with an engaging sense of 


humour. 
The other representative of Buddhism who spoke at 


the World Congress was Dr. G. P. Malalasekera of Ceylon 


136 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


[Sri Lanka]. Digests of the papers given by Malalasekera and 
by Suzuki appeared in Watts’s review of the proceedings of 
the event, which were published under the title, ‘‘Faiths and 
Fellowship.’ We have reprinted this review in this section. 


Watts turned to a perennial Buddhist enigma when 
he next composed a ‘‘Letters I Receive’ feature for the jour- 
nal. Subtitled ‘‘Is There a Self?,”’ it deals with anatta, which 
is one of the Three Signs of Being (a/t.: Three Marks of All 
Conditioned Things), a basic Buddhist doctrine. The two 
other Signs are: (1) dukkha, usually translated as suffering 
but meaning something wider than that—a general sense of 
unsatisfactoriness, of dis-ease, of things never being right; 
and (2) anicca—impermanence, the fact that everything is 
subject to change. Anatta, however, is rather more difficult 
for Westerners to grasp. It is usually translated as no soul 
or not self and in the case of human beings implies that there 
is no enduring personal essence, no substantial ‘‘I’’ under- 
pinning the phenomenal person. What, then, is a person 
according to the Buddhist view? The answer is, just an aggre- 
gation of component parts—the physical vehicle, thoughts, 
emotions, etc.—all of them causally rather than self 
produced, and in themselves unstable, subject to continu- 
ous change both internally and in relation to each other. The 
root cause of suffering lies in that universal craving for per- 
sonal existence that encourages the notion of an “‘I,’’ with 
all its native desires and aversions and its various sectors of 
special interest designated ‘‘mine,’’ to arise within these 
unstable aggregations. The cure that the Buddha prescribes 
is to disperse this spurious self identification by discourag- 
ing those habits (‘‘selfish’’ habits) of body, speech, and mind 
that continually strive to substantiate the ‘‘I’’ But then the 
question arises: beyond ‘‘I’-what? Is there just nothing, in 
the sense of pure non-existence, perhaps? This would imply 
the Annihilationist view, which the Buddha consistently 
rejected. But to make things complicated he also rejected 
its opposite, the Eternalist view. In fact, the great teacher 


137 
Part Three 


of men and gods tended to maintain the proverbial noble 
silence upon the matter of the ultimate transpersonal nature 
of the human being, which in Buddhism as elsewhere is 
regarded as identical with Ultimate Reality. He had perhaps 
seen how in the India of his own day ideas and opinions 
about this great mystery had tended to crystallise into rigid 
views that were all more or less mistaken, for Ultimate Real- 
ity can neither be grasped by conceptual thought nor 
accurately described in words. According to Buddhist doc- 
trine it lies beyond all the conventional categories of the 
relative world—beyond all notion of ‘‘is’’ and ‘‘is not,’ of 
‘existence’ and ‘‘non-existence.’’ It must be seen directly, 
realized by each person for themselves; then, we are assured, 
all the restless probings of the inquisitive mind will be put 
to rest once and for all. 


One might suggest, therefore, that the anatta doctrine 
is essentially dialectical insofar as it functions to undermine 
the “I’-building disposition rather than to convey anything 
positively descriptive about the nature of Ultimate Reality. 
Put another way: instead of adding new concepts, anatta 
clears space in the mind and that potentially prepares the 
ground for direct insight into the ultimate enigma. And what 
a supremely elusive enigma it is, as Watts brings out so 
admirably towards the end of ‘‘Is There a Self?’’ To try to 
grasp it is like clutching at a slippery fish in dark waters: 
it shoots through one’s fingers and vanishes back into the 
unknowable depths. And this is as it should be, for the 
greatest error is to think that one can catch it, i.e. grasp it 
conceptually. A good rule of thumb would seem to be: 
Whenever we think we know what it is, then. . . we've got 
it wrong... The only thing to do then, Watts argues, is to 
desist from chasing after it—and just walk on!'°. This is a 
very Zen-like thing to say and may be appropriate in the right 
time and place. But even in the Zen school we find advice 
that, within the matrix of a system of practice, trainees 
should constantly conduct direct enquiry into their essen- 


138 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


tial nature. This sort of enquiry (enquiry, note, as opposed 
to speculation or discussion) is not the same as mere self- 
preoccupation, for it leads beyond the personal, and, hence, 
if carried through to its conclusion, breaks rather than per- 
petuates the circles of samsara. In short, in the last para- 
graph of this piece Watts seems to be confusing discussion 
of the nature of and belief in a limited personal self (atta) 
with authentic spiritual enquiry, which is surely not some- 
thing that the Buddha ever ‘‘advised us not to trouble 
about... .’ 


When Watts next composed a ‘‘Letters I Receive’ fea- 
ture, he elected to deal with the subject of karma and sub- 
titled his piece, ‘‘Karma, or ‘You Have What You Want’”’. 
Karma is a fundamental notion in the Buddhist-Vedantist 
religious continuum, and the word has even in recent years 
entered English parlance. Buddhism specifically denies any 
Prime Mover or external causative agency, but sees every- 
thing that happens in the universe as being the effect of 
preceding causes. Karma is the neutral law that governs the 
workings of cause and effect, but it is often popularly mis- 
construed as being quasi-judicial: a man ‘‘reaps what he 
sows.”’ Watts rightly criticises this simplistic view, and points 
out its affinities with the concept of a ‘‘schoolmaster-God”’ 
that crops up in certain primitive forms of Christianity. He 
also criticises the view that karma implies a rigid 
determinism—which is natural enough, for, being a free 
spirit, he is dispositionally inclined to believe in free will. 
However, he finds it hard to establish a convincing case for 
free will and concedes that, in terms of hard logic, the deter- 
minists seem to have it much their own way. Actually, how- 
ever, although he doesn’t seem aware of it, Buddhism is on 
his side here. It does not deny free will or volition (Pali: 
Cetana). It is one of the seven mental factors inseparably 
bound up with all consciousness. Once an action has been 
freely performed, however, then the law of karma comes 
into force and the results are strictly vipaka: causally deter- 


139 
Part Three 


mined. If an action is not freely performed, on the other 
hand, then there are no karmic consequences. In a sense, 
therefore, Rarma could be said to be free will. 


In the same item, Watts explores the derivation of the 
word ‘“‘karma’”’ and again rightly relates it to the root kri 
in the Sanskrit, which is often translated as ‘‘to do’ or ‘‘to 
make.’ Finally, he goes on to appeal to depth psychology 
to reinforce an argument that karma is really getting what 
we secretly desire; and, if we get suffering, it is because at 
some deep, subconscious level, for veiled sado-masochistic 
reasons, we actually want to suffer. This inevitably begs cer- 
tain questions. Do these subconscious desires really origi- 
nate in ‘‘me?’’ If they are not fully conscious, how can ‘“‘I’’ 
be said to choose them? How can we be sure that they don’t 
originate beyond the personal strata of the subconscious psy- 
che? In fact, there are strong grounds for arguing that I don’t 
have these secret desires but that they have me! . . . The con- 
cept of karma is complex and deep, and although he raises 
some valid points about it and seems generally pointed in 
a constructive direction, Watts fails in this article to develop 
a thesis of any real depth or to arrive at any really convinc- 
ing conclusions. 


And so into 1937, the year in which Watts’s second 
full-length book, The Legacy of Asia and Western Man, was 
published by John Murray. This was an altogether more ambi- 
tious work than The Spirit of Zen and sought to relate East- 
ern thought and mysticism to Christianity and ‘‘that young 
but swiftly growing science—Psychology.’ In reviewing the 
book in the November/December issue of Buddhism in 
England, Christmas Humphreys hailed it as superior to any- 
thing the Watts had yet written and suggested that at some 
future date it might be recognised as a transitional work 
between ‘‘the awkwardness of inexperience and the full 
maturity of style which is to come.’’ He went on: 


140 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


The whole book is full—some might say a 
cosmos, some a chaos—of ideas, all of which 
are challenging, stimulating and provocative 
of deeper thought. . . . The author is here rev- 
ealed as a modern to his intellectual finger 
tips, a mental child of to-day, impatient of the 
past, omnivorous of all experience and forgiv- 
ably delighted in his own brilliance. ... 


Humphreys was worried, however; the brilliance 
seemed ‘‘born of the metallic qualities of an intellect as yet 
but little warmed by the flame of compassion.’ Watts in fact 
spoke from the head, whereas the East spoke from the heart 
and its ‘‘greater depth of understanding is immeasurable.”’ 
Still, with his usual generosity of spirit, Humphreys con- 
cluded: ‘‘A fine symphony, Mr. Editor; may its music echo 
far and wide.” 


A topic of general contemporary interest formed the 
subject of the ‘‘Letters I Receive’’ feature, ‘‘Education for 
Progress, with a Capital ‘P’”’ that was published in the Janu- 
ary/February 1937 issue of the journal. This was the materi- 
alistic bias that was becoming dominant in education—as 
indeed in most other departments of life. Watts argued that 
it was no good solely teaching the young utilitarian skills 
and inculcating desire for ever-increasing quantities of 
‘‘things’’ in them; due concern should be given to quality, 
to the training of character, and the development of wis- 
dom. The challenge was in fact not to produce successful 
business-men but successful human beings . . . . These argu- 
ments still carry force today, when we have gone even fur- 
ther down the materialist road and our less enlightened 
politicians and pundits openly call for institutions of edu- 
cation to teach only ‘‘useful’’ subjects—i.e., ones that are 
of merely economic use—and to abandon the old humani- 
ties. The latter, while not directly generating wealth, cer- 
tainly generate profoundly useful social effects by producing 


141 
Part Three 


numbers of citizens endowed with humane, enlightened and 
generally civilized qualities. The materialistic and utilitar- 
ian bias can only have a retrogressive effect on the actual 
quality of our societies in the long run. 


We have included next an article that appeared in the 
March/April 1937 issue of Buddhism in England entitled 
‘Not Only But Also.” Here Watts begins by emphasising the 
profundity of the Buddha’s teachings. One may think that 
one has intellectually grasped the meaning of the basic doc- 
trines, but after a while one is amazed to find whole new 
dimensions of meaning emerging—and one then beholds 
the depths of one’s ignorance. He then goes on to enumer- 
ate certain misunderstandings prevalent in the popular West- 
ern Buddhist mind and tries to account for these. Some are 
due to difficulties of language, he suggests, but more pre- 
cisely he identifies a ‘‘Not Only’’ or exclusive disposition 
that, in terms of any pair of opposites, will tend to opt for 
one and discount the other: if this, then not that. Against 
this Watts proposes a ‘‘Not Only But Also” approach, which 
affirms that either party in a pair of opposites cannot exist 
without the other, and which keeps both and the relation 
between them in view. From this relation meaning arises. 
Thus while there is infinity, there are also finite things— 
which in fact is precisely what Dr. D. T. Suzuki had told the 
Buddhist Lodge when he had paid a visit there on July 20, 
1936: ‘‘.. . in oneness there is manyness, and in manyness 
there is oneness. The transcendent and the immanent God 
exist at the same time’’'!, Suzuki also wrote in Buddhism 
in England: **. . . our logic has never taught us to rise above 
dualism, and we have always interpreted all our experiences 
on the basis of a bifurcation or dichotomy’’!?.. . . Watts 
concludes that delusion arises from such one-sidedness; and 
from delusion arises dukkha, which he suggests should be 
translated as ‘‘discord’’ or ‘‘lack of harmony.” 


In ‘Simple Language,’ another ‘‘Letters I Receive’ fea- 
ture, Watts takes as his gambit the fact that many of those 


142 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


attending Buddhist Lodge meetings and correspondents to 
the journal were complaining of finding Buddhism compli- 
cated and fraught with abstruse technical terminology. This 
raises the whole question of the communication of spiritual 
ideas. How is it to be successfully done? Should Buddhism 
be explained in ‘‘simple language’? Well, there are many 
difficulties with ‘‘simple language,’ as Watts amply demon- 
strates. Then he comes to the heart of the matter: ‘‘The para- 
dox is that profound Truth is complicated because it is 
simple.’ Yet complicated Westerners tend to believe that 
‘“‘profound Truth’”’ must be difficult and somehow distant. 
They therefore look for the wrong thing in the wrong place 
and thereby miss the genuine article, which is right under 
their noses all the time. 


This is a very important point and one that needs 
emphasising as much today as when Watts wrote the item 
fifty years ago. For our disposition is still to imagine that 
spiritual enlightenment consists of some ‘‘peak experience,’ 
highly aesthetic and uplifting: the clouds open and pillars 
of light appear. One of Dr. Suzuki's great contributions was 
to emphasise the ordinariness of profound spiritual insight: 
‘‘the most ordinary things in our daily lives hide some deep 
meaning that is yet most plain and explicit, only our eyes need 
to see where there is a meaning. . ”’!3 That unique and original 
contributor to the understanding of Zen in the West, Douglas 
Harding (author of On Having No Head) talks about one’s 
ultimate or supreme identity being supremely obvious and 
always perfectly available. People in fact reject it precisely 
because it doesn’t match up to their inflated expectations: they 
find it prosaic, boring, unimpressive—a let-down! Watts winds 
up the article by concluding that what people really want 
is to have Buddhism explained in their own language, and 
that it is the special skill of great spiritual teachers that they 
are able to see how to communicate with each individual 
at that person's level. It may even be that, in certain cases, 
a single word or a gesture may be enlightening... . 


143 
Part Three 


Watts returned to the theme that everyday life is the 
true arena of spiritual practice in ‘‘The Experience of Mys- 
tery,’ his next “‘Letters I Receive’ feature. Again he pointed 
out that all too many seekers are frankly unwilling to keep 
their feet on the ground and their noses to the mundane 
grindstone. Rather, they go shooting for the stars: they pur- 
sue all kinds of marvellous transcendental states or seek to 
acquire occult powers. These aspects of the spiritual hin- 
terland are always with us. There are indeed ‘‘higher states 
of consciousness’’ beyond the ordinary: refined states of con- 
sciousness which are often states of great bliss. They are 
called the jhanas in Buddhism, and there is a whole hier- 
archy of them. They are definitely not, however, to be con- 
fused with the central matter of Buddhism: the 
Enlightenment that the Buddha achieved beneath the Bodhi 
tree at Bodh Gaya. That led to the Deathless, a state of being 
that was not subject to old age, sickness and death, not sub- 
ject to dukkha, anicca and anatta. 


In Buddhist cosmology the jhanas are identified with 
the abodes of the the various orders of gods or devas, who 
live for enormous spans of time in delightful environments, 
enjoying all manner of pleasure and luxury. But because the 
devas are still subject to the law of impermanence (anicca), 
the bitter day will eventually dawn when the beautiful 
flowers in their hands begin to wither and their bodies give 
off an unsavoury odour that makes them uncongenial to 
their godlike companions and consorts. They then know 
that the bliss of heaven is to be taken from them and that 
once again they are about to be recycled through the lower 
worlds. This poetically illustrates the drawbacks of these 
‘higher’ ’states. 


Occult powers, on the other hand, are called siddhi 
in Sanskrit, and consist of healing powers, the ability to 
materialize objects, to travel on the Astral Plane, to levitate, 
conjure spirits and occult beings, to foretell the future, and 
so forth. Such powers may well come to seekers as a by- 


144 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


product of spiritual practice, but all the great traditions warn 
against being seduced by them, for once a person has been 
entrapped by power of any sort it is difficult to break free. 
Furthermore, the possession of ‘‘powers’’ is definitely not 
a sign of true wisdom, which in Buddhism is always linked 
with humility and compassion. Many great wonder-workers 
have in fact been inspired by very venal motivations. Best 
then, as Watts emphasises, to stick to the ordinary, the every- 
day, for here resides all we need for our practice—and, 
indeed, what could be more wonderful than that we actu- 
ally exist, that we are here at all. It is indeed a great mys- 
tery, the greatest mystery. The eminent modern Western 
philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein clearly had much the same 
view in mind when he wrote: ‘‘It is not bow things are in 
the world that is mystical, but that it exists’’'4. Or in the 
words of the ‘‘Chinese poet’—specifically Layman P’ang, 
a Chinese Ch’an (Zen) Master—that Watts quotes: 


How wondrous, how miraculous, this— 
I draw water and I carry fuel. 


If we scan through the ‘‘News and Notes’’ sections 
in the issues of Buddhism in England that appeared in 1937, 
we can trace various developments that had a bearing upon 
Watts’s own personal life. The September/October issue 
reported the staging of a Second World Congress of Faiths 
in Oxford. Dr. Suzuki was not there this time, so Buddhism 
was represented by a Burmese, Maung Aye Maung—and of 
course Alan Watts went along, too. The Congress had again 
the important effect of facilitating ‘‘the making of new 
friends and coming into personal contact with the great 
minds of other faiths . . . also, living together for a long 
week-end afforded many opportunities for personal conver- 
sations, and some of us stayed up until the early hours of 
the morning enjoying the company of new-found and fas- 
cinating friends.’ We know from his autobiography that 
Watts shared a room with Baron Hans Hasso von Veltheim, 


145 
Part Three 


a ‘‘big, boisterous and warm-hearted’’ ex-Zeppelin com- 
mander with a deep contempt for the Nazis—a contempt 
for which he later paid with his life. One lecture given at 
the Congress particularly impressed Watts. It was by a lay 
theologian from Rome named Ernesto Buonaiuti, who was 
apparently ‘‘a disowned member of the Catholic Church.”’ 
He picked Watts’s brain about Buddhism as they strolled 
together around the quadrangle at Balliol, where that ses- 
sion of the Congress was held that year, talking in bad 
French, their only common language. Watts in his turn was 
amazed by Buonaiuti’s profound understanding of Catholi- 
cism. 


At the Buddhist Lodge, meanwhile, a special study was 
being made of Zen Buddhism using Dr. Suzuki's Introduc- 
tion to Zen Buddhism as text-book. Fortuitously, on June 
14, a wealthy American lady hailing from Hinsdale, near 
Chicago turned up at a Lodge meeting—a lady who had actu- 
ally been in Japan and studied Zen under a real Zen Master! 
She even had a Zen name: Sui Getsu Kuge. Naturally the Zen 
Class enthusiastically picked her brain about the ‘‘purpose, 
technique and results of Zen meditation.’’ The lady had a 
curious way of looking up at the ceiling as she spoke, Watts 
recalled. So many questions were posed that the meeting 
had to be adjourned and continued on another evening. 


This lady was Ruth Fuller Everett, and she is now 
regarded as one of the pioneers of Zen Buddhism in the 
United States. She eventually married Sokei-an Sasaki (Sokei- 
an Shigetsu Osho; 1882-1945), a fellow pioneer who 
founded the First Zen Institute of America. At the time of 
her first visit to the Buddhist Lodge, however, she was 
unhappily married to Edward Warren Everett, a ‘‘genial but 
fearsome red-haired Chicago attorney, ’'5 who according to 
Watts had developed a formidable will and a fair measure 
of misanthropy in his fight against the after-effects of polio. 
To live with such a man, Ruth had had to develop an iron 
will of her own; she was also highly cultured and something 


146 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


of a social climber. At one stage she came under the influence 
of a rascal-guru named Pierre Bernard who kept an ‘‘ashram- 
cum-zoo”’ at Nyack-on-the-Hudson, where he taught vari- 
ous forms of yoga to a following that included a number 
of New York socialites. It may have been at Nyack that Ruth 
heard about Zen. Later she went on a world cruise with her 
husband and, while in Japan, they were introduced to Dr. 
Suzuki. The kindly doctor gave Ruth one of his books and 
also some rudimentary instruction in zazen (sitting medi- 
tation). When she returned to Japan subsequently with her 
fifteen-year-old daughter, Eleanor, Suzuki introduced her to 
Nanshinken, the revered roshi (lit.: ‘‘old master’’) of Nan- 
zenji, the famous Zen monastery founded in Kyoto in 1293. 
Nanshinken took a liking to Ruth and allowed her to join 
the monks in their morning zazen. The spiritual instruc- 
tion that he gave to Eleanor, on the other hand, consisted 
mainly of sitting out on veranda with her, leafing through 
picture magazines in search of a suitable husband among the 
super-portly sumo wrestlers on offer. Mother and daughter 
stayed in Kyoto on that occasion for about three and a half 
months.!¢ 


Eleanor visited the Lodge on 12 July and it took the 
lusty Alan about a week to fall hopelessly in love with her. 
She was buxom, talented, and vivacious, if not stunningly 
beautiful. Another recommendation was that she was as 
eager for erotic experiment as he was. When Ruth left to 
return to the States after a short while, she obligingly left 
Eleanor to Alan’s tender mercies, though with the parting 
comment (something of a put-down, really): ‘‘He’s all right, 
but he’ll never set the Thames on fire’’ Now Alan no longer 
had to race for the last train for Chislehurst every night; he 
often stayed up in Eleanor’s London flat, something that 
probably caused a certain amount of disapproval back at 
home. 

Alan and Eleanor now regularly attended meditation 
sessions at the Buddhist Lodge together and one night as 


147 
Part Three 


they were walking home she helped him to an insight that 
he rated as a premature satori.” He was experiencing some 
frustration in his attempts to remain choicelessly aware of 
the present moment in the manner of Krishnamurti’s teach- 
ing. Eleanor pointed out that whether one was ruminating 
about the past or fantasising about the future, those thoughts 
were precisely the present contents of the mind. 


‘‘The present is just a constant flow, like the Tao, and 
there’s simply no way of getting out of it,’ she told him— 
and for a whole week afterwards he simply floated. 


Watts also credits Eleanor with loosening him up con- 
siderably. Inroads began to be made into the stiff Anthony 
Eden style of dressing that he had hitherto affected. He now 
sported colourful ties, more casual clothes and even bought 
a tweed jacket and matching felt hat with a jaunty feather 
in the band. She was also well-placed to educate Alan musi- 
cally, having come to London to study piano witha teacher 
named George Woodhouse, who had a theory that the mind 
should slow effortlessly along with the melody. They there- 
fore went to concerts, the opera and the ballet together. And 
another of her accomplishments was that she had studied 
the hula in Hawaii, so she ‘‘showed me that there was much 
more to dancing than formal stepping, prancing and turn- 
ing... . 8 


Alan of course kept up his duties as Editor of Bud- 
dbism in England during this exciting period, and in the 
November/December 1938 issue we find him printing a short 
haiku-like poem by Eleanor. It is called Steps to the Gate. 


Laden with snow 
The bamboo bends, 
But does not break. 


148 ? 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


Zen 
The man who asks 


No help 
From the saints 


The heart of gold is within thee, 
The heavens be empty and below the earth— 
There ts naught. 


The burgeoning affair with Eleanor does not seem to 
have impeded Watts’s literary output in any way, for arti- 
cles continued to appear in Buddhism in England under 
his name. In ‘‘The Man and the Means,’ for instance, he 
raised a classic teaser about motivation on the spiritual path, 
specifically citing a reader’s problem with the dictum in the 
Richard Wilhelm translation of the Chinese Taoist classic, 
The Secret of the Golden Flower, to the effect that if the 
wrong man uses the right means then the right means work 
in the wrong way. How then can any of us do anything at 
all about ourselves spiritually for we all start off wrong— 
ie., deluded, full of egoism and desire—a million miles from 
being pure and clear? Some of us undertake the spiritual path 
because we want to escape from life and its attendant prob- 
lems, but how do we escape from trying to escape? The 
seeker seems inexorably caught in a circular dilemma—and 
this is a theme to which Watts was to return many times. 
Basically, it boils down to the absurdity of the ego trying 
to become egoless, which is like asking a man to pull him- 
self up by his own bootstraps. Later he was to propose “‘solu- 
tions,’ but here he really does little more than identify the 
basic problem. A correspondent to the following issue of 
the journal upbraided Watts for this. He had only succeeded 
in making the problem seem more acute by ‘‘adding to the 
original proposition the weight of irrefutable logic.’ It was 
a fact, the correspondent went on, that over the millennia 
a few bad managed to tread the spiritual path successfully 


149 
Part Three 


and had left instructions that those coming in their foot- 
steps might follow. 


In the first issue of 1938, Christmas Humphreys 
announced ‘‘Our Editor’s Engagement’ to Miss Eleanor 
Everett, who ‘‘has already acquired, when visiting Japan 
with her mother, a practical knowledge of Japanese Bud- 
dhism.’”” She was proving to be most capable in the new 
executive post of Assistant Editor to which she had lately 
been appointed. Toby Humphreys also reported that the 
young couple, who were then spending Christmas in 
Chicago, had fixed the date of their wedding for May. 


Alan and Eleanor had in fact sailed for New York on 
the Bremen on December 17, 1937, having celebrated their 
engagement at Rowan Tree Cottage the previous day. The 
Watts family and the Buchans had been duly impressed with 
Alan’s ‘‘American fiancée,’ but once on board the Transat- 
lantic liner Alan found himself in another world entirely. 
He and Eleanor gorged themselves on the exquisite cuisine 
and the savour of one particularly choice wine—an Oster- 
reicher Holle Riesling Spatlese, 1927 vintage—lodged in his 
memory for the remainder of his days. Then, on landing, 
he found himself zooming through the canyons of New York 
and on to Chicago aboard the overnight Commodore Van- 
derbilt train. On arrival at La Salle Station, he and Eleanor 
were met by the Everetts and their Philippino chauffeur, Ish- 
mael. Alan found to his delight that he got on well with War- 
ren Everett, despite the man’s irascibility: they shared certain 
minor vices in common and Alan could effectively use his 
English charm and manners to draw the lawyer out about 
his career. With a few notable exceptions, however, he found 
the remainder of the Warren family ‘‘pompous and vapid,’ 
but Eleanor’s youthful friends were another matter 
altogether and he kept in touch with some of them for long 
afterwards. The food in the Everett household was again 
exquisite and every item on the Christmas Day menu 
impressed itself indelibly upon the impressionable Alan’s 


150 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


memory. Then it was back to England on the Bremen again, 
waltzing crazily to a Bavarian band on a rolling dance floor 
in rough seas and playing chess with a young German profes- 
sor who plied him with so much Benedictine (an unsubtle 
gambit?) that on one occasion he was well and truly soz- 
zled. It had all been a magnificent whirl through a magical 
new world and one can vividly appreciate Alan’s delighted 
intoxication with it all. 


The next issue of Buddhism in England, however, 
announced that the date of the editor's forthcoming mar- 
riage had been changed. It was now scheduled to take place 
privately in London on April 2. The venue for the ceremony 
was the parish church of the Earl’s Court district of west 
London—and a somewhat puzzling one in view of the young 
couple’s Buddhist inclinations, in which, moreover, they 
were joined by 4er mother and dis father. Evidently, how- 
ever, a conventional church wedding was necessary for social 
reasons. The Humphreys’s wedding present was to be a sil- 
ver sugar salver that Puck, an accomplished silversmith, had 
made personally for them. However, Eleanor rejected the 
item when she noticed that the she-goat on the lid was preg- 
nant: a detail that was a little too close to home. 


After their marriage, Alan and Eleanor moved into an 
‘almost palatial duplex’’ at 28 Courtfield Gardens in Ken- 
sington. Alan must have been well-pleased. He at last had 
the consort for which he had so long been wishing; and he 
had also moved out of his parents’ tiny cottage in Holbrook 
Lane, Chislehurst and was living in the style to which he 
ardently wished to be accustomed. His cousin, Joy Buchan, 
used to go up to give him secretarial help with the book 
reviewing work on which he was engaged at the time, hav- 
ing given up his previous job. Joy thought that Alan and 
Eleanor seemed very happy together then. 

At this time, Watts contributed a major article to Bud- 
dhism in England entitled ‘‘The Monkey Mind in Religion.” 
Here he defined a sort of spiritual materialism that predates 


151 
Part Three 


the Chégyam Trungpa Rinpoche book, Cutting through 
Spiritual Materialism (1973), by thirty-five years. People 
in fact try to get something for themselves out of spiritual- 
ity (it may be just self-aggrandizement or something more 
sinister—like the acquisition of siddhbis, occult powers) and 
many—here there are clear resonances of Krishnamurti’s 
teaching? and also of the early Chinese Zen Masters—become 
mere copyists, clinging to outward forms or aping the super- 
ficial behaviour of adepts. This will not do, Watts contends; 
one must not cling on to props and supports; one must be 
free and original and creative. He also emphasises that 
Spirituality isn’t a kind of special sphere of activity sepa- 
rate from the main flow of life—‘spirituality is precisely crea- 
tive and spontaneous /iving. .. .’ 


It is all good stuff, bold and fresh and straight from 
the shoulder; but one feels there is something slightly amiss 
too. It moves a little too fast, goes a little too far. Certainly 
there can be blind clinging to forms and techniques—and 
that is certainly negative. The Buddha pointed this out him- 
self in his analogy of the Dharma being like a raft that one 
uses to cross a mighty river. It is useful to get us from the 
unenlightened state to the enlightened one; but just as it 
would be absurd to go on carrying the raft on one’s back 
after one has reached the further shore of the river, so it 
would be equally absurd to cling to the forms and techniques 
of the Dharma once they had served the practical purpose 
of leading one out of the deluded state. However, it is impor- 
tant to realise that one doesn’t drop the Dharma until one 
has reached the other state. Thus forms and techniques (or 
disciplines) are vitally necessary in the early stages of any 
sort of training. 

In the training of a Japanese swordsman, for instance, 
certain basic movements of the sword are practised with 
monotonous repetition—but finally, in the actual cut and 
thrust of an engagement, the swordsman is expected to 
throw technique away and make his manoeuvres freely. By 


152 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


then, however, his whole being will have-been transformed 
by that monotonous initial training so that creative energy 
can flow through him in an informed—as opposed to an 
anarchic—way. To move into another sphere, we have all 
seen those awful attempts at poetry written by people who 
are contemptuous of the laws of prosody and believe that 
no initial practice of basic disciplines is necessary. It is sim- 
ply a matter of opening the floodgates and letting it all come 
out—and it is bound to be pure gold. Almost invariably it 
is pure rubbish. . . . Freedom and spontaneity are only right- 
fully the prerogatives of those who have served long appren- 
ticeship to discipline and technique. 


Up to a certain point in the article one fears that Watts 
is going to overlook this point completely. But then one is 
proved wrong: he does mention it—but only fleetingly and 
without proper emphasis. The article thus ends up cover- 
ing the basic ground of its theme well, but the overall bal- 
ance is not quite right. This in a way throws light upon the 
workings of Watts’s mind at this period in his life: it is sharp, 
mercurial, logical; as Christmas Humphreys said in his review 
of The Legacy of Asia, it is undoubtedly brilliant. Yet some- 
thing is lacking: a deeper wisdom of the heart, perhaps. 


By the middle of 1938, as Europe moved like a blind 
man on a sightless horse (to paraphrase Arthur Waley) 
towards an immolation that no-one seemed able to avert, 
the general climate in Britain was one of profound appre- 
hension. At this dark hour Watts again took up his pen and 
composed an article on the subject of war, taking as his title 
“The Unimportance of War.’ This appeared in the May/June 
issue Of Buddhism in England, and in it Watts uncom- 
promisingly rejects the notion that there is anything basi- 
cally noble or heroic about war. It is really a form of 
cowardice; therefore, if the anticipated war did break out 
in Europe, it would not be at all cowardly to betake oneself 
to a private sanctuary well removed from the cockpit of 
hostilities. It would, indeed, be good sense to do so; and 


153 
Part Three 


those who pursued this course could return after the con- 
flagration was over and begin to pick up the pieces. They 
would be the custodians of the future and of civilized values, 
having refused to be dragooned into the recent collective 
madness. In any case, the only other option would be to 
stay behind and be killed, modern warfare having virtually 
ruled out the possibility of defence... . 


But this is not all that the article has to say. Why are 
people making so much fuss about war? Watts wants to 
know. People get killed, civilizations are destroyed—but so 
what? We've all got to die some day. Civilizations also come 
and go—and is the present civilization all that worthy of 
preservation if it hasn’t even the moral power to prevent 
itself being blown up? In the vast perspectives of cosmic 
space and time, all these things fade to insignificance any- 
way. We should console ourselves by reflecting upon such 
eternal verities and attempt to abide in the eternal Now; 
therein lies ‘‘unbelievable freedom of spirit... .”’ 


All of which may be quite correct, but is it true? 
Charles E. Ball of Chiswick, London, did not think so. He 
wrote a Letter to the Editor which appeared in the next issue 
of Buddhism in England. 


Sir he wrote]—I think your article is not only 
too academic but harmful. Its airiness is too 
suggestive of the Japanese treatment of their 
devilish wholesale massacres of Chinese [in 
Manchuria] as an “Incident”’ and which must 
do much to prove to the world the apparent 
unimportance of Buddhism in Japan. 
Ball went on: 

To say that wholesale death by every method 
of horror doesn’t matter will convince ordi- 
nary rational people of the unimportance of 
the Buddhist outlook on matters of importance 
to everyone. If, as Dr. D. T. Suzuki tetls us, Sam- 


154 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


sara is Nirvana and Nirvana is Samsara, 
earthly life is then not something that doesn’t 
matter, but rather what matters a great deal, 
apart from the first duty of all to protect the 
weak and unenlightened people of the world 
from hopeless despair and atheism as they find 
themselves again involved in one of these fren- 
zied outbursts of demonaic destruction guided 
by Rakshasas {a class of demons in Buddhist 
and Hindu mythology] and elementals. 


W. J. Gabb, author of The Goose is Out, contributed 
another Letter in which he appealed to the Lankavatara 
Sutra (which Suzuki had rendered into English) to support 
the argument that war was both important and unimpor- 
tant. The wise man acted as /fit were important, while the 
Watcher within remained detached and aware that in ulti- 
mate terms there is no annihilation. 


It is hard not to feel from this perspective in time that 
in ‘‘The Unimportance of War,’ Watts was really publicly 
rehearsing his personal rationalizations for what was to be 
his own course of action in the face of the impending Euro- 
pean conflagration. Now that he was married to Eleanor 
Everett, an American citizen (and one with wealthy family 
connections), he had, as he himself admits in his autobiog- 
raphy, the necessary ‘‘wings’’ to betake himself to the rela- 
tive safety of the United States. 


We have also included in this section a piece entitled 
‘The Original Face,’ attributed to one Wu Tao-kung, a fic- 
titious Zen Master. It carries no other credits but we believe 
it to have been written by Watts for he preserved it among. 
the cuttings of his published articles. It is an exuberant piece 
of chinoiserie, or perhaps better, chanoiserie, Chan being 
the Chinese form of the Japanese Zen and the Sanskrit 
Dhyana, broadly meaning ‘‘meditation.”’ The ‘‘original face’ 
of the title is our own true nature, which is the Buddha 


155 
Part Three 


Nature. We look out of it all the time and it is boundless 
and perfectly clear. 


The last article that we have included in this anthol- 
ogy is the transcript of a lecture entitled ‘‘Can We Help Our- 
selves?”’ Basically it recapitulates many of the themes that 
we have already encountered, particularly one that cropped 
up in ‘‘The Man and the Means:”’ the circular dilemma of 
our trying to do anything to help ourselves spiritually. The 
spiritual is, in fact, a great mystery that Watts chose to call 
the 7ao,'9 and its ambit is everyday life. It is always right here 
in front of us, supremely obvious, and there is nothing that 
we can do to put ourselves in touch with it, for we always 
are in touch with it. Once we realise this there is nothing 
more to be done except to get on with our lives. 


The lecture was in its way no doubt brilliant. It con- 
tained witty and apposite stories, clever arguments, edify- 
ing remarks, and it built up a wonderful sense of deeply 
penetrative enquiry—that a great secret was going to be rev- 
ealed at the end. It was no doubt delivered, too, with Watts’s 
usual oratorical vigour and panache. But when all was said 
and done, did the audience perhaps not feel left in the air 
a little? For, despite all its emphases upon the impossibility 
of expressing the inexpressible, it is still a very wordy and 
highly conceptual piece. 


The November/December 1938 issue of the journal 
informs us that the editor is ‘‘at present making another visit 
to America, and in the course of his visit is hoping to make 
many contacts with American Buddhists.’ This suggests that 
Watts had really not evolved final plans for emigration to 
the United States when he left England in 1938. He may have 
had it in the back of his mind to return home if the politi- 
cal climate in Europe mellowed, or if things did not turn 
out too well for him on the other side of the Atlantic. He, 
therefore, retained the editorship of Buddhism in England, 
with Clare Cameron holding the fort for him in his absence. 


156 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


But events now began to move decisively. On Novem- 
ber 14, Eleanor gave birth to a baby daughter, Joan, in New 
York. Then, in London, on November 28, at a meeting of 
the Buddhist Lodge, it was decided that Clare Cameron 
should replace Watts as Editor but that he should retain a 
link with the journal as Associate Editor. Finally, less than 
a year later, the urbane atmosphere of the capital of the Brit- 
ish Empire was shattered by the wail of air-raid sirens. The 
long-anticipated European hostilities had broken out, and 
they were to rage with all the destructive fury of vast col- 
lective madness for more than five years. At the start of it 
all, another English expatriate was breathing the same ‘‘neu- 
tral air’’ of New York as Watts was then breathing. Sitting 
in one of the dives on Fifty-second Street, W. H. Auden 
wrote: 


Waves of anger and fear 

Circulate over the bright 

And darkened lands of the earth, 

Obsessing our private lives; 

The unmentionable odour of death 

Offends the September night. 
—September 1, 1939 


Alan Watts never returned to live permanently in his 
native land. His British phase was over. 


NOTES 


1. A. E.R. (Eric) Gill, (1882-1940) designed typefaces for the Monotype Corpo- 
ration and was an accomplished letterer and stone-carver; but be also produced 
Sculpture, drawings and innumerable wood-engravings, many of which were highly 
erotic and portrayed ‘loving couples' and suchlike subjects, Gill’s philosophy might 
be summed up in bis dictum, “Man ts matierand Spirit, both real and both good."’ 

2. Literally, ‘Everything transient is only a symbol for parable)” 

3. Eric Graham Howe introduced Watts to J. Krishnamurti in 1936. 

4. Buddhism in England, volume 11, p. 151. 

5. ibid. volume 1H, p. 36. 

6. This suggests that Watts may have by this time become a little more conscious 
of the true nature of totalitarian ideologies than when be wrote the Buddhism 
and War ttem in Buddhism and the Modern World. 


157 
Part Three 


7. Koan: this bas connotations of a ‘case’ in Lau. It is an enigmatic question 
used in Rinzai Zen as a skilful means; it cannot be ‘‘solved"’ by the rational 
intellect, but requires a leap to the deeper wisdom that lies beyond. 

Mu: ‘‘Not, or No, the Negative which is beyond mere positive and negatire’— 
Christmas Humpbrey's, A Popular Dictionary of Buddhism, Volumes have been writ- 
ten about Mu but it ultimately defies conceptual description. 

8. Rohatsu Sesshin- A sesshin, literally a ‘collecting of the heart’ is a kind of 
Zen Buddbist retreat. Rohatsu signifies December 8, the date upon which the 
Buddba's Enlightenment is traditionally celebrated by Zen Buddbists. The Rohatsu 
Sesshin usually takes place in Zen monasteries during the week preceding the 8th, 
and everyone then strives to match the enormous effort made by the Buddha to 
resolve the central problem of bis spiritual quest. It is considered a gruelling spell 
of practice, made all the harder by the rigours of the Japanese winter. 

9. D. T. Suzuki: A Biography, by A. Irwin Switzer 111, edited and enlarged by 
Jobn Snelling. London, The Buddbist Society, 1985; pp. 32-33. 

10. Walk On! was the title of a book by Christmas Humpbreys. 

WI. “Dr. D. T. Suzuki on Zen, A Visit to the Buddbist Lodge.”’ Buddhism in England, 
volume II, p. 69. 

12. D. T. Suzuki, “Buddhism in the Life and Thought of Japan,” Buddhism in 
England, rolume HI, p. 104. 

13. “Dr D. T. Suzuki on Zen, A Visit to the Buddbist Lodge.’’ Buddhism in England, 
volume I, p. 68. 

14. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, by Ludwig Wittgenstein. London, Routledge 
and Kegan Paul, 1961; p. 149. 

15. In My Own Way by Alan Watts, New York, Vintage paperback edition, 1973, 
p. 145. 

16. How the Swans Came to the Lake by Rick Fields. Boulder, Shambhala Publi- 
cations, 1981; p. 188. 

17. Satori is a technical term in Zen signifying an insight into the nature of one's 
true nature of varying degrees of depth and duration. 

18. In My Own Way, (edition cited abore), p. 144. 

19. Tao: a Chinese term with similar connotations to the Sanskrit Dharma. It could 
be said to signify universal law or the way things are: a subtle and elusive essence 
fully penetrating and vitalizing all that exists. In Taoist terms, the art of life is 
the art of harmonising with Tao. See The Way and Its Power, by Arthur Wale}; 
London. George Allen & Unwin, 1934. 


158 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


SEVEN SYMBOLS OF LIFE 


Being an essay on eternal verities as 
expressed in the images of the lotus, of 
water, wind, fire, man, woman and child. 


Published by The Buddhist Lodge, London, 1936 
e 


THE LOTUS. 


Alles Vergangliche 
Ist nur ein Gleichnis. 


—Goethe 


Of all symbolic flowers man has chosen the lotus as the one 
of most meaning. It figures in the art of every great civiliza- 
tion of Asia, and in the course of thousands of years has 
gathered to itself associations which, to the Western mind, 
are bound up with all that seems exotic in the life of the 
East. For the lotus is a mystery—a perfected glory appear- 
ing out of the unknown, a flower in whose circular spread 
of petals has been seen a symbol of the Wheel of Life and 
the rays of the sun. Yet while there is mystery in the perfec- 
tion of its form, the greatest mystery is that such a form 
should appear out of the slime—the formless primaeval 
morass, where, in the earliest ages, stirred the first living 
creatures—the home of blind worms and slithering reptiles, 
feeding upon one another and begetting their kind in 
innumerable masses. 

This underworld of the morass has been sufficiently 
described in Keyserling’s masterpiece the South American 
Meditations, and there is no need to describe it further. But 
what must never be forgotten is that this underworld still 


159 
Part Three 


exists in the soul of man, that while his spirit, like the lotus, 
struggles towards the light, so beneath him and surround- 
ing and nourishing his roots is the primaeval slime. And fur- 
ther, below this slime is the world of minerals, the rocks 
and ores descending deeper and deeper into the earth right 
down to that flaming darkness which men have imagined 
as Hell. From all this the flower gathers its nourishment, 
while from above the sun and the rain bring to it the gifts 
of Heaven. Both are essential to the life of the flower. 


It might seem to the eyes of man that the lotus is no 
more than a flower, that this resplendent creation exists of 
itself, floating detached and spotless above the water. But 
this is illusion. For just as the sage may appear spotless and 
detached from the world, he is like the lotus in that he has 
his roots in the primaeval slime—and knows it. Foolishly 
it is thought that the highest achievement of the human spirit 
is a heavenly purity detached from earth—a rootless flower 
suspended in the air and nourished wholly from above. Yet 
in the symbol of the lotus we see that there is no conflict 
between heaven and earth; above, the flower develops into 
the fullness of its glory, expanding joyously, opening its 
petals in welcome to sun and rain, while below, its roots 
stretch out into the morass, welcoming darkness and slime 
as the petals welcome light and air. For the life of the lotus 
is not in the flower alone; if it were, the roots would shrivel 
and die and the flower too would sink back into the mud. 
Nor is its life in the roots alone, for if this were so the flower 
would never raise its head above the water. 


The realization of the truth contained in this symbol 
is the central problem of human life—the equal acceptance 
of both earth and heaven. Yet remember, it is the roots which 
accept the slime—not the flower, and the flower which 
opens itself to the sun—not the roots. The reverse of this 
would indeed be abomination and evil. But nothing can be 
evil so long as it is in its right place, for the conflict between 
good and evil is not a conflict between heaven and earth, 


160 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


but between a right and a wrong orientation of man between 
the two. For evil is when the flower turns and plunges into 
the slime, twisting up its roots to gesticulate meaninglessly 
in the light of day. Or again, evil is to withdraw from either 
the root or the flower, to try to deny either of the two by 
refusing it its right to reach out into its appropriate world. 
Thus the particular problem of modern man of the West is 
to recognize his roots. For hundreds of years his peculiar 
interpretation of the teaching of the Christ, his cult of con- 
sciousness, his moralism, his belief in progress towards the 
hygienic, the individuated and the independent has made 
him forget his roots in the primaeval slime. But he must 
remember that the roots are not to be recognized once more 
by searching them out with the flower; to attempt this would 
be to lose all that he has gained by his development, one- 
sided though it be. It is this folly which we see at work in 
the West to-day, in the growing obsession with the irrational 
force of sex, of the herd, of blood and violence. Yet these 
forces are, in themselves, as pure as any of the virtues, and 
as full of life-giving nourishment as Reason and the cool 
thought of great philosophy. For this obsession is not recog- 
nition. It is feeding the mouth with the contents of the 
bowels, or, conversely, filling the bowels with undigested 
food. 


What must be done, therefore, if man is to attain a right 
orientation between heaven and earth, and a full develop- 
ment of both root and flower? How can he fulfil the East- 
ern precept, ‘‘Grow as the flower grows, at peace’? How 
can he give full recognition to the slime, and at the same 
time rise upwards to the sun? 


In the darkness below the surface of the water lies 
what modern psychology has termed the Unconscious. A 
little way down it remains individuated, but the further it 
descends, the more individuals are lost in the mass. Thus 
in the slime is the world of reptiles, an ever coiling and 
uncoiling world of flux, where the individual is subordi- 


161 
Part Three 


nated to the one aim of reproducing the species—a world 
of extreme fertility and ruthless destruction—symbolized 
by the circle snake which swallows its own tail. In the depths 
of the slime below the reptiles are even more primitive and 
unindividuated forms of life—plasmic formations wherein 
even the distinction between the sexes has not developed, 
formations which reproduce their kind simply by dividing 
into two. And further down, beneath the bed of decaying 
vegetable and animal matter (the death from which life arises 
again and again), is the formless substratum of the mineral 
world. These depths have their counterpart in the soul of 
man, for his Unconscious sinks beyond the personal and the 
chain of his past lives and the lives of his forefathers, to the 
race, to the animal, vegetable and mineral worlds. Here lies 
hidden the memory of the whole Universe, and in these 
unconscious depths every man has his roots. From them he 
derives his life just as much as from the conscious world 
above the water. And by accepting them he transmutes the 
life of the slime into the glory of the flower. Therefore man 
must learn to recognize his foundation, to accept the 
primaeval slime as part of his nature—nay more, to affirm 
and welcome it with his roots, stretching them down deeper 
and deeper into the earth. For as men we cannot deny that 
we came into the world with blood and pain, that the power- 
ful reproductive urge symbolized by the reptile stirs within 
us, that we have bowels as well as brains, that our life 
depends alike on growth and decay, and that what we have 
been accustomed to regard as dirt, violence and pain is an 
essential part of our nature. This is the meaning of the Resur- 
rection, that life comes forth out of death and decay, just 
as the fruit must rot for the seed to grow into the tree. 


Therefore nothing is to be gained by trying to escape 
from the primaeval slime; without it we should die, while 
in truth it is no evil. Indeed, the humility of the sage is his 
capacity to accept the lowliest of things, to find goodness 
in slime. Yet it is strange that this should have been perverted 


162 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


into the false humility of the ascetic who rejoices in the dirt 
on the outside of his body, for this again is obsession, it is 
making the flower descend to the root. 


Some will ask if this is not a ghastly life where the 
most gorgeous of flowers depends on slime, where growth 
can only be had at the expense of decay, where great achieve- 
ments of the human spirit have their roots in the darkness 
and ‘‘depraved’’ irrationality of the Unconscious. Indeed, 
there are those who are so revolted by this life that they deny 
both flower and root, growth and decay, light and darkness, 
conscious and unconscious—hating both. But their attitude 
is false, for they do not really hate both; they hate the dark 
side and would like to have the light, could it be had with- 
out darkness. When they speak of the vanity of life we must 
remind ourselves of the story of the sour grapes; they would 
not call it vain if it could be had without death. Yet noth- 
ing is to be achieved by revulsion and denial, not only 
because the attitude is fundamentally false, but because the 
denial of a thing does not make one free of it. Paradoxically, 
hatred binds one to the thing one hates, for if anything has 
enough power over a man to make him hate it, to that extent 
he is bound and conditioned by it. But while hatred is 
extracted, love is given. Therefore freedom comes not 
through hatred and denial, but through love and affirma- 
tion. ‘‘Love’’ is not meant in the sense of ‘‘like’’ as opposed 
to ‘‘dislike,’ for one may love without liking; the two are 
on different planes. To love both the root and the flower, 
earth and heaven, slime and air, death and life is not merely 
to like decay because it makes possible growth, it is to bring 
the two together into an inseparable unity and to become 
one with it by a complete acceptance, until, beholding it, 
man can make to himself that tremendous affirmation—Zat 
tuam asi—That art thou! 


WATER AND THE WIND. 


In the Book of Genesis it is said that before the world was 


163 
Part Three 


made ‘‘the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.’ 
In all the cosmogonies of the ancient world, Water was made 
the symbol of the Mother of the Universe—the passive and 
yielding substance from which all things proceeded. 
Whether or no this myth will bear the test of scientific 
examination, its value does not consist in its being an histor- 
ical truth. For the creation of the world from the union of 
Water and the Spirit is an allegory wherein we may read not 
so much a truth of the past as a truth which may give us 
light in the present. Spirit means breath, wind, life, move- 
ment, and Water means the substance which is moved. Spirit 
is light and Water is heavy; one is positive and the other 
negative, one male and the other female, and while both are 
in themselves ‘‘without form and void,’’ their union is the 
birth of form. For the wind, entering into the water, rears 
up waves, and the whole surface of the ocean of life is stirred 
into an ever-moving vastness of dancing shapes. 


In all the world there are no two things more elusive 
than water and the wind. Water may be grasped in the hands, 
yet it is never held, for the harder the grasp, the faster it 
slips through the fingers. A man may try to catch the wind, 
and though he feels it all around him there is nothing for 
him to seize. If it blows into a room, it cannot be caught 
by closing the door, for the air which is trapped is no longer 
wind. Whatever is separated, cut off from the living Whole, 
and shut away, loses its life. 


Yet in a universe born of Water and the Spirit man 
cherishes the illusion that there is a permanence and a rigid- 
ity in things. But wherever there is life and form, the more 
there is of life, the more does the form change. Where is 
there more life than in the ceaseless play of waves on the 
shore of the sea? And where is there more subtlety and 
impermanence of form? The strange patterns of form on the 
shifting water,the leaping clouds of spray and the tumbling 
curves of the waves—all is unceasing movement and unceas- 
ing change, which nothing can stay or hold. Try to catch 


164 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


the spray, and it has vanished; pick up the water in your 
hands, and its life and movement have gone. So is it with 
all things in the universe. 


Thus all forms are vain if impermanence is to be 
accounted vanity. Certainly forms are vain to him who seeks 
permanence. But the secret of life is to abandon the desire 
for the eternity of forms. Those who have surrendered this 
desire find in the endless play of Water and Spirit, form and 
life, the joy which is wisdom. For them, forms are no longer 
vain; they know that their evanescence is their glory. The 
cause of immeasurable vanity, abomination and folly is the 
longing to grasp and keep things which exist through move- 
ment and change. To try to fasten the universe into a set of 
ideas, to hold on to a feeling of happiness, to possess those 
whom one loves, to perpetuate the circumstances that bring 
joy—these indeed are vanities. The beauty of music would 
not exist if every note and phrase did not sound for just its 
appointed time and then give place to another; but hold a 
note for longer than its time and the melody is broken, the 
life and movement have gone. 


Therefore wisdom is the love of change, of the move- 
ment, the dance of life, without which the universe would 
vanish into nothing. The fool strives to keep still and pos- 
sess the forms of life that he may enjoy their loveliness for 
ever. Yet as the plucked flower dies, every form clutched 
in the fingers of his desire withers away and he declares that 
the form is vain. He is deceived. For he who has wisdom, 
knowing that things exist only through their impermanence, 
perceives their true loveliness. In affirming change he is born 
anew ‘‘of Water and the Spirit’’ for he enters into their play, 
he joins in their dance, seeing that he, too, is also a form 
and only has life because he must vanish away. This, then, 
is the music of life and the dance of the universe, the play 
of Water and the Spirit. To move with it is joy and life, but 
he who would not change, who would not die, is already 
dead. 


165 
Part Three 


FIRE. 


Out of fire came this earth, and all that live upon it has its 
life from fire. No one can compute the benefits which we 
receive from the sun: it lifts the moisture from the seas and 
scatters it over the land as refreshing rain; its rays give energy 
to all that grows; its heat protects us from ice and snow. Yet 
that same sun scorches our crops and dries up the rivers, 
bringing disease and famine, for of all the elements none 
is more useful and none more dangerous than fire. And just 
as there is a fire which gives life to this macrocosm of 
planets, so there is a fire which gives life to the microcosm 
of man. And as both give life, so also both give death. If we 
believe the ancient teachings, we shall conceive the visible 
sun as the symbol of a spiritual sun, of the Spirit whose rays 
are the spirits of all living things. So we may conceive that 
the visible fire in man is the lesser form of one of those rays 
which proceed from the greater sun. But this does not con- 
cern us here; we would speak of the fire in man which is 
visible, the fire which drives him, which is desire, emotion, 
passion, love. These things incite man to an abundant life 
and fill him with activity; at the same time they burn him 
just as flames eat away the logs and die out amid the ashes 
of forms that were not strong enough to hold them and sur- 
vive. The more there is of activity and life, the more there 
is of decay and death. For Life is like the fair flower which 
feeds upon the filth of manure. 


The precepts of wise men and teachers of religion con- 
tain many warnings as to the dangers of the passions and 
desires, but in all things there is a Middle Way and it seems 
that in such precepts too little is said of their uses. For desire 
and passion is no more an evil in itself than the sun or a 
flame; only the method in which we employ it may be 
judged good or evil. Much ill may be wrought when pas- 
sion, when emotion is uncontrolled, and in the same way 
much destruction is occasioned when fire is not made to 


166 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


keep to its proper place. But only a fool would advise us 
to dispense with fire because, if we are careless with it in 
preparing our food, we burn our fingers. When primaeval 
man first discovered that flames might be produced by the 
rubbing together of sticks, he must often have hurt himself 
through unguarded use of his new power. If such hurt had 
persuaded him to abandon the use of fire, the human race 
would to this day be living in trees and caves, wearing gar- 
ments of rough skins and furs. But, through courage, man 
learnt how flame might be controlled until it became the 
foundation of many arts and sciences. 


Therefore those who have come to harm through ill 
use of the passions and desires, and those who have wit- 
nessed such harm in others, should not give too much heed 
to the fear which would have them abandon such things 
altogether. Many are those who have changed suddenly from 
the life of extreme sensuality to the life of extreme asceti- 
cism, but in this there is no wisdom. For before man can 
afford to ignore and to forget the fire of passion he must 
first become a master in its use. And this is true also of all 
the faculties and senses of body and mind. Being endowed 
with such faculties, man is responsible for their right use. 
It is ill to squander them, and it is also ill to deny them, 
to believe that wisdom can only be found through the com- 
plete abandonment of all desire and feeling like the man in 
the parable of Jesus who went and hid his talent in the earth. 


Reading the teachings of the ancient sages of the East, 
there are some in the West who seek to strangle their emo- 
tions and root out their desires. But in so doing they mis- 
understand those teachings, forgetting that they are directed 
only to those who have first learnt the right use of their facul- 
ties. In any art the rules and responsibilities can only be set 
aside in favour of a greater freedom when those rules have 
been mastered. So in the art of life, there can only be free- 
dom from passion and desire when that has been mastered 
until the possibility of its being squandered can no longer 


167 
Part Three 


trouble the mind. The novice in the art of riding a horse 
must attend closely to the manner of holding the reins, of 
sitting upon the saddle and directing its footsteps. The 
unbroken horse must be carefully watched. But when the 
novice has learnt proficiency or when the horse is broken, 
then the rider can let his mind pass to other things and ride 
on his way undisturbed. The abolition of the horse, how- 
ever, would not solve his problems. The Buddha is often 
recorded to have likened the mind and the desires to 
unbroken steeds, but it is necessary that they should be cor- 
rectly used, not disused, before there can be any Nirvana. 
Disuse is mere regression; the log remains a log, for having 
no flame it gives no warmth; the muscles of the horse grow 
weak, for it is not exercised; man becomes again a helpless 
infant, for he refuses to develop his powers. 


Therefore it is unwise to speak overmuch of the for- 
getting of all desire and of freedom from passion, for they 
are few who have any need for such freedom. Desire and 
passion do not exist simply in order that we may become 
free from them. Rightly used they can construct things of 
beauty and delight which none can claim to despise unless 
he can himself construct such things with so great a profi- 
ciency that they entertain him no longer. We cannot despise 
the things of the senses unless we are first masters of all the 
arts which pertain to them; otherwise we do not know what 
is best in the world of sense, and so cannot judge that world. 
Few indeed are those who are artists in the use of their facul- 
ties of body and mind. Every faculty has its art, which, when 
developed is a thing of delight and a legitimate joy. There- 
fore we have enough to occupy us in learning the arts of 
the faculties which are ours already, before we begin to think 
of new faculties which shall displace the old. But some, look- 
ing ahead, feel that there can be no satisfaction and no joy 
in these arts. They meditate on the vanity of all that can be 
achieved through artistry with sight and sound and touch, 
with feeling and emotion, with intellect and muscle. Most 


168 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


frequently, these are they who have never achieved anything 
in such artistry; for them the wine of life is sour, and in 
beauty of form and movement, in the fleeting joys of love, 
of friendship and of pleasure they see only emptiness and 
dust. But the sourness is not in the wine; it is in an ill diges- 
tion arising from an immoderate and unskilful drinking. If 
forms were not vain and transient, if desires and feelings 
and thoughts were not changing and perishable, if they were 
external, fixed and rigid, they would lose all beauty. For 
there is no greater ugliness than a monotony, even of per- 
fection; perfection is death in that it permits of no further 
growth. He who desires it is welcome to it, but we shall give 
a new meaning to the enjoyment of vanity. 


MAN, WOMAN AND CHILD. 


Like a pendulum man is swung between the pairs of oppo- 
sites, hurled unwillingly from one to the other, involved in 
a war between them in which he, through ignorance, takes 
a part. For he imagines that one can be held and the other 
cast away, that in the end good can conquer evil, beauty 
ugliness, joy pain, and life death. His struggle is great, for 
he longs above all things to be free from the bondage which 
taints all joy with the certainty of pain, all life with the 
inevitability of death. Yet one is only known through the 
existence of the other. As is said by Lao Tzu: 


When the world speaks of beauty as being 
beautiful, ugliness is at once defined. 

When goodness is seen to be good, evil is at 
once apparent. 

So do existence and non-existence mutually 
give rise to one another, as that which is 
difficult and that which is easy, distant 
and near, high and low.... 


Likewise, if the pendulum swings to one side, it must 


of necessity swing to the other, for the right implies the left 
and the front the back. 


169 
Part Three 


Yet conflict between the opposites exists only in the 
mind of man. In his striving for mastery the conflict is 
increased, for to set up one against the other is to disregard 
the law of his own kind whereby man and woman are not 
set at enmity, but wedded to one another. More than this, 
the harmony is achieved not simply by the bringing together 
of the two, but by what is born of their union. For the mean- 
ing of man and woman is the child. So also to the sage all 
opposites are given a meaning by that which is seen when 
they are known as mutually dependent. Just as there is a 
child of man and woman, there is a child of life and death, 
good and evil, joy and pain, liberty and law. 


Now in a certain city there were two philosophers 
whose custom it was to hold debate in a public place. It hap- 
pened one day that a sage of great repute came to that city, 
and as he walked in the streets he chanced upon the two 
philosophers in heated argument before an assembly of their 
disciples. And one of them said, ‘“‘I tell you that in all life 
there is only law. Whatever comes into being proceeds from 
a cause, and every cause is the effect of a previous cause. 
Thus all things are predetermined by what has been, and 
each thought and deed is but the inevitable result of thoughts 
and deeds in the past. As each thing is born so must it die; 
all must pass through the cycle of being, and in passing must 
submit in every detail to the decrees of fate. From law there 
is no escape, and in the whole universe nothing happens 
which is not in obedience to law.” But the other laughed 
at him, and turning to the assembly said, ‘‘Hear what this 
man saith. All, he says, is of law and moves on its way like 
the several parts of a machine. He would have you believe 
that life is dead, that all things are fixed to eternity by Fate. 
So he says because he cannot escape from the machine-like 
reasonings of his own mind. All that he touches he kills, for 
he cannot see it otherwise than as a machine. Certainly his 
logic is right, but logic is of law, and in life is no logic. Logic 
is only of man’s mind which would fasten its own likeness 


170 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


upon the universe. But I tell you that in life is only liberty, 
and that which lives can in no way be defined by law. For 
that which lives unceasingly changes and moves, while defi- 
nition remains fixed. Life is a machine! Aye, and if you truly 
believed that you would make an end of yourselves, for in 
living further in such bondage there would be no joy.’ In 
this strain they continued to debate, and no agreement was 
reached. But one who stood in the assembly grew weary 
of such talk, and interrupted them, saying, ‘‘Here amongst 
us is a sage of great repute. Let him decide the issue between 
these two.’’ Whereat they consented, and turning to the sage 
were about to explain themselves to him, but he smiled and 
said, ‘‘Shall the night contest the existence of the day? Shall 
the right maintain that there is no left? You are both right, 
and also you are both wrong, for you are wrong in saying 
that the other is not right. If all were law then all would 
be strangled to the death. If all were liberty then all would 
perish in confusion. But if liberty is to live, its bounds must 
be set by law, and if law indeed exists it implies something 
free which is to be ruled. Liberty is of life and law of death, 
and law sets bounds to liberty as death sets bounds to life. 
Without death life would stand still and cease to live, for 
all things would remain just as they are for ever, and never 
grow old. Through death there is life, and through life, 
death.”’ 

Thus out of life and death there is born a child for 
which there is no name in our tongue. In Sanskrit it is called 
Tathata—‘Suchness’—the condition of living and dying 
which is the greater Life. This is the Higher Third which 
is born of two opposites. But is such a Higher Third truly 
outside the opposites? Is there not yet another pair, com- 
prising the Higher Third and the Lower Fourth? If the two 
opposites of man and woman produce the child, has not 
the child an opposite? Cannot the child be opposed to the 
adult? There is a saying Divide et impera, divide and rule, 
and if there is a Lower Fourth it is ruled and mastered by 


171 
Part Three 


the Higher Third, because whereas the Third is one, the 
Fourth is divided. For the adult is either man or woman, 
whereby the Fourth ceases to exist and becomes the First 
and the Second which originally produced the Third. Truly, 
man and woman are ruled by the child, for in any house- 
hold there is nothing more powerful than an infant. By his 
weakness and helplessness he commands all attention. Thus 
itis often that an adult, wishing to have power over others, 
becomes an invalid so that he may be treated once more as 
a child. 


But the child-state of the invalid must be distinguished 
from the child-state of the sage who rules over the pairs of 
opposites. ‘Ye must become again as little children’’ is a pre- 
cept which may be interpreted in two ways—as a means of 
escaping adult responsibilities, or as a means of entering that 
new life of which it is said that ‘‘except a man be born again, 
he cannot see the kingdom of God.’ So also, the quest for 
Nirvana may be an attempt to flee from the world or to 
accept it to the uttermost, so much so that the sage can have 
no peace until all things have entered into Buddhahood. 
Thus there are two kinds of children which may proceed 
from the pairs of opposites, the living and the still-born. 
Those who accept life and death are the living, and those 
who wouldescape them are the stillbom, for Enlightenment 
is not found outside the universe, but within it. In the words 
of Monoimus the Arabian: ‘‘Cease to seek after God (as with- 
out thee), and the universe, and things similar to these; seek 
Him from out of thyself... . And learn whence is sorrow 
and joy, and love and hate, and waking though one would 
not, and sleeping though one would not, and getting angry 
though one would not, and falling in love though one would 
not. And if thou shouldst closely investigate these things, 
thou wilt find Him in thyself, one and many, just as the atom: 
thus finding from thyself a way out of thyself.’ 


In this way the sage awakes in himself the Holy Child, 
the Christ Principle, ascending from the state of conflict 


172 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


between life and death to the stage where both are seen as 
aspects of the greater Life. For the greater Life is in the 
ordered music of change, in the synthesis of law and lib- 
erty, birth and death, force and inertia, which in union make 
possible the movement of the Ever Living. Therefore, in 
accepting both pairs of opposites as essential not only to 
one another but also to the very existence of the universe, 
he becomes no longer the slave who is torn helplessly 
between them but the master whom they serve. He is born 
again of Water and the Spirit. Even so, his task is not yet 
finished. Indeed, the task of evolving life is never done, but 
beyond the mastery of the pairs of opposites there is yet 
another task for man. 


There is a danger that, full of the pride of mastery, 
man may set himself in opposition to the pairs of opposites, 
and thus begin over again the struggle which he has resolved 
into harmony. To claim victory over the world of opposites, 
to take pride therein, to set oneself up as God as distinct 
from the world, this is once more to fall into illusion. He 
who glories in his conquest of the world has not conquered 
himself; he has become the victim of another opposite; he 
has created the opposition of a Higher Third and a Lower 
Fourth. For he does not perceive that the Lower Fourth is 
illusion, that there is no opposition between the man and 
woman and the child, between life-and-death and the greater 
Life. In the highest sense life-and-death /s the greater Life, 
Samsara és Nirvana, the Son of Man és the Son of God. The 
Higher Third is in no way apart from the pairs of opposites; 
it is produced by them; it exists in them, and they in it. For 
the Higher Third is just the harmony of opposites wherein 
the opposites become, not blended into one another, but 
understood as mutually dependent and mutually produc- 
tive. Hence the sage, attaining mastery, renounces all claim 
to victory. For to claim lordship over the world is to be a 
slave to the world, to be possessed by an illusion of the 
world, the illusion that one opposite can triumph over 


173 
Part Three 


another. Truly to accept the opposites is not only to receive 
but also to give; victory comes through acceptance, but when 
acceptance is real there can be no thought of victory. Thus 
the sage receives the world into himself, and gives himself 
to the world. In giving himself he yields his claim to vic- 
tory, for in truth there is no victory over the world; he has 
only seen the world as it is. 


CONCLUSION. 


We have now enquired into the meaning of seven symbols, 
but as there is nothing in the world which is not an image 
of eternal verities, we might probe forever into hidden mean- 
ings. For in taking these symbols we have chosen those 
things which are alive and of the world of experience as 
distinct from such abstract symbols as the circle, the swastika 
and the cross. But of living symbols let this be said: the sym- 
bol is not less than its meaning. It is not enough to search 
for philosophy in the lotus, in water, wind, fire, man, woman 
and child, for through this we might think that the world 
of forms is no more than the outward representation of 
abstract principles. Certainly the world is such a represen- 
tation, but it is more than this. The knowledge of meanings 
is of little avail unless it can teach us to know more truly 
the beauty and ugliness of the lotus, the wetness of water, 
the motion of wind, the heat of fire, the love between man 
and woman, and the birth of the child. Through philoso- 
phy we may learn that what we once considered ordinary 
objects and events are in truth mere symbols of an eternal 
world more real than the temporal. But this is not all, for 
we must see once again that the lotus is a lotus, that water 
is water, and fire is fire—with this difference: that such things 
will appear no longer ordinary, but miraculous and full of 
wonder. 


174 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


LETTERS I RECEIVE 


THE ‘‘WHAT”’ AND THE “‘HOW’”’ 
By the Editor 


From Buddhism in England 
May-June, 1936 


It is often said that letter-writing is a lost art and that nowa- 
days no one bothers to write more than a sort of enlarged 
telegram. Don’t you believe it. The people who used to write 
long and beautiful letters in the leisurely days that are past 
have their modern counterparts; their style is, of course, 
different, but I have no doubt they take as much trouble. 
The difference between now and then is that now more peo- 
ple write letters, and those who are responsible for these 
enlarged telegrams would not have been able to write at all 
if they had lived two hundred years ago. If you are a writer, 
and especially if you are an editor, and especially if your 
writing and editing is concerned with philosophical and reli- 
gious subjects, you are bound to receive a large number of 
letters. Some of these raise such important and interesting 
problems that I have thought it worth while to devote some 
space in each number of this magazine to a discussion of 
questions of general interest, suggested by letters which I 
receive in the past two months. 


‘‘T know what you say is true. But when I read your 
article it seems so easy—whereas no one wants to know 
what must be done, but bow? and where? and even more 
so, wherein don’t we do it now? I am fogged by your stat- 
ing a problem (my problem, and everybody’s) in terms which 
do not help me to define it any more than giving it a poetic 


175 
Part Tbree 


symbol and so perhaps sending it further from fitting an 
actual form.”’ 


It does not matter what the article in question was, 
except that it illustrated an ancient truth by means of a sym- 
bol. The writer of this letter had no difficulty in understand- 
ing that truth and its relation to the symbol; she even agreed 
that what was said was right, but thereafter she was at a loss, 
for although she knew what to do she could not see how 
to do it. That may seem a very simple matter to remedy. If 
I say, ‘‘We should build a bridge across this river,’ and my 
friend says, ‘Yes, I agree, but how?”’ then it should not be 
difficult to explain, ‘‘Well, we must cut some trees, saw them 
into planks and then lay them across from one bank to the 
other’”’ Many more difficult problems could be explained 
with an equal simplicity, except that the explanations would 
be longer, but that is all very well when we are explaining 
things which it takes no more than the intellect to under- 
stand. Thus it is a simple matter to show how to add ten 
to eight, because both the explanation and the addition are 
performed by the intellect, but it is a very different matter 
to explain how to love, how to appreciate music or how to 
acquire wisdom. The trouble is that almost any explanation 
must be made in terms of intellect, that is, the reasoning 
faculty of the mind, which measures, calculates, makes 
deductions, discriminates, analyses and in short “‘puts two 
and two together.’ But such things as love, beauty and wis- 
dom cannot be measured for they are qualities and not quan- 
tities. Thus we cannot devise a formula for a beautiful piece 
of music, such as: five hundred quavers, forty semi-quavers, 
a thousand crotchets, two hundred minims and eight semi- 
breves arranged in bars, each bar being of the value of four 
crotchets, equals one Overture. Unfortunately, not all 
intellectual explanations of abstract qualities are as absurd 
as this—at least, not apparently so, or we might be more 
often on our guard against them. But leaving aside questions 
of how to write beautiful music or build bridges, let us con- 


176 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


sider the problem for which so many of us are seeking an 
answer and which, after all, is the greatest of all problems. 
How can I find happiness? How can I find Enlightenment? 
How can I find help from this Buddhism? 


Well, we are always trying to give answers in this 
magazine. We say, ‘‘Give up selfish craving—the desire to 
make yourself God.’ Or ‘‘Study the Four Noble Truths. Keep 
the Precepts. Follow the Eightfold Path,’’ and if more detailed 
instructions are wanted we write a long text-book on Con- 
centration and Meditation giving numerous exercises in 
mind-control. We publish articles intended to be of help in 
the ordinary affairs of life, explanations of the workings of 
the mind and the emotions, and while some of these are 
advanced and difficult, others are so simple that one would 
think a child could understand them. But were we to enlist 
the services of sages to write for us, if we could have a Bud- 
dha to write a leading article in every number, we should 
not necessarily be of any more help to our readers than we 
are already. After all, do not most of us make a fairly regu- 
lar practice of reading the words of the Buddha or the other 
great teachers of men? And yet, with all these great teach- 
ings at our finger tips, most of us still go on seeking, trying 
to find some interpretation of these teachings or some new 
teaching which will give us just that something that we lack. 
But what can we say that is new, and what can we write 
that has not been written already in another form? Even the 
Buddha said nothing new, for there were Buddhas before 
him, and their teachings were forgotten just as this may some 
day be forgotten. 


So we might write and teach and preach for ever, but 
still people would fail to practise Buddhism; they would still 
go on reading and reading with an ever-growing hunger for 
words; they would still be unable to understand what we 
said or else come to us with the eternal complaint, ‘‘ Yes, 
I understand what you say perfectly and agree with it 
entirely. You have explained what I should do in every detail, 


177 
Part Three 


but how am I to do it?’ I ask the same question myself, 
and I confess it worries me a lot, but I think I have found 
some sort of an answer. Let me return to the analogy of 
music. No one on earth could write a book giving a com- 
plete explanation of how to write beautiful music, although 
thousands of people have written books on the mere tech- 
nique of music. Though there are works on Harmony, 
Orchestration, Counterpoint, Tempo and the rest, there is 
no work on how to become a Mozart. In just the same way 
all that appears in this magazine and even all that has been 
said by Buddhas and sages is no more than a collection of 
instructions on the technique of Buddhism. These instruc- 
tions are very useful in their way, but by themselves are so 
much waste paper. They can be of use to you if you can use 
them, just as the technique of music is useful to one who 
has a beauty in his soul which he wishes to express. But it 
cannot give him that beauty. Similarly, if you already have 
a conscious spark of Enlightenment within you, you will 
be able to use the teachings of Buddhism to increase it and 
express it. But if you have not, no amount of words will 
create it and though you study till your hair turns grey you 
will find nothing because, in themselves, words are mere 
lifeless forms. Yet you are by no means a ‘“‘lost soul.” 


The spark of Enlightenment is in everyone simply 
because everyone has life. But not everyone is conscious of 
the spark; in fact, this consciousness is an unusual achieve- 
ment and there is no need to feel that you are an outcast 
or that you are subnormal because you haven't got it. (In 
strict confidence, I don’t think I’ve got it myself.) But I 
believe that we can find this spark if we look, in the first 
place, not to words and teachings and technical principles 
but to living things. If this spark exists anywhere, where 
would one expect to find it? Surely the answer is—in the 
people who have it. Not in what they write, or say or do, 
but in what they are. To find someone like this, it is not 
necessary to go to Tibet or start hunting for a guru, for you 


178 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


have it yourself, only you don’t know it. You are one of those 
people, so is your next-door neighbour. And once again you 
ask, ‘‘How am I to know that?” The answer to that is a ques- 
tion. Does the great music of the world seem lovely to you? 
If so, you have within you a little Mozart. Have you any 
regard at all for your fellow men? Do their interests or trou- 
bles seem of any importance, even if they have nothing to 
do with you? If so, you have a little Bodhisattva. Do you 
reverence wisdom when you meet with it, not in wise say- 
ings or learned books, but in life, in people? If so, you have 
a little Buddha, a little spark of Enlightenment. 


Wisdom can no more be found in books on Buddhism 
or any other philosophy than you can find out how to love 
your wife or husband in a text-book on Matrimony. If you 
cannot find it in living beings, in yourself and in others, all 
the scriptures in the world are worthless, for they are about 
wisdom; wisdom itself is alive and can no more be set down 
than sunlight can be caught in a box. But you may ask again, 
‘“‘How shall I recognize it when I meet it? You say that if 
I reverence wisdom, then I have a little Buddha, but I do 
not know that what I reverence 7s wisdom and I can’t recog- 
nize my Buddha.” It is like asking, ‘‘How do you love? And 
how can you know that your love really is love?’’ That is 
the most terrible question that can be asked; more than any 
other it presses for an answer, but it cannot be answered— 
at least, not in the same terms in which it is asked, in words 
or ideas. Some things can only be communicated from man 
to man by means of what is known in Zen Buddhism as 
‘direct transmission’’; that is, enabling someone to under- 
stand and develop a certain quality by showing it to him 
in yourself. Well, sometimes we are fortunate enough to meet 
someone who can help us in that way; yet if we believe in 
Karma, we may be sure that that is an opportunity which 
we have earned. It comes to all who are ready for it. 


What more can be said? We have reached the point 
where words can go no further, but perhaps just a hint can 


179 
Part Three 


be given to the answer of that most unanswerable of ques- 
tions. It has been said; ‘* You ask me how you shall find Truth. 
Would you ask me also how you should love? But I say it 
is by trying that you fail, for your strivings divide you from 
what you seek. Be not as one who tries to kiss his own lips.” 


LETTERS I RECEIVE 


TALKING OF WAR 
By the Editor 


From Buddbism in England 
July-August, 1936 
@ 


It is with the greatest hesitation that I mention this subject 
at all. Nowadays everyone is talking about War, so much so 
that it seems to have attained the position of principal bee 
in the public bonnet. What with innumerable films, articles 
in the Press, speeches and movements, one feels that one 
owes one’s readers a profound apology for adding yet 
another few columns of print to this interminable discus- 
sion. The danger is that what we think about, whether with 
pleasure or with pain, is inclined to happen. Thoughts cre- 
ate things, no matter whether they are thoughts of attrac- 
tion or repulsion, and a widespread fear of War is just as 
dangerous as the popular militarism of certain nations which 
are described as ‘‘war-mongering.’’ Yet several readers of 
Buddhism in England have written in the past two months 
asking for more prominence to be given to the problem of 
War and Peace, and it occurred to me that this would be 
a good opportunity of presenting the question in a way in 
which it has never been presented before in this magazine. 


180 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


Going through back numbers, I find that all discussion of 
the evils of War has been based on the idea of War as a denial 
of brotherly love, of the fundamental Unity of Life which 
is the raison d’‘étre of the Buddhist attitude to one’s fellow 
beings. 

No one can dispute that War is such a denial, but it 
does not necessarily follow that the chief cause of War is 
hatred of other people, especially in modern civilization. 
For instance, it would be absurd to argue that the entry of 
England into the last war was the result of age-old hatred 
between the English and German peoples. What hatred there 
was was stirred up at the last moment by Government 
propaganda, and of course it can be argued that the 
individual Englishman was in no way responsible for the 
conflict, that he was the mere pawn of a capitalist oligar- 
chy. I do not want to enter into a discussion of economic 
determinism, but even if this theory is true, it in no way 
conflicts with the principle that a nation gets what govern- 
ment it deserves, and that if War comes upon it, from what- 
ever immediate cause, it is the nation’s Karma both 
collectively and individually. 


At one time, warfare concerned, in the main, only a 
small section of society—the professional soldiers. Certainly 
cities and villages were attacked and their populations were 
massacred, but only in comparatively recent times has mass 
warfare become a phenomenon of European civilization. At 
the same time, the old motive for warfare, territorial expan- 
sion, has become obsolete, for under present economic con- 
ditions it is impossible for any nation to become more 
prosperous by conquering another. The expense involved 
cripples both victor and vanquished, and no amount of con- 
quest will solve the fundamental economic difficulty of this 
age—the problem of scarcity amid plenty. No one in his right 
mind could pretend that Italy went to war with Abyssinia 
out of greed for wealth. The Italian Government must have 
known from the beginning that the war would ruin the 


181 
Part Three 


already unstable financial position of the nation, and the 
only possible political motive was the glorification of Fas- 
cism by means of a victorious war. But underlying this was 
a psychological motive—a motive which is intensified by 
Fascism but not caused by it, a motive which exists to-day 
in almost every European country. 


With the progress of what we are pleased to call civili- 
zation, the behaviour of man becomes more and more sub- 
jected to a rational order. In all primitive races definite 
provision is made for an essential irrationality in man, which 
‘civilization’ does not officially recognize. This takes the 
form of orgies held at certain seasons of the year, though 
no one need imagine that the life of the primitive is one 
long orgy. On the contrary, he is just as much set about by 
tabus as the civilized man—in some instances even more 
so. But there are special times when tabus are thrown aside, 
and the tribe joins in ceremonies and dances involving a 
tremendous outpouring of the emotions. At one time these 
festivals were held throughout Europe, and the Continen- 
tal carnivals of the present day are their pale relics. But wher- 
ever the restraining influence of Protestantism has made itself 
felt, these emotional safety-valves have been entirely closed 
with results both extremely good and extremely evil. 


Among the irrational desires of man—and particularly 
of man in any advanced state of civilization—is the desire 
for blood and death. This desire is always emphasized when 
a large proportion of the population is either idle or sub- 
jected to monotonous forms of work which stifle the mento- 
emotional nature. Imperial Rome had its Circus Maximus, 
where crowds flocked to see the crudest spectacles of death. 
The degenerate Spanish Empire produced the love of the 
bullring, and in India (home of the greatest extremes of good 
and evil on earth) is found the most pronounced form of 
this death-worship—the cult of Kali, the bride of Shiva, 
which is the adoration of final annihilation under the sym- 
bol of the female principle. We are accustomed to regard 


182 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


these orgies as signs of barbarism, but, revolting as they are, 
it is probable that the historian of the future will look upon 
them as comparatively harmless beside the hideous, imper- 
sonal slaughter of modern warfare. For it seems that this 
slaughter is less the result of hatred than of the damning- 
up of man’s irrational desires. 


Many things are possible in time of war which would 
otherwise be denied. Murder, which ordinarily would be 
punished, is condoned; unusual opportunities are offered 
for sexual promiscuity; and a release is found from the hum- 
drum isolation of everyday life in the adventurous fellow- 
ship of the Army. Emotional outbursts in the form of 
hysterical mass meetings become almost commonplace, and 
the attitude of ‘‘let us drink to-day, for to-morrow we die”’ 
rouses man’s emotional capacity to its highest level. Thus 
while primitive races relieve their emotions by a safety-valve, 
modern man allows the boiler to burst. Certainly the gigantic 
scale of modern warfare is directly due to our knowledge 
of machinery, but machinery was produced by the same ten- 
dency which closed the emotional safet y-valve—the desire 
for progress, order, efficiency and rationality, carried to its 
furthest extremes. 


But the idea of man, in his present stage of evolution, 
as a rational being is a conceit of the mere surface of our 
minds. However muchhe may order the externals of his life, 
however much he may cultivate ‘‘good behaviour,’ in the 
depths of his being the primitive, unreasoning forces of his 
nature remain as mighty as ever. In time of war they break 
from their prison and make havoc until they subside with 
exhaustion. No one, however, is suggesting that man should 
cease to order his life and attempt to cultivate good 
behaviour. There is a picturesque phrase about throwing out 
the baby with the bath-water; the prevention of War by the 
giving up of such tiresome things as morality, discipline and 
good manners would no doubt provide an excellent excuse 
for a perpetual ‘‘good time.’ Doubtless it would prevent War 


183 
Part Three 


in any violent form, but I can imagine nothing more dull 
than a permanent freedom from discipline. It would be like 
a diet of strawberries and cream, and we would, from neces- 
sity, very soon be swinging over to the ascetical fare of plain 
water and dry biscuits. But just as a perpetual debauch would 
be not only dull but productive of a disagreeable asceticism, 
so also a perpetual attempt at good behaviour is both dull 
and productive of such highly repulsive excesses as War. 


What, then, is the solution? Are we to spend half our 
time in ascetic discipline and half in sensual enjoyment? Are 
we to mould our lives so as to be not very good and not 
very evil? It is rather difficult to imagine what the latter alter- 
native would be like; certainly it would be dull, and we 
should probably be aching for some extreme behaviour so 
as to beautify the landscape of our existence with valleys 
and mountains through boredom with a vast, flat plain. 
There remains the former alternative. I think most of us will 
admit that that, too, is rather dull. It does not get us any- 
where, either to one extreme or the other. It is the monot- 
ony of a pendulum, swinging its measured distance 
throughout eternity. But the pendulum has an arm, the 
weight is at one end, and at the other is the pivot which 
remains unmoved however far the weight swings. Suppose 
one could shift one’s centre of consciousness from the 
weight to the pivot, and so find a position which is neither 
good nor evil nor a compromise between the two—a Higher 
Third, which is above and between the pairs of opposites. 
Jung speaks of this in his commentary to the Secret of the 
Golden Flower. ‘‘But if the unconscious,’ he writes, ‘‘can 
be recognized as a co-determining quantity along with the 
conscious, and if it can be lived in such a way that conscious 
and unconscious (in a narrower sense instinctive) demands 
are given recognition as far as possible, the centre of gravity 
of the total personality shifts its position. It ceases to be in 
the ego, which is merely the centre of consciousness, and 
is located instead in what might be called a virtual point 


184 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


between the conscious and the unconscious. ... There 
develops a personality who, so to speak, suffers only in the 
inferior parts of himself, but in the superior regions, to carry 
out the future, is singularly detached from painful as well 
as pleasing events.”’ 


Any of the pairs of opposites can be substituted for 
the words ‘‘conscious”’ and ‘‘unconscious,’’ ‘‘painful’’ and 
‘‘pleasing.’’ We might also say that if equal recognition can 
be given to both the rational and irrational elements in man, 
we can develop a centre of being which is detached from 
both good and evil? Do we perform acts of charity and com- 
mit murders with utter impartiality and equanimity? Do we 
sit smiling on the pivot of the pendulum and watch our 
weight (which is our outward personality) swinging to kiss 
our fellow men on the one side and smite them onthe other? 
If we pull it too far in the kissing direction it will eventu- 
ally return with tremendous force on the other side; if we 
pull it too far in the smiting direction it will return again 
with a nauseating kiss. Do we witness these things unmoved? 
Do we just let it swing a medium distance? Or do we stop 
it swinging altogether? To do that would be to return to the 
inanimate existence of stones. It would be altogether with- 
out purpose—a refusal to solve a difficulty, a shameful 
escape from the task, an utter denial of life. And even then, 
it would be difficult, for spiritual suicide is but another 
extreme of the pendulum’s swing. It is the worship of Kali, 
the opposite of the fiercest desire for life and conscious- 
ness. Whichever way we move we find that we can never 
escape from an opposite, and while there are opposites the 
problem remains unsolved. For the pendulum must always 
return. 


This is the most difficult of all problems, and at this 
point I hazard only the most tentative answer to the ques- 
tion of the pairs of opposites. I shall be glad if all those who 
have any ideas to offer on the subject will write to me, so 
that we may clarify the problem among ourselves. I do not 


185 
Part Three 


fully understand my own answer, so I can only present it 
in the form of an analogy. When man has shifted the centre 
of his being from the weight of the pendulum to the pivot 
he can do something with it which he can never do while 
identifying himself with the weight. You can prove this by 
holding a piece of string in your hand with a weight on one 
end. You can do one of two things with it. You can let it 
swing to left and right, though you can never make it stay 
at either extreme. On the other hand, you can make it travel 
in a circle—and in this way the extremes vanish. To exe- 
cute this circular movement is a difficult task from the weight 
end. If you attach the pivot end to a nail on the wall, it will 
be a tiring performance to move the weight round the nail. 
It will be an impossible performance if the string is suffi- 
ciently long. The string between man and Buddha is very 
long. But a weight with a considerable length of string can 
be revolved with ease from the pivot end—and this is what 
the Enlightened Ones do with the pendulums of their lives. 


They revolve their weights, their personalities, in the 
same direction as the universe itself is revolving. Lesser 
beings do not revolve; they swing one way or the other. 
Sometimes they swing with the universal cycle, sometimes 
against it, which makes them alternately happy and miser- 
able. If they swing against the universal pendulum, its weight 
hits them and they suffer. If they swing with it, they can- 
not keep up the effort unless they shift the centre of their 
being to the universal pivot upon which all of us are hang- 
ing. There is only movement—ultimately beneficent move- 
ment, for the knocks which it gives us if we go against it 
only serve torouse us to the treading of the Path which leads 
to harmony with the cycle of Life. 


186 
The Earl) Writings of Alan Watts 


THE TRUTH THAT IS MORE 
THAN TEACHING. 


An Appeal to Buddhists on the occasion 
of the World Congress of Faiths. 


From Buddhism in England 
July-August, 1936 
e 


This summer, London is to be the scene of a rather unusual 
gathering. Early this month representatives of every impor- 
tant religion in the world will be meeting for a great Con- 
gress of Faiths of which the main object is ‘‘to discover what 
the various Faiths can contribute towards the establishment 
of World Fellowship,’ and ‘‘to seek for methods of express- 
ing that Supreme Ideal of Human Life which every man of 
whatever race or creed is seeking in his heart.’ 


Therefore this seems to be a fitting occasion to con- 
sider the subject of unity in religion and to examine some 
of the reasons why, even among Buddhists, there are 
innumerable sectarian squabbles which prevent us from 
working together like reasonable human beings. 


All schools of Buddhism are agreed that Life is a Unity, 
and that the apparent separateness of one being from another 
is illusion. However different we may appear to be on the 
surface,ultimately we all have our roots ina common source 
which you may call Life or Reality or whatever other name 
you may prefer. This is such an important Buddhist princi- 
ple that I have often wondered at the things which divide 
us into conflicting parties and which cause believers in this 
great truth to quarrel among themselves. All conflict must 


187 
Part Three 


take place on the plane of separateness, in the superficial 
and illusory aspect of Life where the fundamental Unity is 
not perceived. In the real aspect there can be no conflict, 
for there it is realized that the many are One. I believe that 
such conflict might be overcome if we could accept the fact 
that in Samsara—the world of form and separateness—it is 
in the very nature of things to disagree. In all the universe 
there is no one form that is in every respect the same as 
another, for all things, while they are essentially One, are 
unique in their outward appearance. 


Therefore quarrels are caused by looking for agree- 
ment where it cannot exist, and the man who quarrels with 
his fellows is he who seeks to impose his own form upon 
others. But in Samsara unity can only be achieved by agree- 
ing to differ. For difference is the very nature of Samsara, 
and unity cannot be achieved by trying to make separate 
forms the same as one another, but only by realizing that 
all forms have a common essence. For instance, if a bird is 
to be a bird, it would be ridiculous to expect the wings to 
be like the beak, or the claws like the tail. And yet many 
of us seriously expect such impossibilities to be achieved 
when we try to make others conform with our own pat- 
terns and plans. For the human race, in the same way as a 
bird, is an organism of which every part has a separate and 
distinct function or dharma, and the whole cannot be 
expressed in its parts unless each part is unique in its form 
and method of work. 


Just as the human race is a total organism, so are the 
followers of the Buddha of whatever sect or school. It is 
unfortunate, therefore, that within this great religious body 
there should be numerous conflicts and quarrels which pre- 
vent it from working as a harmonious whole. There is the 
conflict between Mahayana and Theravada, between the var- 
ious schools of thought about the Anatta doctrine, between 
theists and atheists, and between the Self-power and Other- 
power sects of China and Japan, to mention only a few. 


188 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


These conflicts prevent Buddhists from sincerely 
acknowledging one another as brothers, and destroy the 
effectiveness of acommon purpose within the greatest reli- 
gious community in the world. Of course, it would be too 
much to expect people not to quarrel, for the seeds of strife 
are planted deep in human nature. But it is not too much 
to expect the more conscious and intelligent members of 
this community to refrain from doctrinal squabbles and to 
realize that there is a deeper and infinitely more important 
bond between man and man than mere similarity of belief. 


We must accept the fact that, even among Buddhists, 
beliefs are bound to differ. For all belief in doctrines is a 
matter of intellect, and intellect is that faculty of the mind 
which discriminates, which forms ideas and concepts. All 
forms, whether mental or physical, are of Samsara; thus they 
will differ in greater or lesser degree with each individual, 
for, as we have seen, in Samsara there can be no two things 
of the same pattern. Therefore I am convinced that it is a 
mistake to try to achieve unity among Buddhists or between 
the members of any other religion by attempting to construct 
a common creed or even a minimum basis of generally 
accepted beliefs. We can be united and yet have different 
opinions. This may sound strange, even impossible, and so 
it would be if there were not in Buddhism a Truth that is 
more than teaching, more than a set of ideas about the uni- 
verse. 


The error which is at the root of all conflict is too 
great a reliance on forms. No one, unless he spent too much 
reverence on mere concepts, would quarrel with another 
because of his form of belief, or be offended because some- 
one disagreed with his own. If someone attacks my prop- 
erty and so offends me, my feeling of offence can only arise 
through attachment to property—which is not a Buddhist 
virtue. What applies to property must also apply to beliefs, 
concepts and doctrines, for these are the property of the 
mind. Zanba—selfish clinging—can apply just as much to 


189 
Part Three 


ideas as to money, for both are anicca, impermanent, and 
anatta, without essential reality. For a concept (even the 
concept of Karma or Anatta) is a form and as such is sub- 
ject to the same conditions as all other forms. Thus even 
the Dhamma is a part of Samsara, and for this reason the 
Buddha likened it to a raft for crossing a stream, a raft which 
must be left behind when the stream is crossed. Therefore 
if the Dhamma cannot enter Nirvana, it is certainly a part 
of Samsara. 


One should always be careful to avoid that simplest 
yet most dangerous of mistakes—the confusion of belief 
with Truth, the identification of the raft with the opposite 
bank of the stream. Beliefs are ideas about Truth and not 
Truth itself, for the formless Nirvana cannot be described 
by the forms of Samsara, and as all forms are illusory and 
impermanent, he who clings to beliefs is lost. He who would 
attain Nirvana must give up all clinging, for only in this way 
can he achieve the Enlightenment which is freedom from 
forms. That is not to say that he destroys all forms, but that 
he is no longer attached to them, that he no longer depends 
upon them for his peace of mind. Therefore let us make less 
ado about beliefs; no one ever travelled far on a road by 
clinging to its surface, and he who travels fastest, he who 
runs, touches it least with his feet. But how, then, shall we 
know that we are on the right road? Must we not depend 
upon the road if we would reach the Goal? Paradoxically 
the answer is: That road is the best upon which we feel we 
need depend least, for that road leads to non-attachment, 
to freedom from dependence. Further than this, non- 
attachment is that road, for Buddhism is essentially the art 
of setting the mind free from the forms which it uses. For 
the doctrines of Karma, Anatta, Dukkha, Rebirth and the 
rest are all teachings about the nature of Samsara; they are 
warnings to us to be careful of the snares of Samsara. But 
the Truth which is more than all these teachings can only 
be known when we depend neither upon Samsara nor on 


190 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


ideas about it or about anything else. Therefore why should 
intelligent Buddhists quarrel over the various merits of cer- 
tain sets of ideas and doctrines? For the real question for 
them is not in which set of doctrines to believe, but how 
to pass beyond all doctrines. Let them ask not, ‘‘How shall 
we reconcile our beliefs?’’ but ‘‘How shall we cease to 
depend on beliefs?’’ For the essence of Buddhism is the 
attainment of Enlightenment through freedom from all 
objects, forms and concepts—yes, even the concept that we 
must depend for our salvation on becoming free from 
objects, forms and concepts! Ultimately Buddhism goes as 
far as that, for even he who is attached only to Nirvana 
knows not Nirvana. If this is our ideal we shall become the 
laughing-stock of the world if we behave like the pundits 
of whom Omar Khayyam said: 


Myself when young did eagerly frequent 

Doctor and Saint, and heard great argument 
About it and about: but evermore 

Came out by the same door as in I went. 


LETTERS I RECEIVE 


IS THERE A SELF? 
By the Editor 


From Buddhism in England 
Sept.—Oct., 1936 


For some reason the doctrine of anatta is the occasion of 
endless controversy. The remarks of Mrs. Rhys Davids pro- 
duce storms of protest, and in the past few weeks I have 
seen several Buddhist periodicals containing somewhat 


191 
Part Three 


polemical articles on the subject. It has been said that three- 
quarters of controversy is due to inadequate definition or 
understanding of terms, and doubtless this is no exception 
to the rule. Naturally it is very difficult to discuss things intel- 
ligently unless we all know what we are talking about, but 
the real trouble with this particular discussion is that it has 
little or no relation to practical life. I do not say that it is 
not a very interesting discussion, in the same way as a cross- 
word puzzle or a game of chess is interesting. Certainly it 
is a peculiarly delightful and in every way legitimate form 
of intellectual gymnastics, and so long as we recognize that 
the result of it does not matter one way or the other, it must 
be regarded as a very excellent and entertaining amusement. 
Nowadays people are somewhat prone to treating sport as 
a religion, with the result that it ceases to be sporting. Sport 
is really doing things that do not matter for fun, and man’s 
faculty for this is one of the things that make him superior 
to animals. But it only remains superiority so long as he 
recognizes that those things do not matter. Thus aman who 
hits a ball about with a stick for fun is a delightful being, 
but one who does it as if his life depended upon it is a dan- 
gerous lunatic. The same principle applies to the intellec- 
tual amusements. It is certainly great fun to discuss the 
existence or non-existence of the self, but it ceases to be 
fun when we take it into our heads that the discussion really 
matters. It then becomes lunacy, because there is no possi- 
ble means of deciding which party is in the right. 


Of course the matter-of-fact person will at once ask, 
‘Surely it matters very much whether I do or do not exist?”’ 
But unfortunately it is not quite so simple as that because 
we first have to define what we mean by “‘I.”’ In the philos- 
ophy of the East we find mention of at least two different 
kinds of self. One is the little creature ‘‘the size of a thumb’’ 
who is said to exist somewhere inside the body—a creature 
who is both personal and inimortal. The other is the Self 
of the Upanishads, the Self which is the same for everyone, 


192 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


existing in all things alike, and this is impersonal and immor- 
tal. The first of these corresponds approximately to the West- 
ern notion of the soul. There is really no need to define it 
philosophically, because everyone knows exactly what it 
means. It is the feeling, the intuition, that I am I, separate 
from you and from everything else. And therefore the prob- 
lem is, does this thing which says I am I exist or does it not? 
If it does exist, is it immortal? And further, is one’s intui- 
tion of it incomplete in the sense that it is really much greater 
than one thinks, that it includes the whole universe instead 
of just that area of space which is bounded by one’s own 
skin? 

It is certainly a very entertaining problem, but it does 
not matter in the least because we have no means of know- 
ing whether, objectively, the ‘‘I’’ exists or not. We cannot 
examine ourselves to find out if we are really here, because 
we cannot examine the thing that examines, and that is the 
great limitation of all scientific investigation. The scientist 
may probe into the psyche of other human beings and 
declare that on analysis he cannot find anything in the shape 
of a self. Unfortunately he cannot probe into the thing that 
probes. However, the doctrine of anatia is included in the 
Buddha’s teaching, and if we believe that the Buddha was 
the wisest of men, he must have had some reason for includ- 
ing it. Is the answer that he intended us to believe in our 
non-existence, because, apart from all questions of objec- 
tive truth, that belief is a working hypothesis conducive to 
the good life? Was the Buddha a pragmatist, holding that 
the effect of a belief upon one’s manner of life is more impor- 
tant than the truth of that belief? 


But it has been said that a man believes a thing when 
he behaves as if it were true, and it is rather difficult to 
imagine a man behaving as if he did not exist. Presumably 
he would make a noise like the legs of asnake and run away. 
But not even the most extreme upholder of the anatta doc- 
trine would go so far as to say that if it implies one’s com- 


193 
Part Three 


plete non-existence. The principle of cogito, ergo sum (even 
if untrue from the standpoint of Absolute Truth) must always 
hold good for practical purposes. If we disbelieve in it, our 
disbelief is a mere intellectual perversity having no relation 
to life, for we cannot reasonably act upon our disbelief. But 
here again it is important to note that this is not fundamen- 
tally a question of belief or disbelief in anything; the living 
of the Dhamma does not require assent to any proposition 
which is foreign to our experience. The Dhamma is con- 
cerned with life here and now at this very moment; it has 
no immediate relation to metaphysics, and however rational 
the doctrine of rebirth and the non-existence of the personal 
soul may be, they are undeniably metaphysical. In our pres- 
ent stage of evolution discussion of them must always be 
mere intellectual gymnastics, because we have no means of 
testing their objective validity. 


What, then, does anatta mean in reference to ordi- 
nary experience? To understand this, it must be taken in con- 
junction with the two other “‘signs of being’—anicca 
(impermanence) and dukha (suffering). It is important to 
remember that the Buddha spoke of these three signs of 
being not as doctrines, not as ‘‘revealed truths,” but as facts 
of ordinary experience. Dukha does not mean only ‘‘suffer- 
ing’’ in the Western sense of the word; if its meaning were 
as narrow as that, it would be absurd to say that all life is 
dukha. We experience happiness and misery in turn, and 
though the two are frequently mixed, we cannot deny that 
life is composed of both pleasure and pain. Dukha is rather 
‘limitation’; it signifies confinement, discontent, the tran- 
siency of happiness, the imperfection of our lives, as well 
as actual suffering and pain. And this is not a doctrine requir- 
ing belief or disbelief; it is a fact of experience, and we are 
as familiar with it as with the hotness of the sun. The same 
is true of anicca. We know that all things are subject to 
change, and no proof is wanted. If, therefore, these two signs 
of being are facts of ordinary experience, should not the 


194 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


same thing be said of anatta? And the answer is, Yes. For 
are we not perfectly familiar with the fact that the identity 
of forms disappears? To every form, whether man, beast, 
flower or stone, we attribute an identity. When we meet Mr. 
Jones on Monday, we recognize him again on Thursday 
because we identify him as the same Mr. Jones. He has not 
become Mr. Postlethwaite or Mr. Featherstone. The Buddha 
did not deny the fact of identity, but he said something about 
it which is perfectly obvious to everyone. That was that iden- 
tities not only come to an end but are in a constant state 
of flux. When we meet Mr. Jones again on Thursday, we 
know quite well that he is not really the identical Mr. Jones 
we met on Monday. In the first place, he may have changed 
his mind about lending us a five pound note; he has cer- 
tainly changed in body, for his tissues have absorbed nourish- 
ment and some have wasted away; he may have had 
experiences which have made him a ‘‘different man.’ All 
these are changes in the identity called Mr. Jones. There- 
fore, when the Buddha said that all things are anatta, he 
meant that identity is not an abiding principle in any form 
of life. If everything did retain its identity life would stop 
dead, for change is really a constant movement towards los- 
ing one’s identity. As soon as we are born, we begin to die, 
and our identity is always running away from us. 


The trouble is, however, that people are always try- 
ing to run after their lost identities. The baby who does not 
want to be weaned from his mother is running after his iden- 
tity as a suckling; he resists the loss of his suckling atta, 
and does not want to give up his old self. But if we are to 
go forward, we must give up our old selves every minute. 
In fact we are compelled to give up these selves, whether 
we like it or not. What makes the difference between the 
enlightened and unenlightened man is that one accepts this 
giving up gladly, while the other does it against his will and 
usually tries to deceive himself into the belief that he has 
not done it. Try to imagine yourself back in the identical 


195 
Part Three 


state of consciousness and experience which you were in 
two minutes ago. You cannot do it. You are different. And 
if you think about it long enough, you will find it hard to 
believe that the ‘‘you’’ which got out of the train two 
minutes ago is the same ‘‘you”’ which is now walking down 
the street. It is not the same you. Sabbe sankharam anatta. 


But what is this ‘‘you’’? What is the something that 
two miuntes ago experienced getting out of the train, and 
now experiences walking down the street? Certainly it may 
have changed in that two mintues, but what is it? Is it the 
self? Is it the immortal soul? Is it the unchanging essence 
of the universe? Those questions cannot be answered, for 
the simple reason that it cannot look at itself to find out. 
Some lunatics imagine that if they turn round quickly 
enough they can see the backs of their heads. But man has 
eyes only in one side of his head, and a characteristic of all 
things is that while one side is in the light the other is in 
the dark. It is that dark side which we are perpetually seek- 
ing, consciously or unconsciously. For why does the achieve- 
ment of desire turn to ashes? Because we find that we can 
add to ourselves nothing that we have not already. We may 
possess a kingdom, but it adds nothing to us. It does not 
make us any worse or any better, for all that we know of 
it is our own reaction to it. Whatever possession or know!l- 
edge we may acquire, it has no influence on the way in 
which we react to it. We gain from such things solely in 
accordance with our capacity to gain from anything. A long- 
desired fortune may weary us when achieved, for it can add 
nothing to our powers of enjoyment. If we can enjoy little 
things, we can enjoy great, and if we are bored by little, we 
shall be bored by what is great. For all things under the sun 
are mirrors in which we see our own reflections; when we 
catch them after a long chase, we find that we have only 
caught ourselves. And so we are like dogs chasing their own 
tails in the belief that they may be something good to eat. 
When we find that what we have sought with so much 


196 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


energy is only ourselves after all, it irritates us, for the ‘‘self’’ 
is such a curious and elusive creature. We find it everywhere 
when we do not want it, but when we do want it, it always 
runs away. We turn round to try and catch it, but it is behind 
us again like the backs of our heads. Thus whether we are 
trying to run away from it or trying to run after it, we are 
always chasing it. In the outside world we catch its 
reflection—but the thing itself we can never catch. We can- 
not even be sure that it exists. 


It was for this reason that the Buddha deemed discus- 
sion of the nature of the self unprofitable and not conducive 
to Enlightenment. For Ignorance (avidya) is precisely this 
tail-chasing process. It leads nowhere, except ina circle. It 
is just this going round in little circles in pursuit of ourselves 
which is selfishness, the heresy of separateness, the folly 
of belief in atta. It is the Wheel of Samsara. The Buddha 
advised us not to trouble about it. We shall know what the 
self is and whether it is only when we no longer chase it. 
The secret is to stop running round in circles and—walk on! 


LETTERS I RECEIVE 


KARMA, OR 


““YOU HAVE WHAT YOU WANT’’ 
By the Editor 


From Buddhism in England 
Nov.—Dec., 1936 


From letters which have found their way to me and from 
many articles which have recently been published in jour- 
nals connected with the philosophy of the East, it seems 
that there is a somewhat widespread misunderstanding of 


197 
Part Three 


the law of Karma. There appear to be two principal ways 
of misunderstanding Karma. The first is found in the idea 
that it is some sort of cosmic and impersonal system of 
reward and punishment, based on eternal laws of justice 
which in some way correspond very conveniently with 
humanethics. It is thought that when amancommits a mis- 
deed, quite independently of his own wishes, the universal 
wheels are set in motion, and after a certain period the exact 
and fit retribution returns to him. It is rather like those 
machines into one end of which we place a cow, and in due 
course receive at the other a pair of boots, a gallon of milk, 
several joints of beef, ten dozen straps, two horn spoons and 
a bag of bones. This theory differs only in trivial respects 
from the idea of the schoolmaster-God, cherished by the 
more primitive forms of Christianity; the difference is that 
this God is simply made impersonal, and that His rewards 
and punishments cease to be eternal. 


The second, and more insidious, misunderstanding is 
found in the entirely logical but wholly stultif ying idea that 
Karma involves the doctrine of determinism. It is argued that 
if Karma is the law of cause and effect, then nothing can 
come into being without some cause, and that whatever does 
come into being can only come from one particular cause 
(or set of causes). The corollary of this contention is there- 
fore that any given cause (or set of causes) can and must 
have only one as distinct from several alternative effects. 
Thus whatever we think or do has some cause of which it 
is the inevitable effect. That cause is rigidly conditioned by 
previous causes, until we are found to be fettered in ‘‘one 
infinite chain which none can break, nor snap, nor over- 
reach.’’ It is said that every action has some motive; that that 
motive results in that action because it is the strongest of 
several possible motives; that that motive is the strongest 
because. . . . Which reminds one of the delightful verse: — 


198 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


Big fleas have little fleas . 
Upon their backs to bite ‘em; 

And little fleas have lesser fleas 
And so ad infinitum. 


No one can deny for a moment that this theory is com- 
pletely logical, that its reasoning is perfect in every respect; 
but the trouble is precisely that it és so very logical. It has 
all the precision of a finely constructed machine, and all its 
lack of intelligence. 


Surprisingly few people, however, are even aware of 
what the word ‘‘Karma’’ means. It is derived from the San- 
skrit root kri—‘to act’’ or ‘‘to do,’ and thus the word itself 
means ‘‘action,’ although the purely English translation, 
‘doing,’ is in many ways better. Thus when we say that 
something which happens to a person is his Karma, we mean 
that it is his doing. And it is his doing in a very immediate 
and personal sense, for at this moment we are the sum total 
of all our past actions. The whole doctrine of Karma can 
be explained by extending the German proverb, ‘‘Man is 
what he eats’’ to ‘‘Man is what he does’—using the word 
in its widest sense to include thinks, feels, desires. The Bud- 
dha taught that all existence proceeds from 7rishna, a pos- 
sible translation of which is ‘“‘desire,’ and if we follow out 
this principle we shall discover exactly what is meant by 
the law of Karma. For there is a saying, ‘“You have what you 
want.” And let us be careful here that we know what we 
mean by the word ‘“‘want.”’ If you are sufficiently rude to 
say to someone, ‘‘What you want is a good thrashing,’ you 
do not mean what you say. You mean, *‘What you eed is 
a good thrashing,’ and there is a subtle difference between 
the two. Therefore, when we say, ‘“You have what you want,’ 
we mean that your present circumstances are exactly what 
you desire and have been brought into being simply by the 
power of your desire. 


This may seem entirely contrary to experience, for the 


199 
Part Three 


immediate answer of most people would be that they cer- 
tainly have not got what they want. But we can never be 
sure of how much we know about our own desires. Few 
indeed are the people who really know what they want, and 
those have a remarkable capacity for getting it. Desire, how- 
ever, is a strange force, for it is like the iceberg—one part 
above water and six below, one part conscious and six 
unconscious. Thus we can never really understand the 
phrase, ‘‘ You have what you want,”’ unless we can appreci- 
ate that conscious fear is often enough the expression of 
unconscious desire. This is a doctrine which many people 
resist with fury; they are highly indignant at the suggestion 
that they do not know their own minds, that they do not 
know just what they like and what they do not like. How- 
ever, in their indignation they are making the proudest of 
all claims; they are claiming that they have carried out the 
precept of the Delphic Oracle, ‘‘Know thyself,’ and that is 
the attainment of the Supremely Enlightened alone. 


But the relationship between fear and desire is easily 
understood if we remember first that the instrument which 
desire uses for achieving its ends is Imagination—the image- 
building power. All are familiar with instances in which they 
have allowed something which they feared to dwell on their 
minds. They have woven phantasies around it, they have 
absorbed themselves in its contemplation, they have thought 
of it day and night. And why? Because they took a morbid 
pleasure in doing it. In other words, because, although they 
would be ashamed to admit it, they wanted to. They wal- 
lowed in the self-pity which their phantasies produced; they 
nursed their fears, and ran back to them at every unoccupied 
moment, like a mother going to her ailing baby at every odd 
moment between her domestic duties. If someone tries to 
persuade them that their fears are groundless, they will either 
argue stoutly against him or reluctantly admit that he is right, 
and return promptly to their contemplation once again. 
Indeed, there is no pleasure like worry. The trouble is, how- 


200 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


ever, that because the imagination has been allowed to work 
on these fears, in longer or shorter time it creates them in 
actuality. For ‘‘all that we are is the result of what we have 
thought; it is founded on our thoughts; it is made up of our 
thoughts. If a man speaks or acts with an evil thought, suffer- 
ing follows him as surely as the wheel of the cart follows 
the hoof of the ox which draws it.”’ 


What is an ‘‘evil thought,’ and why does suffering fol- 
low it? The thought is not judged evil by some impersonal 
tribune of cosmic law and punished accordingly; it is not 
evil because it transgresses certain ethical principles. Evil 
came first; ethics afterwards. It is evil because it desires a 
condition of pain. The evildoer inflicts pain on another 
because he fears it in himself, but in his cruelty he identi- 
fies himself to some extent with the sufferer; he revels in 
the pain which he causes; he satisfies his own desire vicari- 
ously. He would find no pleasure in being cruel if he had 
not a vivid phantasy of what that pain would be like when 
inflicted on himself. A remarkably interesting study of this 
sequence of desire, fear and evil will be found in Keyser- 
ling’s South American Meditations. His philosophy is at one 
with the Buddha’s in tracing all life to ‘‘Original Hunger’”’ 
(which might be a good translation for Trishbna), from this 
arises ‘Original Fear’’ He writes:— 


Life would absorb into its body the entire 
universe, and thus eat its way out of all dan- 
ger. Thus even the nightingale daily devours 
several times its own weight; thus it is the eter- 
nal dream of human understanding to swal- 
low the World. Nevertheless, Life in its 
nethermost depths knows that its hunger is 
unappeasable, and that Nature’s overwhelm- 
ing power is irresistible. And from all this 
arises Fear. 


And again:— 


201 
Part Three 


Out of Original Fear follows Evil.... All 
torturing is the expression of dimly felt help- 
lessness: the impotency of making the victim 
suffer the full measure of the fear the torturer 
himself feels in bis beart of hearts. (Italics mine.) 


But we must go further than this and say that he 
desires his fear. 


For here we may read more deeply into the Buddha's 
teaching, and understand that we suffer not only because 
we desire, but also because we desire suffering. Our Karma 
is suffering because we wish it; it is no punishment; it is 
simply a kind of pleasure found in a more easily recogniza- 
ble and conscious form in certain neurotic cases, where it 
is known in psychological jargon as ‘‘masochism.”’ In a less 
intense form this is the familiar experience of taking a pleas- 
ure in doing what you don’t like, or making a martyr of your- 
self. It is difficult to understand just why we desire to suffer, 
and more difficult still to explain how we change our desires, 
both conscious and unconscious, for the better. The first step 
is obviously to know them; the second to educate them in 
much the same way as one educates a taste for pictures. 
Acquaintance wth great art gradually ousts the liking for 
inferior art, which would seem to show that there is a divine 
principle in man which ultimately responds to what is divine 
in both art and life. This principle will not be forced because 
it is essentially free; it is subject to no compulsion. We have 
to Jet it grow like a glorious flower, and discipline ourselves 
by taking the weeds out of the way. Yet, strangest of all, the 
flower needs filth—manure—for its roots. As ‘‘Interpreter’’ 
pointed out in an article in the first number of this volume, 
the lotus rises up from the slime, and filth is just as essen- 
tial to its life as sun and air. But he said also that evil was 
to place the flower in the slime and the roots in the light. 


And this brings us to the fallacy of the determinist 
interpretation of Karma. We have already seen that this 


202 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


interpretation is entirely logical. In terms of pure reason it 
is quite impossible to make out any case for Freewill. Accord- 
ingly, from a strictly rational point of view, life is a machine; 
beauty, intelligence, love and virtue are all the outcome of 
complex mechanical processes—the inevitable effects of a 
chain of causes going back into infinite time. If all human 
thoughts and actions are the inevitable results of certain 
causes, it is therefore interesting to enquire into the cause 
which results in the belief in determinism. It seems as if it 
were closely allied to the desire for suffering, for bondage, 
for limitation. If masochism is the conscious love of pain, 
determinism is the conscious love of bondage. We say ‘‘love’’ 
because almost all determinists argue for their doctrine as 
if their lives depended on it. It appears, therefore, that deter- 
minism is a form of neurosis (Freudians, please note); it is 
a supremely reasonable creed, but the trouble is that of all 
reasonable people lunatics are by far the most reasonable. 
No ordinary lunatic ever does anything without a very 
closely thought-out reason; his smallest and most inconse- 
quential actions, for which the sane man offers no reason 
whatever, have a specific purpose. When the sane man twid- 
dles his thumbs, he just twiddles his thumbs; but when the 
lunatic does it, it is so that his thumbs may grow large and 
conspicuous, believing, as he does, that he is Imperial Cae- 
sar, and that when he puts his thumb up in the arena there 
must be no mistake about it. 


However, because the desire for suffering will be 
found to include the desire for bondage, it is true that most 
of us have no Freewill at all, or precious little. We do not 
allow ourselves to be free; we tie ourselves up in Karmic 
effects until, consciously or unconsciously, our minds are 
hopelessly limited. But in terms of logic, freedom can never 
exist. That is because the logical faculty is essentially a 
mechanical faculty. If man uses this faculty alone for under- 
standing the universe, then it is only to be expected that he 
will view it as a machine. The logician claims that his par- 


203 
Part Three 


ticular faculty is the highest of all faculties, but that is sim- 
ply because he does not know any higher. His thoughts are 
limited by his instrument of perception. He may ask us to 
prove that there is any other instrument of perception, but, 
unfortunately, it seems that one can only shake one’s head 
and say, ‘‘Poor fellow!’’ It is as hard to convince a logician 
that there is a higher faculty than logic, as to convince an 
idiot that he is not in fact Jesus Christ or a poached egg. 
Both are splendidly isolated by the barriers of rationality, 
those tough, iron walls through which nothing human can 
penetrate. Their Karma is Fate, because they make it so; but 
if you choose. Karma need not be Fate, for in itself it is just 
your own doing. 


LETTERS I RECEIVE 


EDUCATION FOR PROGRESS, 


WITH A CAPITAL ‘‘P”’ 
By the Editor 


From Buddhism in England 
Jan.-Feb., 1937 


A reader has sent me an amusing cutting from The Times—a 
letter to the editor from Mr. J. C. Dent, the headmaster of 
Westminster City School. ‘‘Progress,’’ he writes, ‘‘unless it 
is a complete illusion, consists in increasing the range and 
quality of a man’s desires; and in spreading throughout man- 
kind generally a desire for that increase.’’ This somewhat 
doubtful definition would perhaps have been a little less 
doubtful if used in connection with the desire for wisdom, 
or for any sort of quality which makes progress something 


204 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


more than a mere accumulation of possessions. Unfor- 
tunately it was used in connection with what are termed 
‘‘the necessities of life,’ concerning which the writer says, 
‘‘what is accepted by one class of society as a necessity is 
envied by another as a luxury.” The reader who sent me this 
cutting comments, ‘Can we wonder that modern youth suf- 
fer such grievous illusions when their teachers hold such 
dreadful views?’’ Of course, there is this side to the ques- 
tion: that one must do all in one’s power to encourage peo- 
ple to buy things, because that is good for industry and 
solves the unemployment problem. And that is a very pleas- 
ant idea provided (a) that one has the money to buy them, 
and (b) that the solution of such problems is the aim of edu- 
cation and the meaning of Progress. 


Naturally there are many kinds of progress, but only 
one of them is really entitled to be called Progress with a 
capital ‘‘P’’ If you can make two blades of grass grow where 
one grew before, that is progress in terms of quantity. If you 
drink Napoleon Brandy in place of methylated spirits, that 
iS progress in terms of quality. But remember that a mis- 
guided use of either may lead to unfortunate consequences. 
Thus whatever the number or quality of things we may have 
or desire to have, it makes not the least difference to the 
way in which we use them. A desire for Chinese paintings 
may have more quality than a desire for Edwardian furni- 
ture; it shows a higher degree of taste, and, indeed, the same 
may be said of the desire for virtuous and vicious actions. 
But moral desires are not in question here. What was being 
discussed in this letter was the possession of things, of 
‘necessities of life,’ and it was written because some equally 
misguided person had spoken of poverty as a condition 
favourable to the growth of sound character. Thus we are 
confronted with two opposite views of Progress. The first, 
common to a vast number of modern men and women, is 
that Progress consists in having and fulfilling desires for more 
and better things. The second, found only among a few, has 


205 
Part Three 


this important asset: that it conceives Progress as growth 
of character, but it considers that this can only come pre- 
cisely from a lack of ‘‘things,’’ from poverty, from “going 
through the mill.’ 


Obviously the solution to this conflict of views may 
be found in the Middle Way, and this provides an unusually 
clear illustration of the fact that the Middle Way does not 
mean a mere compromise between extremes. If this were 
so, we should say that the Middle Way consists in having 
neither too few possessions nor too many, that in quality 
they must neither be too good nor too inferior. That, how- 
ever, would be a lukewarm and lifeless solution to the prob- 
lem; indeed, it would not be a solution at all, because, as 
we have seen, the number or quality of one’s possessions 
makes no difference to the way in which one uses them. 
Thus the Middle Way is not only between extremes but also 
above them, for it shows that progress in wisdom has noth- 
ing to do with either wealth or poverty except in so far as 
it shows itself in the use one may make of them. A poor 
man may appear to be wise, but if wealth kills his wisdom 
it is not real wisdom. Often enough a man will neglect his 
friends and develop vicious habits after ‘‘coming into 
money,’ but that is less a reflection on the evils of money 
than the evils of man. The converse is also true. Often we 
see one who is happy and content while rich become a 
grumbler in poverty. In both instances we see that their ‘‘wis- 
dom’”’ depends on their circumstances. Thus if character is 
to be educated by poverty, who shall say that it will stand 
the test of wealth? 


But poverty does not necessarily call forth the best 
in man. It does not follow that because most of the great 
saints and sages have chosen to be poor, all poor men are 
therefore saints and sages. On the contrary, wherever there 
is acommunity abjectly poor, there is cruelty and immorality 
of every kind, and that has not only arisen in these times 
of the cinema, hire-purchase and other methods of increas- 


206 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


ing men’s desires. Long before advertisers ever attempted 
to persuade the milions that luxury was within their reach, 
the poor quarters of every great city harboured vice; one 
has only to look at Hogarth’s pictures to understand that 
poverty and nobility of character are not inseparable, and 
never have been. Nor must it be imagined that poverty and 
vice are only found together in the slums of great cities. 
Much sentimental romance has been written about the poor 
but honest countryman by those who have always lived in 
towns. But in those quaint and curious little houses with 
tiny windows which look so picturesque from the outside 
one often finds the equivalent or worse of the city slum. 
There, too, vice flourishes in the same way, save that it is 
less apparent. Yet it would not be either fair or true to make 
any sweeping generalisations about the relationship between 
material and moral conditions. For to say that poverty neces- 
sarily breeds virtue is just as untrue as to say that it neces- 
sarily breeds vice. We simply note the fact that where there 
is great poverty and where there is great wealth, there one 
is likely to find great evil. It does not necessarily follow from 
this that either is a bar to wisdom; what does follow is that 
neither is more of a bar than the other. 


Thus if one imagines that education, if it is to be of 
any value at all, is concerned mainly with ‘‘things,’ whether 
in scarcity or abundance, the whole point is missed. One 
school of thought would teach children how to do with lit- 
tle, another how to do with a lot; the trouble with the first 
is that some men have riches thrust upon them, and they 
are a karmic responsibility not to be denied. Precisely the 
converse is true of the second. Both make the mistake of 
trying to produce wisdom by circumstances instead of cir- 
cumstances by wisdom. Closely allied with this error is 
another which in the West (and in much of the East) is mak- 
ing education a pure farce. And this is the error of teaching 
children to cope with material things rather than spiritual 
and moral things. The aim of much modern education seems 


207 
Part Three 


to be to produce successful men of business instead of suc- 
cessful human beings. It is said that they must be taught 
something of ‘‘use,’’ something which will help them to ‘‘get 
on in the world.’”’ Thus delightful but quite ‘‘useless’’ sub- 
jects, such as Religion, Hebrew, Latin, Greek, or maybe San- 
skrit, Pali or Hebrew are replaced by Economics, Shorthand, 
Typing, Accountancy, Science, and other Jiterae 
inhbumaniores. The result is that our youth tends to become 
merely clever. It is like educating technique and neglecting 
art. The child becomes an efficient manipulator of the 
machinery of modern civilization, but his understanding 
goes little further; he has not been shown how to direct that 
machinery with wisdom. 


Such “‘useless’’ subjects as dead languages and ancient 
history are thus of far greater importance than the purely 
utilitarian, and for two reasons: firstly, that they pass on the 
tradition of an old culture which a new civilization must 
feed upon in the same way as a tree feeds upon a soil of 
dead matter. Moreover, this tradition contains not only 
supreme literature and art, but that legacy of spiritual wis- 
dom which the ancient sages seemed to see more clearly 
than their modern counterparts. Secondly, that their study 
exercises the faculties of the mind and improves the judg- 
ment in such a way that any new subject can be mastered 
rapidly and with comparative ease. In all commercial and 
scientific subjects one is occupied solely with quantities; 
in languages, in literature, history and religion one is con- 
cerned with qualities, not only material but moral and 
spiritual. Perceiving this fault in our education, a great scien- 
tist of the present day—Prof. Whitehead—writes: ‘‘When 
you understand all about the sun and all about the 
atmosphere, and all about the rotation of the earth, you may 
still miss the radiance of the sunset.’’ Thus you may know 
everything about life; you may measure and weigh it and 
give its parts all manner of names; but still you do not neces- 
sarily know life; you do not taste its quality. 


208 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


Thus Progress, if it is to be more than an acquisition 
of ‘‘things’’ and of cleverness, can only mean progress in 
wisdom. Material goods and knowledge about the world, 
in whatever quantity and of whatever quality, may be used 
for base and immoral ends if wisdom is lacking. And of all 
men, the educationalist must be the first to realize this, for 
in the modern world he wields a far greater influence than 
the old source of spirituality—the Church. Nowadays, 
nobody need go to a church or join any religious commu- 
nity. Almost everyone, however, goes to school, and that is 
now the only place where teaching has (or can have) a 
universal hearing. Hence, with the decline of the Church 
the educationalist inherits a tremendous responsibility, and 
it is fortunate that there are still a large number of impor- 
tant schools free from the control of the State. For while 
State schools may be compelled by law to give the type of 
education required by a deluded public, the independent 
schools are still able to give the world what it ought to have 
as distinct from what it thinks it wants. Their influence is 
still strong enough to arrest this false utilitarianism if they 
work together. This, however, will be difficult, although its 
necessity seems almost painfully obvious. So much so that 
many might well call these remarks platitudinous. Nowa- 
days, however, platitude is frequently a name given to an 
inconvenient truth to make it look absurd, for there is a 
widespread dislike of the obvious. The obvious is often a 
little annoying, so we look for truth in obscurity; and by 
making out that the problems of the world are much too 
difficult for anyone to understand we conveniently manage 
to shelve them. 


209 
Part Three 


NOT ONLY BUT ALSO 


From Buddhism in England 
March-April, 1937 
e 


There is truth in the old saying that familiarity breeds con- 
tempt, and perhaps one of the greatest tests of a religion 
is that though one may study it unceasingly it never becomes 
familiar. There comes a stage in one’s pursuit of Buddhism 
when those fundamental principles which one learnt in the 
beginning, the Four Noble Truths, the Eightfold Path and 
the Three Signs of Being, seem to be a limitation on thought, 
to be dull and lifeless. One imagines that, in so far as pure 
intellect or even intuition can grasp their meaning, one has 
fully understood them, and the mind cries out for more 
nourishment, for new teachings which will offer fresh ter- 
ritory for the adventure of thought. This is a natural and 
proper stage, for after exploring further one suddenly sees 
the old principles in a new light. After studying other 
religions and philosophies, one realizes the immeasurable 
profundity of the Buddha’s wisdom—a wisdom in which 
most of us are just dabblers. At this realization one marvels 
at one’s own ignorance and at the immense arrogance of 
those who can dismiss his teaching as mere nihilism, or for 
that matter as mere anything. For at first sight the princi- 
ples of original Buddhism seem perfectly easy of compre- 
hension; its whole system is set forward in a series of 
tabulated formulae as if it could be mastered with the com- 
parative ease of a Latin Grammar. But the depths of the 
Buddha’s understanding seem infinite, and though one may 
imagine that one has found some other philosophy greater 
than Buddhism, after working through it one comes upon 


210 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


Buddhism again, only at a deeper level. And from this new 
point of view the ordinary differences of opinion concern- 
ing anatta, the Unity of Life, and the existence of God seem 
to be as far removed from reality as the famous remarks of 
the blind men concerning the appearance of an elephant. 
They seem to have no more to do with Buddhism than with 
book-binding. 

Thus one becomes somewhat hesitant in expressing 
any opinion on a teaching of which one is just realizing one’s 
abysmal ignorance, but there is always the chance that even 
the tentative statement of a new understanding may help 
others to penetrate just a little further. Or, on the other hand, 
it may prompt those who have gone further still to speak 
of their own understanding and so increase the general 
enlightenment. It must be stressed, however, that even the 
widest differences of opinion on so vast a subject should 
be expressed with the humility of ignorance rather than the 
pride of knowledge. But true knowledge is without pride. 


One of the first and most difficult bars to the under- 
standing of Buddhism in the West (and even in the East) is 
language. Even among those who speak English argument 
may be occasioned simply because different people use the 
same words with a variety of meanings. The difficulty is 
therefore increased when it comes to the understanding of 
Pali and Sanskrit words for not only were they evolved 
among people with a psychology far removed from our own, 
but also they are capable of expressing more subtle shades 
of meaning. For example there are those three crucial words 
dukkha, anicca and anatta, the Three Signs of Being, 
usually taken to mean that life is characterized by Suffer- 
ing, Impermanence and Absence of Soul, that is to say, of 
any individual principle in man that is real, much less eter- 
nal. From this we are given to understand that the object 
of Buddhism is to escape from suffering and impermanence 
by understanding that there is no ‘‘I’’ which suffers or 
changes. There being no actor, it follows that there is no 


211 
Part Three 


action, and that the whole phenomenal universe is a mere 
figment, a shadow without substance on the face of Noth- 
ingness. On the other hand, there are those who say that 
the Buddha could never have preached so hopeless, not to 
say illogical, a teaching, maintaining instead that though the 
“I” which suffers is illusory, there is behind the false a true 
“I”? which is the Self not only of the individual but of the 
whole cosmos. It would be so easy to pin the Buddha’s 
words to one or other of these interpretations, but it was 
not so easy to pin the Buddha himself. A certain Vacchagotta 
once tried to obtain a definite Yes or No on this point and 
received only a Noble Silence (Samyutta Nikaya, iv. 400). 
For unless the Buddha had compromised and said No or Yes, 
it would have been almost impossible to explain to that 
obtuse person that before one can say whether Self does or 
does not exist, one must not only know very clearly what 
is to be understood by ‘‘Self’’ but also by ‘‘existence.’’ Fur- 
thermore, the Buddha’s teaching is no mere matter of words 
and definitions, for even his own most dogmatic assertions 
can only be regarded as hints, as glyphs into which each 
disciple will read just as much as his understanding permits. 


Dukkha, it is said, means Suffering, and the Buddha 
expressly stated that his doctrine was concerned with one 
thing, dukkba and deliverance from dukkba. The obvious 
interpretation of this would be that Buddhism is first and 
foremost a method of what is vulgarly termed ‘‘saving one’s 
bacon,” or rather of avoiding the responsibility of having 
any bacon to save. Life is a misery, an intolerable burden, 
therefore get rid of it as quickly as possible by committing 
spiritual suicide. It is as if a king was appointed to rule a 
kingdom and said, ‘‘Oh, this is too much like hard work”’ 
and promptly abdicated, the kingdom, in the meantime, 
reverting to anarchy. Or perhaps Buddhism teaches that there 
is neither king nor kingdom, and that it is mere ignorance 
to suppose that there was ever any question of responsibil- 
ity at all. But is there not a passage in the scriptures which 


212 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


speaks of a kingdom, a city which has to be most vigilantly 
watched? This city has a gate corresponding to each of the 
senses—a city far more difficult to govern than any ordi- 
nary city, for this is the realm of one’s own mind. The Bud- 
dha appears to have taken the responsibility of its 
government very seriously indeed, and in the Samyutta 
Nikaya (ii. 103-4) he speaks of the Path as an ancient road 
leading to a lost city which is to be restored to its former 
glory. Even if that is mere figurative speech, one would 
hardly use a prosperous city as a simile for well-regulated 
spiritual suicide. Moreover, however intolerable the burden 
of life may be, it is ridiculous to imagine that any but the 
most depraved mentalities would prefer an eternity of obliv- 
ion to an eternity of mixed pleasure and pain—if those were 
indeed the only two alternatives. 


Let us then leave the dreary prospect of eternal obliv- 
ion. Perhaps the Buddha really meant that we should evolve 
some kind of super-consciousness in which we become iden- 
tical with the universe, in which we become nothing in par- 
ticular but everything in general. This was certainly a 
doctrine prominent in India at his time, that is, if Western 
interpretations of the Upanishads are not wholly false, which 
is likely enough although outside the scope of this article. 
In this event suffering would be an illusion because it is only 
something which pertains to individuals. Individuals are 
unreal from the viewpoint of the One Universal Self, and 
therefore if one’s consciousness is identified with that Self, 
suffering is unreal. The implications of this teaching are only 
slightly removed from mere nihilism—if we accept it at its 
face value. For it implies that the whole universe of form 
might as well not be there; that it is without meaning, with- 
out interest, and that the only thing of worth is a No-thing, 
a colourless, formless, infinite consciousness which has 
nothing to be conscious of. But it will be said that it is con- 
scious of the Infinite, a sublime mystery which requires a 
special sense of appreciation. The trouble with the Infinite 


213 
Part Three 


seems to be that it is only half the truth, and one of those 
half-truths which may easily be worse than falsehood. Some- 
one has wisely said that there is nothing infinite apart from 
finite things, and perhaps we have in that saying a key which 
will unlock the first door of that inconceivably vast palace 
of the Buddha’s wisdom. 


There seems tobe something about the interpretations 
of Buddhism considered above altogether inconsistent with 
that tremendous title Buddba—Supremely Enlightened. 
They are so shallow, so reminiscent of the vague generali- 
sations made by those who have never penetrated deeply 
into their subject. It is so easy to proclaim the doctrine of 
‘Nothing But’’, to say that life is nothing but this, or noth- 
ing but that, for this is the practice of almost every tyro in 
every field of study. When, however, he has progressed far 
enough to realize his ignorance, he comes instead to the doc- 
trine of ‘‘Not Only But Also,’ which is another name for 
the Middle Way. Thus to every reliable observer, life is charac- 
terized not only by suffering but also by happiness, for the 
whole existence of the world of form depends entirely on 
the existence of opposites. We should not know pain unless 
we also knew pleasure, and the same may be said of living 
and dying, hot and cold, day and night. Hence, as Buddhism 
is the Middle Way par excellence, let us assume for the 
moment that dukkba means neither pain nor pleasure, nor 
an indifferent condition between the two. Let us call dukkha 
as ‘‘discord”’ or ‘‘lack of harmony,’ and then ask if it does 
not refer to a state of discerd in relationship between pleas- 
ure and pain, implying a conflict between the two oppo- 
sites. This conflict exists only in man’s mind, for it is he who 
sets the opposites at war by striving for the perpetuation 
of one and the abolition of the other. It is precisely this con- 
flict which is at the root of man’s misery, of his spiritual 
disease, for he is seeking something which simply does not 
exist, which is maya in the real sense of that term. For there 
is no such thing as pleasure apart from pain, and dukkha 


214 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


would seem to be the illusion (maya) of seeking pleasure 
as a thing-in-itself (atta). 

This principle may also be applied to the anatta doc- 
trine. Because man does not understand anatta he tries to 
hold himself apart from life as a separate entity; he tries to 
appropriate to himself various other entities, and in this he 
is like one who attempts to separate the beautiful parts of 
the human body from the ugly with the result that he kills 
both. For surely anatta means that any individual thing con- 
sidered in and by itself has absolutely no meaning, no use, 
no life, no autonomous soul. Did anyone ever see a finger 
working without a hand? Or a spoke running round with- 
out a wheel? Or a hair growing without a head? For if we 
consider those two opposites, the part and the whole, we 
see that they can no more exist without each other than 
pleasure without pain. That they are opposites we know well 
enough, for each one of us distinguishes sharply between 
the self and the not-self, subject and object, ‘‘I’’ and the uni- 
verse. But separate self from the universe and it has no 
existence—it is maya. The converse is also true, and this 
is where we have to distinguish between Buddhism and the 
“All-is-Nothing-But-One’”’ doctrine. The whole has no exis- 
tence without its parts. No one ever saw a hammer with- 
out handle or head, or a cube without any sides, and even 
the Platonic Idea of a cube, the abstract prototype cube, re- 
quires prototypical sides. That is to say, if you take a chariot 
to pieces and then say, ‘‘Where is the chariot-soul?’’ the 
answer is, ‘‘In the mind of the man who made it.’ But that 
mental chariot is inconceivable without its mental parts. 
Thus maya is a term applicable to any one opposite con- 
sidered apart from the other, and when the Mahayana sutras 
say that the opposites are maya they imply that they are 
meaningless, illusory and non-existent apart from the Recon- 
ciling Principle which relates them to one another. And this 
principle is called Dharma, or Tao, or Logos; it is the Mean- 
ing, the raison d‘étre of the opposites just as the child is 


215 
Part Three 


the meaning and raison détre of man and woman. Hence 
so far as oneself and the universe are concerned, the object 
of Buddhism is surely to follow the Middle Way, to become 
absorbed neither in oneself (which is Trisbna) nor in the 
universe (which is no-thing), but to give full attention to the 
Meaning which reconciles the two. This reconciliation is love 
(kRaruna), the higher reflection of the love of man for 
woman, which, fulfilling itself, is directed beyond and 
between the two opposites to the child. To express it in as 
concrete a way as is possible: forget yourself, forget the 
world outside you, and go straight ahead, but don’t remem- 
ber either by trying to forget. . . . After all, if you have con- 
centrated on this article that is what you have been doing 
all the time. You forgot yourself, forgot the printed letters, 
and remembered only the Meaning which was born of your 
thoughts and mine. 


LETTERS I RECEIVE 


SIMPLE LANGUAGE 
By the Editor 


From Buddhism in England 
March-April, 1937 


Many people write or tell me at Lodge meetings that they 
find Buddhism so very complicated and so full of strange 
technical terms. The other day a lady told us that she found 
it almost impossible to understand what we were talking 
about, to which one of our older and wiser members replied, 
‘Well, the only difference between us is that you are more 
candid.’ That remark, however, did not come from one who 


216 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


might be described as ‘‘muddle-headed”’; he often writes 
in this journal, and what he says is anything but confused. 
For the deeper one’s study of Buddhism, the more one real- 
izes how very little one understands. In the words of Chu- 
ang Tzu: ‘‘He who knows he is a fool is not a great fool.” 
The fact remains, however, that it is of little help to the begin- 
ner to offer the more abstruse metaphysics of the Mahayana 
or elaborate explanations of the Four Jhanas or the Paticca 
Samupada. For the beginner invariably tells us that he wants 
Buddhism explained in simple language, which apparently 
means that he does not want to be overwhelmed by the ter- 
minology of pandits, by vague references to ‘‘transcenden- 
tal Reality,’ ‘‘noumenal ontology” or ‘‘alaya-vijnana.’’ 


But what is simple language? Does it consist in econ- 
omy of words? The 7ao Te Ching is a model of such econ- 
omy, but who will say that he understands it? Does it mean 
ordinary words of not more than three syllables? But what 
are ordinary words? It may be said that they are the words 
used by the great masses of the people, but here we can only 
ask, ‘‘Which masses and which people?’ What is common 
speech in East London may perhaps be more or less unin- 
telligible in Lancashire, not to mention New York. Perhaps 
then it means the language of what we call ordinary edu- 
cated and intelligent people (implying people like ourselves). 
Yet I have often seen such people argue for hours without 
understanding each other in any sense whatever. Indeed, it 
has frequently been my experience that the more intelligent 
the company, the more it fails to arrive at any understand- 
ing. Take, for instance, the very ‘‘simple’’ phrase, ‘‘Without 
faith in spiritual realities there can be no religious life.’ All 
the five important wards used are common enough in every- 
day speech, but if any three people can be found who can 
fully agree to the meaning of any one of them, I shall be 
not only amazed but incredulous. And if the simplicity of 
words consists in their familiarity and brevity, here is a list 
of fifteen ordinary four-lettered and one syllable words over 


217 
Part Three 


which we might argue for millions of years:— 


Love Life Good 
Hope Fact Real 
True Hate Mind 
Soul Time Fate 
Sane Form Self 


For the difficulty is that even when we (perhaps) know 
what we mean ourselves by these words, those to whom 
we speak give them widely different meanings. If we were 
so very simple, in more senses than one, as to tell people 
that the first principle of Buddhism is that Life is Pain, and 
the second that Pain is born of Lust, we should be neither 
explicit nor intelligible. This may be simple language, but 
it does not convey a simple truth. For there are two kinds 
of simple language: one is used by such people as the Bud- 
dha, Lao Tzu and Jesus Christ, and this is more difficult to 
understand than the most formidable tomes on metaphysics. 
The other conveys a meaning which one not only sees but 
sees through, as when pleasantly vague people produce the 
devastating remark that Love solves all problems. We have 
known it to create some exceedingly difficult ones. But the 
paradox is that profound Truth is complicated because it is 
simple. We stumble over it because we are seeking it far away, 
and perhaps the most difficult thing in the world is to per- 
ceive the obvious. The remarks of the Zen masters are said 
to be baffling, yet they refer to such commonplace things 
as shoes, dishes, spades, the weather, sticks, trees and cups 
of tea. What is found so strange is that they talk about these 
things in answer to religious questions. The disciple asks 
about something which he imagines to be distant and diffi- 
cult, and the master points to something under his nose. 
Whereat we feel that the master must be an obscurantist or 
a lunatic. But almost everyone has at some time engaged in 
a furious search for the glasses, pen or knife which he was 
carrying all the time in his hand or in his pocket. And when 
someone points out this odd lapse of memory we do not 


218 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


scratch our heads (or tap them) but laugh at ourselves for 
not having thought of the obvious. 


Here we may say, in parenthesis, that this is the main 
reason why religion is not the serious and solemn affair 
which so often masquerades under its name. For essentially 
it is the same as the joke about the man looking all over the 
house for the shoes he is wearing or the dog spinning round 
in a wild chase after its own tail. Certainly it is a solemn 
business both for the man and the dog, but religious 
experience itself, the actual awakening to the truth, is such 
that a Zen master has said of it, ‘‘Nothing is left to you at 
this moment but to burst out into a loud laugh.’’ But the 
mind of man, and especially of educated man, is so easily 
led away by the pride of knowledge that the obvious 
becomes merely contemptible. The things which lie at our 
feet are called ‘‘ordinary'’ and ‘‘commonplace’’ as if these 
words were synonyms for ‘‘dull.’’ It is said that the deepest 
shadow is nearest to the lamp, and in this shadow are all 
manner of wonders and mysteries. We can only call ordi- 
nary things dull when we never really look at them, and 
simple things platitudinous when we never study them. Thus 
for ‘‘intelligent’’ people the difficulty is to be simple, and 
by this I do not mean what is often called ‘‘leading the sim- 
ple life’ for this is just another way of being complicated. 
To don a loin-cloth and feed on beans in the wilderness, 
and to imagine that such practices are necessarily conducive 
to religion is, in any event in the West, just another form 
of spiritual pride, of the love of being peculiar, of the con- 
tempt for what is usual. In the words of St. Jerome, ‘‘Beware 
of the pride of humility; and having renounced the desire 
to attract by thy fine raiment, seek not to call forth atten- 
tion by thy rags.’’ And beyond this there is an even more 
subtle trap: the pride of the religious man in being ordinary, 
in making himself conspicuous by being normal. 


Thus, when we are asked for simple language, we are 
not really being asked for simple language at all. The readers 


219 
Part Three 


of Buddhism in England would no doubt be a little sur- 
prised if, instead of articles on Buddhist philosophy, they 
were suddenly treated to something so simple as a few hints 
on cooking or carpentry. If the Editor were a Zen master 
these surprises might be expected. Nor are we being asked 
for articles full of those dangerous little words of four let- 
ters. In fact, we are not being asked for any particular kind 
of article at all. For when someone wants Buddhism 
explained in simple language, he means his OWN language, 
and if the Editor and his contributors are to satisfy in this 
way they must have the Gift of Tongues. By this I do not 
mean that they must be able to write in every language from 
Esquimaux to Arabic. That would be comparatively easy; 
the British and Foreign Bible Society has done as much 
already. The Gift of Tongues is the art of putting oneself so 
much en rapport with another person that one uses words 
in the same sense as he understands them. To return to cook- 
ing and carpentry: it is well for those who wish to explain 
Buddhism to find analogies for it in every form of human 
activity, so that it can be represented to one’s cook or one’s 
carpenter in the terms of their respective arts. Hence in talk- 
ing with another, let him first do the talking so that his lan- 
guage may be learnt. It is almost useless just to talk at people; 
one might as well waste one’s Swedish on a Hottentot or 
one’s knowledge of the differential calculus on the profes- 
sor of Early Greek History. One must always begin with what 
is called the Socratic method of asking questions—a method 
almost invariably used by the Buddha himself. 


Unfortunately it is a little difficult to do this in a peri- 
odical which appears only once in two months. It would 
be hard enough if it were a ‘‘daily,’ but at the same time 
our aim is to try to present a central Truth under as many 
forms as possible in the hope that sometimes they may come 
near to someone's language. In this we have the advantage 
that Buddhism is a religion of tremendous variety and that 
among its many sects is a way of life suited to almost every 


220 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


general type of human being. In the words of Dr. Suzuki: 
‘‘Buddhism, being a great world religion, has eighty-four 
thousand ways of teaching at its command, any one of which 
is available on any occasion. One single word casually 
dropped from the lips of a master, or his gesture such as 
the raising of the eyebrows, or the pointing of a finger at 
a flower, is sufficient to openthe mind of the intelligent dis- 
ciple. Buddhism performs this miracle when necessary, that 
is, when conditions are thoroughly matured. . . . The busi- 
ness of (Buddhist) philosophy is to deal with concepts, 
which is really the most roundabout way of reaching the 
truth. Practical religionists all avoid this.”’ 


LETTERS I RECEIVE 


THE EXPERIENCE OF MYSTERY 
By the Editor 


From Buddhism in England 
July-August, 1937 


Perhaps the greatest advice ever given to those who tread 
the path to Enlightenment was the Zen master’s answer to 
the question, ‘‘What is the Tao?” ‘‘Walk on!’ Unfortunately 
so many of us are much more inclined to walk off, even to 
the extent of making jumps into the air. In other words, life 
moves and to attain harmony we must keep pace with it; 
to stop for a moment to regret the past, to put off the future 
or to retain the present is to be thrown out of time. For life 
passes on, and those who lag create about themselves a tur- 
moil like a log caught up in the weeds by the side of a stream. 
But those who move forward in time attain that stillness 


22/1 
Part Three 


which is perfect motion; the stream carries them and the 
turmoil ceases—hence the Christian paradox that in the serv- 
ice of God is perfect freedom. But there are so many leap- 
ing salmon in the human stream, jumping up from the water 
at the elusive objects of the upper air. Perhaps they are 
attracted by the glories of the sky, preferring them to the 
familiar water. But if only they would not create so many 
ripples they would see that the water holds the sky’s reflec- 
tion. For this world is the counterpart of the worlds beyond; 
man is the universe writ small; and every littlest thing of 
this world is a symbol of eternal principles. 


Therefore it is rather disturbing to find so many who 
discredit this ordinary world that we know with our five 
senses. Someone wrote to me saying that she was very anx- 
ious to attain ‘Cosmic Consciousness,’ and could I please 
help. So much is written and said in occult and ‘‘spiritual’’ 
circles about the development of senses which can see be- 
yond ordinary life; our senses, they say, deceive us and with 
occult perception we could discover the truth behind this 
mirage of form and substance. It does not often occur to 
them to ask why, if our physical senses deceive us, our occult 
senses should not deceive us also. Furthermore the ques- 
tion arises, ‘‘If there are deeper worlds within this world, 
do we become any the wiser just for changing our realm 
of perception?’ But for the vast majority of people, even 
for the majority of religious people, extraordinary states of 
consciousness, conditions of occult perception and the rest 
are simply means of leading one astray. For the Buddha said, 
“In this very body, six feet in length, with its sense- 
impressions and its thoughts and ideas, I do declare to you 
are the world, and the origin of the world, and the ceasing 
of the world, and likewise the Way that leadeth to the ceas- 
ing thereof.’ (Anguttara Nikaya, ii. 46.) And here are two 
Zen stories which demonstrate the same truth. The disci- 
ple asked, ‘‘What is the Tao?”’ And the master replied, ‘‘Usual 
life is the very Tao.’ On another occasion a disciple asked, 


222 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


“What is satori (Enlightenment)?’’ The master answered, 
‘‘Your everyday thoughts.’’ Moreover there is that well- 
known saying of Zen master Rinzai: 
The truly religious man has nothing to do 

but go on with his life as he finds it in the var- 

ious circumstances of this worldly existence. 

He rises quietly in the morning, puts on his 

clothes, and goes out to work. When be wants 

to walk, he walks; when he wants to sit, he sits. 

He has no hankering after Buddhabood, not 

the remotest thought of it. How is this possi- 

ble? A wise man of old has said, If you seek 

after Buddhbahood by any conscious con- 

trivances, your Buddha is indeed the source of 

eternal transmigration. 


I have just been reading Miss Evelyn Underhill’s 
famous work Mysticism, and was astonished to find that her 
opening chapter was based on the peculiar theme that mys- 
tical understanding involves the knowledge that this 
‘““worldly existence’ is only a shadow-play, that sense knowl- 
edge is a distortion of Truth and that its familiar forms are 
only the symbols of what lies beyond. Certainly they are 
symbols, but they are not only symbols. In the word ‘‘only’’ 
there is the suspicions of a sneer. Now in sneering there is 
pride; there is also a tinge of what is known as the ‘‘inferi- 
ority complex,’ which simply means pretending to be 
superior to something to which you inwardly know your- 
self to be inferior. As a rule, those who in any way depre- 
cate the ordinary world of the senses are those who have 
not come to terms with it; and those who have come to 
terms with it do not deprecate it. In the sayings quoted above 
from the Buddha and the Zen masters there is no trace of 
pride; they are the words of those whose eyes have been 
opened to the miracle of a world from which so many 
would-be mystics seem anxious to run away. But there’s no 
mysticism in exploring other worlds, in attaining mere 


223 
Part Three 


knowledge. If we are to understand mysticism as the art of 
bringing oneself into harmony with life, as perceiving and 
living its deepest meaning, then this world is sufficient for 
us. Attempts to see beyond the senses come under a totally 
different department of human activity, namely Science, 
whether physical or psychic. This is a perfectly legitimate 
undertaking so long as we do not imagine that it increases 
our spirituality. It is simply the accumulation of facts about 
the universe, and it has been said that the important thing 
is not facts but their significance. Lao Tzu once said that with- 
out going out of his door he knew the whole universe. That 
is to say, in the world in which you live you have the secret 
of all possible worlds; when you know one you know all, 
for all are based on the same principles. Therefore spiritual 
wisdom is less in accumulating experiences than in perceiv- 
ing the significance of any one experience, and for that pur- 
pose our ordinary everyday experience is enough. For the 
secret is that the Enlightenment which we seek by such curi- 
ous and roundabout ways is precisely what we experience 
at this very moment, whether it is sitting in a chair or hav- 
ing breakfast. As Hui Heng might say, the difference between 
a Buddha and ordinary person is that one realizes this and 
the other does not. For this reason a Chinese poet said: 


How wondrous and how miraculous this,— 
I draw water and I carry fuel. 


Or in the words of Hakuin; 


This very earth is the Lotus Land of Purity, 
And this body is the body of Buddha. 


For mystical understanding involves a great sense of 
wonder and reverence for the most common experience. 
As a rule vast knowledge of the mysteries of the universe 
increases pride; to lay bare all mysteries is to be in danger 
of becoming bored, and Van der Leeuw has wisely said that 
‘‘the mystery of life is not a problem to be solved, but a real- 


224 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


ity to be experienced.’’ If you try to discover the secret of 
beauty by taking a flower to pieces, you will arrive at the 
somewhat unsatisfactory conclusion of having abolished the 
flower. For beauty is beauty just because it is a mystery, and 
when ordinary life is known as profound mystery then we 
are somewhere near to wisdom. Here is a new connection 
between mystery and mysticism, a connection which is 
sometimes indignantly denied. So you will say, is the impor- 
tant thing just to cast aside all curiosity and embrace the 
maxim that where ignorance is bliss tis folly to be wise? Of 
course the catch is that every degree of wisdom has its coun- 
terpart in folly, and the two are so alike that the wise man 
is wise simply because he can distinguish them. The highest 
and lowest notes of the musical scale are both inaudible, and 
the ignoramus and the sage are both faced with mystery. The 
difference between the two is that even if you explained the 
mystery to the sage it would still remain mysterious, whereas 
the fool would simply be disappointed and disillusioned. 
For the fool would imagine that the explanation, the tak- 
ing to pieces, the analysis, had spoilt the mystery; the sage 
would see that it had not even begun to explain it. The fool 
would think that he had thereby become wise; the sage 
would know that he was still a fool, and, in the words of 
Chuang Tzu, ‘‘He who knows he is a fool is not a great fool.” 


Therefore if the sage is told that this world is no more 
than a maya, a phantom, conjured up from the Primordial 
Essence by deceptive senses, he is not very much impressed. 
If a doctor explains the transformations undergone by food 
in his stomach, he does not cease to enjoy his dinner. If a 
scientist informs him that thunder is not the music of the 
gods but mere electrical disturbances, the thunder is for him 
no less wonderful. For what is especially interesting about 
explanations is that they do not explain; and what is espe- 
cially dangerous about them is that if they are taken seri- 
ously enough and far enough, they simply explain things 
away. And even if one does resort to the ultimate madness 


225 
Part Three 


of explaining all things away, there remains still the 
impenetrable mystery of who is it that explains and why? 


LETTERS I RECEIVE 


THE MAN AND THE MEANS 
By the Editor 


From Buddhism in England 
Nou—-Dec., 1937 


The other day I recommended a friend to read that great 
classic of Buddhist Taoism, The Secret of the Golden Flower, 
which Richard Wilhelm translated from the Chinese for the 
first time some few years ago. A few days later he wrote in 
a rather disturbed frame of mind, for he had come across 
an exceedingly uncomfortable saying. It was this: ‘‘When 
the wrong man uses the right means, the right means work 
in the wrong way.” “‘If this is true,’’ he said, ‘‘I cannot see 
that there is any hope for any of us. No path of spiritual 
development is of any use, for every such path is a ‘means’ 
and everyone who feels in need of a path must recognize 
that he is in some way ‘wrong.’ No one would ever dream 
of seeking spiritual enlightenment unless he was convinced 
of his own wrongness; yet this saying would imply that even 
if he finds the right path it can be of no benefit to him until 
he reaches its end, which, because he is wrong in the first 
place, he cannot do—which is absurd.’ “‘It is,’ he wrote, 
“rather like being told that you cannot have a university edu- 
cation until you have first obtained a university degree.’ 


It is hardly surprising that he was disturbed, for he 
had touched on what is perhaps the most fundamental prob- 


226 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


lem of religion. A point of interest was that he did not once 
question the truth of the saying, for it is one of those things 
which a moment’s consideration will show to be an abso- 
lute, unavoidable and irritating fact like the fact that you can- 
not lift yourself up by your own belt. This is soon apparent 
when we understand what is meant by the ‘‘wrong man.’ 
Clearly it means one who is wrong, foolish or evil in his 
inmost desires, who is selfish, who acts from the wrong 
motive. Even if he chooses the right path he cannot help 
choosing it for some selfish end; because of his inherent 
wrongness, he aims at spiritual unselfishness for the sake 
of his own pride, or in the belief that it will in some way 
deliver him from the limitations of circumstance. The fun- 
damental problem is, therefore, of motive, and for this rea- 
son the Buddha put Right Motive at the very beginning of 
his Eightfold Path. And yet, it must be asked how can we 
have right motive until we have trodden that path? 


Obviously our fundamental desires are the deciding 
factors in every enterprise that we undertake. This is par- 
ticularly true in the sphere of spiritual activity, for the whole 
aim of religion is to remove wrong desire, to cleanse the 
heart in order that Enlightenment may make itself known. 
It exists within us all the time, but in most of us it is hidden 
by dark clouds. Thus there comes a time when everyone 
who attempts to follow some path of spiritual development 
realizes that all his efforts are in vain if his underlying 
motives are impure. For he has to ask himself the awkward 
question: ‘‘Why am I treading this path?’’ Because I want 
Enlightenment. And why doI want Enlightenment? Here we 
have to be careful about our answer. Only too often we shall 
have to confess that it is because we are afraid of the world 
and wish to find some power which will enable us to over- 
come it, to become such great masters of life that we shall 
no longer feel the agonies of frustrated desire. Or again, it 
may be that we feel ineffective in comparison with our fel- 
lows and wish to have some means of making ourselves 


227 
Part Three 


superior. If we come to the conclusion that our true motive 
is one or both of these, we may possibly try another course. 
We may decide that we must accept the limitations of cir- 
cumstance without trying to overcome them, that we must 
admit and remain satisfied with our inferior position. But 
then we must ask ourselves again just why we are making 
this act of acceptance. Nine times out of ten we shall find 
that we are only trying to achieve the same end in the oppo- 
site way, that we are accepting our limitations in order, para- 
doxically, to escape from them. Acceptance may be the right 
means, but again it works in the wrong way because accep- 
tance is not our real motive. 


Much is said in modern psychology of the evils of try- 
ing to escape from life, by which is meant suffering and limi- 
tation, for naturally we do not try to avoid the things which 
give us pleasure. But psychology does not give us much help 
beyond this destructive criticism; it does not tell us how not 
to try to escape, although it pretends to do so. It teaches 
the doctrine of acceptance, which is all very well so long 
as it is recognized that acceptance may simply become the 
tool of the desire to escape, which is always an essentially 
selfish desire. The same truth has been expressed in the say- 
ing that ‘‘‘Nirvana is not for those who desire it, since Nir- 
vana is the absence of desire.’’ The question is naturally 
asked, ‘‘How, then, do we not desire Nirvana?’’ And again 
we must ask ourselves why we want not to desire it. The 
answer must be, ‘‘In order that we may have it,” which 
brings us back to the point where we began. 


“If the wrong man uses the right means, the right 
means work in the wrong way.’ How do we find the right 
man? Why do we want the right man? Because we are the 
wrong man. Those who are persistently honest with them- 
selves are always led to this strange impasse, this point where 
they seem to be revolving in circles, vainly trying to achieve 
the impossible. In this state they begin to despair of salva- 
tion, for in all religious effort they see only the hopeless 


228 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


attempt to run away from the one thing from which we can- 
not escape, seeing that it is the very thing that runs away— 
oneself. And when they learn that trying not to run away 
from it is only running in the opposite direction, they under- 
stand that nothing can be achieved by trying. The self can- 
not change itself any more than the blind can lead the blind; 
all attempts to be different are vain attempts to avoid what 
is, and to try not to avoid what és is only an indirect means 
of avoiding it. This is rather like the Zen koan about the 
goose in the bottle. In time the goose grew so large that it 
could not get out. Now the man did not want to break the 
bottle, nor did he want to hurt the goose. How can he get 
it out?”’ Is not this koan a symbol of the ultimate paradox 
to which religion must eventually lead? 


At this point our minds may be troubled by serious 
doubts. We shall be wondering if religion is not, after all, 
an absurdity. For the moment we begin thinking about our 
own thoughts, feeling about our own feelings, and desir- 
ing about our own desires, we become involved in the 
morass of infinite regress, the endless circling of the dog 
in chase of its own tail, or the perpetual efforts of a lunatic 
to kiss his own lips. This, we may say, is wholly unneces- 
sary. What is the use of working ourselves into this hope- 
less condition which may so easily lead to madness? Animals 
have no religion, and before we began to think about these 
things we just behaved like animals and went ahead with 
the ordinary business of life, eating, sleeping, and playing 
without having another thought about it. Perhaps it would 
have been much better to stay in this condition after all. But 
Wwe are men and not animals, and man has this peculiar 
faculty of self-consciousness which is the source of all the 
trouble. His personality seems to be divided; there is the self 
and the self which is aware of the self, and these two divi- 
sions are by no means at peace with each other. Like Sia- 
mese twins, they are inseparable and yet wish to go in 
opposite directions. We have no evidence at all that there 


229 
Part Three 


are two selves; it is more likely that there is just one self 
which is hopelessly confused by the one thing which it can- 
not understand—itself. For it is self-conscious; it knows that 
it exists but cannot see what sort of a thing it is that exists. 

But it is not wholly self-conscious, for this is revealed 
in the very fact that it tries to change its own desires and 
control its own impulses. It looks upon those desires as 
something almost external, something which it can clutch 
and move. It is as ifa man were trying to walk by moving 
his legs with his hands, not realizing that he can make his 
legs move by themselves. What is true of the legs is true also 
of the mind, it is not something apart from ourselves which 
we can control and restrain, as it were, from without. There 
is a Zen story which illustrates this point peculiarly well. 
A disciple came to Bodhidharma and said, ‘*Master, I have 
no peace of mind. Pray pacify it.” Bodhidharma answered, 
‘‘Bring out your mind here before me and I will pacify it.”’ 
The disciple was sorely puzzled and said, ‘‘But I cannot find 
my mind to bring it out.’ ‘‘Then,’”’ replied Bodhidharma, 
‘IT have pacified your mind.’ There is yet another story 
which shows the same truth in a different way. A disciple 
asked, ‘‘How can I be delivered from the wheel of birth and 
death?’’ The master replied, ‘“Who is putting you under 
restraint?’ Indeed, who is? When you walk into trouble do 
not blame your feet. 


230 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


THE MONKEY-MIND 
IN RELIGION 


From Buddhism in England 
Jan.-Feb., 1938 


One of the most disturbing features of religious thought to- 
day, whether among Buddhists, Christians, Hindus or The- 
osophists, is the enormous amount of pure materialism 
dressed up in spiritual guise. By this I do not mean moral 
materialism, such as the sensuous pursuits of decadent pri- 
ests or the use of religious forms for selfish ends. Nor should 
the term materialism be understood in this sense as the denial 
of a life after death, of the existence of God or of eternal 
values transcending time and space. For the particular form 
of materialism in question is something much more subtle 
than this, something which is found in almost every depart- 
ment of philosophy and religion, something which is, in our 
time, the most potent enemy of true spirituality, the more 
so because its presence is unnoticed. Part of the difficulty 
is that we are wholly vague as to what we mean by such 
elusive terms as ‘‘matter’’ and ‘‘spirit’’ and their even more 
elusive adjectives ‘‘material’’ and ‘‘spiritual.’’ It has been said 
that spirit is simply a finer form of matter, and, especially 
in occult circles, this saying is the cause of a most lamenta- 
ble confusion of thought. For the so-called occultist is often 
under the impression that he is being spiritual in the highest 
sense of the word when he is concerning himself with the 
study and manipulation of these finer forms of matter, when 
he is developing his senses of raising his consciousness so 
that he can perceive and control them. But in fact he is still 


231 
Part Three 


being purely material, for matter does not cease to be mate- 
rial when it takes on finer forms, when it becomes invisi- 
ble to our ordinary senses. Strictly speaking, the occultist 
of this kind is dealing with psychic things, and under the 
heading ‘“‘psychic’’ we must place all such phenomena as 
telepathy, clairvoyance, projection of the astral body and the 
development of those powers which are known in Buddhism 
as the siddhis. Even the word ‘“‘psychic’’ is unhappy in this 
place, for it comes originally from the Greek word psyche, 
meaning the soul. But it has been used so constantly in con- 
nection with these phenomena that it is now impossible to 
separate it from them, and we can only be clear on the sub- 
ject if we agree to define as psychic just those material things 
which are unperceived by our five senses in their present 
state of development. Thus there is no difference of kind 
between material and psychic substances; there is only differ- 
ence of degree. Besides occultists of this kind, there are 
others who are victims of the same confusion, but in a less 
obvious form, and I] think they may be placed under two 
general headings. 


The first are those who consider that there is some- 
thing spiritual and religious in beliefs or even knowledge 
about the visible or invisible structure and destiny of the 
universe. They hope to arrive at spirituality by studying the 
laws of the universe, maintaining that for every material law 
there is a spiritual counterpart. This is true enough if we 
agree to call this counterpart not spiritual but psychic. It 
is true also that the outward forms of spiritual development 
are analogous to many material processes such as the con- 
ception and birth of a child, the motion and nature of the 
wind, the growth of a flower or the inner workings of the 
body. This we understand from observing the behaviour of 
spiritual people and from their own words which liken 
spiritual attainments to material processes. But these are only 
the outward forms; they are the what and the how of 
spiritual development, but never the why, and it is only this 


232 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


last that belongs to the realm of true spirituality. No one 
can obtain the spiritual gifts of a sage by copying his out- 
ward behaviour; for this is only copying what the sage does, 
and is not necessarily doing it for the same reason as the 
sage. If the motive for the sage’s behaviour is love, it may 
well be that the copyist’s motive is nothing more than self- 
aggrandisement. 


This brings us to our second category—those who 
believe that spirituality can be attained simply by shaping 
their lives in accordance with a pattern, simply by impos- 
ing upon themselves a technique. The mere observance of 
a rule of life can no more produce spirituality than figs can 
grow on thistles, or a beautiful symphony can emerge from 
a purely mathematical arrangement of notes. There are no 
rules for producing spirituality any more than there is a 
specific method of creating in oneself love for another per- 
son, any more than one can read in a book how to make 
oneself a Beethoven or a Shakespeare. Certainly we can say 
what a Beethoven symphony is, but we cannot say why it 
is beautiful. The musician may try to explain its beauty by 
its accordance with certain rules and standards of musical 
expression. But question him further, and he will be quite 
unable to say just why those rules and standards are beauti- 
ful. It simply happens that we like them; the innermost core 
of our being shouts a joyous ‘‘Yes!’’ when it hears them. 
But words can tell us no more than what it shouts at; why 
it shouts remains an impenetrable mystery. One might indeed 
write music which accorded in every respect with those 
rules and standards and yet fall a long way short of 
Beethoven’s genius. For this is simply copying; it is follow- 
ing slavishly in the paths which others have trodden, and 
this is the very antithesis of spirituality. It is just that materi- 
alism which we have described as the besetting danger of 
religion in this age—and for that matter in any age. 


For in just the same way the slavish copying of some- 
one else’s religion—whether the Buddha's, the Christ's, 


233 
Part Three 


Patanjali’s, Krishna’s or Lao-Tzu’s—can only lead to a dead 
end. This is why the teachers of Zen have discouraged reli- 
ance on scriptures, on moral rules on ritual as means of 
producing Enlightenment. These things may be necessary 
for ordering the lives of those who neither desire nor care 
about spiritual attainment, but he who strives for Enlight- 
enment must be ready to accept the dangers of giving up 
these props and crutches, for he must be prepared to die 
for his Goal. For they are no more than the mechanism, the 
technique, the means of expression of true spirituality, and 
without spirituality they are like a brush without an artist. 
For ethics, exercises in meditation, prayer or self-sacrifice 
can no more effect spirituality by themselves than a brush 
can jump up off a palate and paint a masterpiece. They can 
make a well-ordered life, but this is not necessarily a spiritual 
life. This may seem a far-fetched analogy unless we remem- 
ber that spirituality is something essentially creative. In just 
the same way as a mastery of musical technique will not 
of itself make a Beethoven, a mastery of moral technique 
will not of itself make a Buddha. In this respect religion 
offers an exact parallel with art, music and literature. For 
there is all the difference in the world between the reason 
why a Buddha will be moral and why a copyist will be moral. 
The one is a free and creative genius using a limited tech- 
nique in order to express, as far as possible, his genius in 
the world of form and limitation. The other is a slave who 
is no greater than his technique; he relies on it, depends 
utterly upon it, and is used by it instead of using it. He is 
like a carpenter who is no greater than his hanuner, who 
expects it to show him the right way to knock in nails. 


The essence of spirituality is creative freedom. It is 
compelled to pay regard to the regulations of technique if 
it is to be expressed at all in this limited world; but it always 
feels technique to be a poor instrument and inwardly rebels 
against its insufficiency. But in this it is a thousand million 
miles from the copyist who seeks Enlightenment within 


234 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


technique, who expects these limited rules to reveal the 
supreme secret by themselves. This, perhaps, is the reason 
behind the strange dynamic antics of Zen teachers and of 
the true mystics of all time. In every Zen book will be found 
warnings against the danger of copying these antics which 
seem to laugh at all the rules of logic. But when the Zen 
master hands his disciple a cup of tea in answer to a ques- 
tion about Buddhism, he is not trying to be obscure. He is 
performing a creative, free and spontaneous act; he is 
expressing the creative power of the universe which pulses 
in his own soul. He is not acting in accordance with a pre- 
cept, handing his disciple a cup because an old book says 
this is the right thing to do. For in the spiritual man all 
thoughts and deeds proceed spontaneously from this centre 
of power. It is impossible to tell anyone how to attain this 
state, except to say, ‘‘Just go straight ahead with life. Don’t 
stop to imitate. Just live, and one day the secret will reveal 
itself quite unexpectedly, for if you live fully, life itself will 
show it to you. For of a sudden you will find to your sur- 
prise that you have performed an unpremeditated, spontane- 
ous and above all genuine act—not a forgery. But if you go 
about expecting this revelation you will not find it, because 
the irritating joke is that you have it all the time without 
knowing it. At every moment you are expressing this great 
creative power, but you hinder its expression by trying to 
copy someone else's style in the belief that it will give you 
his genius.’ That is why all mystics tell us to seek Enlight- 
enment not in books but in our own hearts—and mark the 
word ‘‘own.”’ It is lying there all the time, and just because 
it is the thing nearest to us (which indeed és us) it is the thing 
least known. It only comes to light when we use it, when 
we learntosee with our own eyes instead of asking another 
to tell us what he sees. No one can tell you how to see with 
your eyes except to say, ‘‘Look!’’ No one can tell you how 
to use your legs except to say ‘‘Walk!’’ Spirituality is a faculty 
given to every man just as much as speech and sight and 


235 
Part Three 


movement; it is undeveloped just because we do not make 
ourselves, through use, aware of its ‘‘muscular centre.’’ You 
cannot walk without first becoming aware of the power in 
your legs; you will get nowhere by trying to move them with 
your hands! But this is just what the copyist is doing; he 
copies the sage just as the monkey copies man and imitates 
his efficiency without developing, through use, the power 
of thought. 


Spirituality, therefore, develops through use, and not 
through the use of its means of expression, monkey-wise. 
The only thing we can say to the man who wants to become 
a great musician is “‘Just use your technique creatively. Cre- 
ate musical sounds! Sing music from out of yourself!’’ In 
the same way to the aspirant to spirituality we must say, ‘‘Use 
the forms of life creatively. Live life from out of yourself. 
Let each act be something new, but do not make a fetish 
of novelty. And above all remember that as you live you are 
creating the universe anew out of nothing in every thought 
and deed. If you stop creating for a moment, your universe 
will return to nothingness. And if you copy instead of creat- 
ing, you will not have a universe at all!’ 


But does this mean that, for the beginner, all technique 
must be abandoned? Furthermore, can we make any final 
distinction between technique and life itself? For is it pos- 
sible to live at all without technique? Breathing, eating, 
walking—all these things require a certain degree of tech- 
nique, and perhaps we should never have dreamt of any kind 
of spiritual attainment at all unless we had first learnt the 
technique of speech. Again, to revert to our musical anal- 
ogy, it must be asked whether Beethoven would ever have 
discovered his own latent genius if he had not first been 
drilled in the technique of music. Perhaps it is true that 
although religious technique will not of itself produce 
spirituality, it will clear the way for its approach. This is 
true enough, but the danger is that we should become slaves 
to technique, and this is especially liable to happen in relig- 


236 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


ion. For unlike music or painting, true religion is not a par- 
ticular activity. There can be no painting without canvas, 
brush and colours, but vital religion can exist and manifest 
itself apart from meditation, prayer, ethics and dogma. For 
spirituality is precisely creative and spontaneous /iving, and 
this can come through a whole multitude of techniques most 
of which may not seem to have anything to do with relig- 
ion as generally understood. For this purpose chopping 
wood can be as effective as any ritual, seeing that the hall- 
mark of spirituality is that it is universal. Freedom and limi- 
tation are ultimately inseparable, but spiritual freedom is not 
bound to a particular set of limitations. Spirituality is limited 
in so far as life itself is limited by its countless forms of 
technique—but no further. Therefore when we say that slav- 
ish devotion to technique is the antithesis of spirituality, we 
refer to the idea that Enlightenment can only be found 
through one or other of the techniques generally understood 
as religious, to the idea that we are being spiritual only when 
our lives are limited by specifically religious or ethical forms. 


On the contrary, these forms are worse than useless 
unless we can see beyond them, unless we can bring forth 
our spirituality through any other kind of activity of which 
we may be capable. For true religion dies if we try to fit it 
into ‘‘water-tight compartments,’ and the spiritual man 
rejoices in and acts creatively through and with any means 
of expression at his disposal. So also, he who would achieve 
spirituality must remember that the spirit is life and that he 
has the means of penetrating its secrets in every task and 
action that comes to hand. He must avoid apeing the relig- 
ion of others, realising that the technique of the spirit is the 
whole vast technique of life and not just that particular 
assembly of meditation, ethics, doctrine and ritual called 
religion. For religion in this sense was never intended to be 
anything more than an aid to life. To become absorbed in 
it and to neglect life altogether is wholly to miss the point; 
it is always preparing to live and never actual living. There- 


237 
Part Three 


fore the mistake is to confine spirituality to any particular 
physical, mental or moral form, it is embodied in every form, 
for every form partakes of life and is produced by the crea- 
tive energy of the universe. 


But the trouble is that the religions of the world are 
thronged with such a vast number of ‘‘seekers,’ combing 
through a host of doctrines and practices to find the One 
Royal Road to Truth, trying to confine Truth’s immense life 
without a set of definitions. Herein is materialism and an 
idolatry of ideas, an attempt torise to the stature of the great 
masters by wearing their cast-off clothes. But the secret is 
not to devote one’s life to religion, for this is to become shut 
in a particular box. Rather it is to devote one’s religion to 
life, expanding from the particular to the universal, to the 
knowledge that the spirit rises anew and unceasingly in 
everything that lives and moves. Furthermore to ‘‘seekers’’ 
and copyists and all who put their means into obscure holes 
and corners to see what lies right before them in the open 
we would address the tremendous words of Zen master 
Rinzai:— 


“Do not get yourselves entangled with any 
object, but stand above, pass on and be free! 
As I see those so-called followers of Truth all 
over the country, there are none who come to 
me free and independent of objects. .. . They 
are all ghostly existences, ignominious gnomes 
haunting the woods or bamboo-groves; they 
are elfish spirits of the wilderness. They are 
madly biting into all heaps of filth. O you 
mole-eyed!... What do you seek in a neigh- 
bour’s house? You are putting another head 
over your own! What do you lack in your- 
selves? O you followers of Truth, what you are 
making use of at this very moment is none 
other than what makes a Buddha. But you do 


238 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


not believe me and seek it outwardly. Do not 
commit yourselves to an error. There are no 
realities outside, nor is there anything inside 
you may lay your hands on. You stick to the 
literal meaning of what I speak to you, but 
how far better it is to have all your hankerings 
stopped and be doing nothing whatever!”’ 


239 
Part Three 


WAR 


I shall not fight. No cry of England’s need 
To guard each ravished jewel in her crown; 
No boast of war’s adventure, of renown 
That waits the winning of the office-freed; 
No urge uprising from a social creed, 

Nor woman’s word, shall drag me down 

To strike a blow for human greed, 

And watch the heart of Abel bleed. 

Let those who know not splendidly defend 
Our England’s banner on the field of woe. 

I shall not fight, for I shall know 

That he who meets me at the bayonet’s end 
May wear the semblance of my country’s foe, 
Yet will he be my brother, and my friend. 


UPASAKA. 


240 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


THE UNIMPORTANCE OF WAR 


From Buddhism in England 
May-June, 1938 
@ 


It is well known that those who are most afraid of great 
heights are those most likely to lose control of themselves 
when looking over the edge of a precipice. Their very fear 
of falling is the power which hurls them over the edge, and 
in this familiar fact there is a moral which must be applied 
to the various bugbears which from time to time become 
fashionable in human society. Whether or not human beings 
would be happy without some particular spectre to haunt 
their minds is a question which we cannot at present con- 
sider, though everyone is no doubt familiar with people who 
are not happy unless they are miserable, who get a certain 
‘‘kick’’ out of imagining that they are the most unfortunate 
people in the world, who can never feel that life has any 
zest unless they can believe themselves threatened by some 
dire event. Whether this peculiar trait is characteristic of 
society as a whole I do not know. Thus it is not easy to say 
whether the present and very prevalent terror of war is some- 
thing which society would be happy to have removed or 
not. We only know that it undoubtedly exists. 


Whether the race as a whole either consciously or 
unconsciously desires war is a problem wherein we have 
No Statistics to help us. Presumably this article will be read 
by those who believe themselves innocent of any desire for 
war, and who, moreover, would do anything in their power 
to prevent its happening. In this they may be prompted by 
an urge to serve humanity and promote civilization, or else 
by fear, though if fear is the motive one can only assume 


24! 
Part Three 


that their efforts will be more of a hindrance than a help. 
The possible steps they may take to avert war may be divided 
into three groups. Firstly, there are those who believe that 
war can only be prevented by intimidating potential war- 
makers with the might of armaments. Secondly, there are 
those who prefer to shame the war-maker by turning to him 
the other cheek, believing that to resist him by his own 
means is to sink to his own depraved level. Thirdly, there 
are those who desire by various forms of propaganda to fight 
the ‘‘ideology’’ of war and to make those who espouse it 
seem , in the eyes of the world, ridiculous, criminal, or mad. 
Each of these three has its own particular sanity and its own 
particular madness, but whether sanity or madness prepon- 
derates depends not on the kind of action taken but on the 
motive from which it springs. 


Therefore, for this reason and another I believe it more 
profitable at this time to consider not how we shall try to 
prevent war, but what our attitude to it may be, whether 
it comes or not. For we have to realize that, at this stage, 
there is really nothing we can do either to prevent it or to 
cause it, unless, of course, we can summon the wits, the 
money, and the will to do something very alarming indeed, 
such as purchasing a fleet of private aeroplanes to deposit 
bombs and propaganda in certain carefully selected spots. 
Why no philanthropic millionaire has done this I cannot 
imagine. Much might also be done by some grimly deter- 
mined secret society such as Dennis Wheatley’s ‘‘Millers of 
God,” but as a rule the people who have the necessarily vast 
sums of money at their disposal lack the imagination to do 
anything so desirable. However, so far as the ordinary man 
and woman are concerned there is really nothing that can 
be done immediately except to buy a hermitage in the 
Himalayas or some other remote spot. But this again is 
expensive, although I am told that quite a number of peo- 
ple are doing things of this kind, storing their Shagri-las [sic] 
with canned food against the coming storm. They may be 


242 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


regarded as escapists and cowards, but since war itself is an 
act of cowardice and military courage for the most part a 
matter of running away from one’s own fears, I do not think 
they are to be especially blamed. They may be cowards, but 
they do at least know what they want. After all, war is, if 
we are to believe human history, just as much a natural 
phenomenon as a thunder-storm, a flood or an earthquake. 
If you believe you can save your homes you stay behind and 
fight the fires or help to stem the water. If you know you 
can’t you just go to a safe place; to stay behind would only 
be sentimental foolhardiness showing a lack of responsibil- 
ity. For everyone is responsible for his own life to the com- 
munity; if he knows the community can be benefited by 
putting his life in danger or even by losing it, then, if he 
dies, he dies responsibly. If, however, he knows that the loss 
of his life will help to save neither the lives nor the homes 
of the community, then if he deliberately goes and gets killed 
he commits suicide, which is usually and sensibly regarded 
as acrime. Talk of ‘‘standing by one’s post’’ or ‘‘going down 
with one’s ship’’ is, under the circumstances, irresponsible 
and pernicious nonsense. One is only justified in doing this 
kind of thing when it serves the general good. 


But now everyone knows, or should know, that in 
modern warfare defence is something which has practically 
ceased to exist. Attack has always been the best form of 
defence; now it is the only form, and unless you choose 
to fly up in an aeroplane and bomb other people's cities, 
you will just have to stay at home and be bombed. And even 
if the bombs, or the gas, or the flames, or the invading hordes 
don’t get you, the subsequent plagues or famines certainly 
will. Therefore most people have got to make up their minds 
either to be killed or to get right out before anything hap- 
pens. Hence responsible people who have the welfare of the 
community at heart should instantly acquire distant and 
secret retreats and transport as many people to them at an 
appropriate time as their means will allow. This is nothing 


243 
Part Three 


less than what every Government will do with itself when 
the time comes, and they, after all, are said to be the most 
responsible people in the community. When the trouble is 
over, they will appear again in what is left of the public and 
Start again. Naturally, only a few people will have either the 
means or the sense to do this, and therefore their retreats 
will remain comparatively remote and secret. They will not 
be escapists any more than anyone else; they will just be 
blessed with good karma. In any case, no one was ever called 
a coward or an escapist because he left his house when it 
seriously caught fire. When my kitchen curtains blow into 
the gas-stove and set the room alight, my cook is not con- 
sidered a glorious martyr if she is burnt to death while stand- 
ing resolutely at her post with an emptied fire-extinguisher. 
If, however, she had been so surrounded with flames that 
she could not leave the kitchen, that would be quite another 
matter. 


Therefore we have to face the fact that most of us are 
in such a position that we cannot remove ourselves to safety 
in the event of war. I think we also have to recognize that 
there is nothing we can do immediately to prevent it from 
coming; we must just hope and continue to behave like civi- 
lized people. Now I know many people who would regard 
this as the most abysmal pessimism, for they all believe war 
to be the greatest evil which could befall us. Anyone who 
does not work himself to a skeleton to prevent it (however 
ineffectually) is to them an irresponsible slacker. These peo- 
ple, who exist in enormous numbers and in various degrees 
of enthusiasm, regard war as the bugbear of bugbears, the 
utter end of civilization, beside which all other evils are as 
pale shadows. War to them is the end of everything and 
hence the thing most of all to be avoided. But let them con- 
sider for a moment. After all, war is only death and per- 
haps a highly unpleasant death. Certainly it is a great deal 
of death, but this is a matter of quantity and not value; in 
spiritual matters, it is value that counts. Without doubt war 


244 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


involves other evils besides death, if death is actually an evil. 
It releases the basest passions of which man is capable, for 
‘‘whom the gods wish to destroy they first make mad.”’ But 
all that can be expected of any one of us is to see that our 
own basest passions are kept under control; though we may 
not be able to prevent the gods from destroying us, we can 
at least make sure that they do not steal away our souls. In 
war the madness is far worse than the death, butif you have 
a good control of yourself, you have only the death to fear. 


Nevertheless, the prospect of death inflames many of 
us with varying kinds of madness, and the prospect of much 
death with more madness still. But this is only because our 
sense of proportion is absurdly distorted and because we 
have not learnt to accept the changing aspects of nature. To 
some extent, this is the fault of our education, at least so 
far as our sense of proportion is concerned. But if we learn 
anything from Buddhism it should teach us one thing—that 
bugbears such as war are of very little significance. To those 
of us who would be inextricably involved in any future war 
it has two important messages. The first concerns our sense 
of proportion. 


For why all this fuss about war? You are going to die; 
civilization is going to disappear. So what? Is this any spe- 
cial cause for misery, and is the acceptance of the fact pes- 
simism? I think not. Empires and civilizations have vanished 
many times before, and of ancient Egypt we have a good 
deal less than bombs may leave of London, Berlin and Paris. 
Of Atlantis, if indeed it existed, we have hardly a trace, and 
yet humanity survives. For physical catastropbes cannot 
touch the spirit unless we let them, and even then only for 
a brief time. It may take two hundred years for civilization 
to rise again, but what is a mere two hundred years? And 
is this physical civilization of ours really such a great treas- 
ure, whose loss would be the end of all things? Rather I 
would say that if it is capable of blowing itself to pieces, 
it deserves to be blown to pieces. Next time it may learn 


245 
Part Three 


better, and even if it doesn’t there is infinite time in which 
to try again. Indeed, the wisdom of the East gives us a vision 
of the soul’s past and future beside which Armageddon is 
an almost imperceptible glow. And yet it does not lose the 
proportions. A single mistake in the life of the spirit may 
throw you back a million years on your path, whereas a 
world war can only put you back three score and ten at the 
most; before eternity this is just the littlest fraction of a 
moment. The wounds of earth will heal, and in time you 
will return once more to start life again. Do you doubt this? 
Well, I cannot prove it, but if you try believing it you will 
find that it affects you as no other belief will. Even so, you 
will in time outgrow it; that is not to say that you will reject 
it, but rather that you will grasp its true meaning, which 
is this: that time the infinitely long is the same as time the 
infinitely short. To see eternity you may have at first to see 
life and death in perspective; after that you will be able to 
see it in every passing moment. At first you may feel that 
to obtain the sense of eternity you will have to bide and 
behold the passing of immeasurable time; but afterwards you 
will see that you can slip into eternity through any moment, 
for the eternally long is one with the eternally short. But 
to slip through the moment requires a certain knack which 
comes with practice, because the moment is an elusive crea- 
ture. To begin with, it cannot be measured; it is so much 
shorter than a second that before we can begin to think of 
it as here and now it has already passed. At the same time 
Wwe can never get away from it, for our very thinking and 
our trying to grasp it partake of it and exist in it. For the 
universe exists only in the moment; the world of yesterday 
is not and cannot be; the world of tomorrow is not, and 
will never be; the world of to-day is, and will never cease 
to be. To-day is therefore eternity, for it is not the moment 
that moves but only its measure. Time stands still, but the 
stars and planets go racing on their courses. Yet however 
much the planets race and in whatever way they behave, even 


246 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


if they rush together and beat upon each other, even if blaz- 
ing comets are hurled out of the void and whole systems 
dissolve into dust, they cannot affect the stillness of Time 
or break the persistence of the eternal Now. 


This brings us to the second message of Buddhism in 
regard to misfortune. If you never lose your hold on this 
eternal Now, you find yourself in harmony with life. Hui 
Neng says: “‘If we allow our thoughts, past, present and 
future, to link up in a series we put ourselves under restraint. 
On the other hand, if we let our mind be attached to noth- 
ing at all times and towards all things, we gain freedom.” 
This freedom is just walking on with the Now, which is to 
become one with the creative impulse of life; for at this 
moment the whole universe is being created. It did not come 
into being at some point in the infinite past, nor will it cease 
to be at some point in the infinite future: it is born now; 
it dies now; it begins and ends with the moment. This is 
perhaps a metaphysical, or even mathematical, way of stat- 
ing a fundamental principle of spiritual psychology. It is that 
you live in this eternal Now, that you are it and that by no 
possible contrivance can you get away from it. Therefore 
it is written: ‘‘Have perseverance as one who doth for ever- 
more endure. Thy shadows live and vanish, but that which 
in thee knows, for it is Knowledge, is not of fleeting life. 
It is the Man that was, is and shall be, for whom the hour 
will never strike’ (Voice of the Silence). The realization of 
this brings the most unbelievable freedom of spirit, releas- 
ing energies of the soul hitherto undreamed of. Loss and 
gain become things of no account because you have noth- 
ing to gain and nothing to lose; you can stake your life with- 
out turning a hair, and at every point you find yourself free 
to go left or right, backwards or forwards, just as you choose. 
For you yourself have become the eternal Path, and carry- 
ing it with you you can never depart from it whichever way 
you turn. This is called responsible irresponsibility, for the 
sage is a law-abiding vagabond. 


247 
Part Three 


In the words of Chuang Tzu: ‘‘The perfect man is a 
spiritual being. Were the ocean itself scorched up, he would 
not feel hot. Were the Milky Way frozen hard, he would not 
feel cold. Were the mountains to be riven with thunder, and 
the great deep to be thrown up by storm, he would not trem- 
ble. . . . The revolutions of ten thousand years leave his unity 
unscathed. The universe itself may pass away, but he will 
flourish still.’ 


THE ORIGINAL FACE 


From the Zen Sermons of Wu Tao-kung 


From Buddhism in England 
May-June, 1938 


An old master used to hit people on the mouth when they 
asked what his religion was. How understandable! But per- 
haps he should have controlled his feelings a little better. 
Yet it may be that I am too kind-hearted, talking along like 
this instead of lifting you off your feet and throwing you 
out of the room. What is my religion? What can you want 
with a religion? Is it not after all like looking over the whole 
Empire for your own face? Heaven and earth perform their 
functions every day without fuss: butterflies have more beau- 
tiful clothes than even Pien-lu could make; no music excels 
the sound of the waterfalls at Chechiang; and even Confucius 
could not arrange his life as well as petals are arranged round 
the stem of a peony, but have they a religion? 

But man, having involved himself in the ten fetters 
and the fourteen afflictions, finds in the innumerable objects 
a certain reluctance to adapt themselves to his convenience. 


248 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


How sad! Now tell me, have you any fault to find with the 
world of ten thousand things? If you have a fault will you 
please show it me? A wise man of old has said that the man 
who finds the fault is the man who put it there. But he does 
not know he put it there, and so blames the ten thousand 
things. Do you blame the ten thousand things, or do you 
blame yourself? If the former, then you are like a deaf per- 
son who blames his neighbour for not talking loud enough; 
if the latter, someone may tell you you are a wise man. But 
are you? I tell you no praising, no blaming! Praise yourself, 
and you are like Lung-chao who made a fine stew out of 
his own tongue; blame yourself, and you are like the demons 
who eat the filth off their own bodies. So much for all your 
talk and sadness about your own evil minds! Do you go to 
the Buddha to get rid of your evil mind? Why not give me 
your evil mind, and I will give it a good washing. If you 
cannot give it me, how do you know you have got it? 


The object of the ten good deeds (paramitas) is to 
get rid of the evil mind and to make ordinary men into 
Buddhas. Does anyone here want to become a Buddha? If 
so, he shall have a knock over the head with my stick. Trees 
and grass are all Buddhas, and man is supposed to be greater 
than they. So how should you want to become a Buddha? 
Having climbed to the top of Mount Lu you still say you are 
not an inch off the ground. But whether you are on the top 
of the mountain or in the rice-swamps by the river you still 
cannot get away from it. Trees and grass are Buddhas and 
have never known what it is like to think they are not 
Buddhas. Ordinary men are Buddhas but seem to have for- 
gotten it. Buddhas are Buddhas and have never been any- 
thing else. But you want to remember what you have 
forgotten. Let me first ask you a question: What is this for- 
getting, and who is it that wants to remember? If a Buddha 
forgets he is a Buddha does he cease to be one? And if a 
Buddha wants to remember that he is a Buddha, is he not 
like the idiot who, when eating a bowl of rice, wondered 


249 
Part Three 


if he was there to eat it and could not understand why it 
did not drop straight on to the seat of his chair? 


I tell you the Buddha is none other than your own 
original face. You carry it about with you wherever you go. 
Going to the Northern River, you cannot catch it; running 
to the Southern Lake, you cannot get away from it. There- 
fore what is the use of all your ten merits, all your toiling 
and trying, all your sutra-reading and worrying about the 
silly tricks of the old masters? Here in this place everything 
is clear as the vastness of heaven. Drinking tea, eating rice, 
sweeping up leaves, sleeping at night, taking a walk, who 
has ever lost it? And yet you want me to talk to you about 
Buddhahood. With all the ten thousand things existing 
around you I wonder you can hear me speak for the noise 
all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas are making. I am sorry I 
cannot shout any louder, but Iam an old man and you must 
excuse me. 


CAN WE HELP OURSELVES? 
A Lecture 


From Buddhism in England 
td 


The study of religion or even of all religions can so easily 
lead us such a long way from religion. For religion itself is 
something intimately bound up with life, so much so that 
one hardly knows where to draw the line between the two. 
A specific religion such as Buddhism or Christianity is really 
a set of ideas and symbols about life, and these ideas and 
symbols are just tricks or cunning devices to make us see 
things which are so obvious that we don’t notice them. 


250 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


Nothing, for instance, could be more obvious than one’s own 
face, and yet in one way it’s the most mysterious thing about 
us because we can never actually see it. We have to go and 
look in a mirror if we want to know what it looks like. Now 
when you go and stand in front of a mirror you know, as 
a rule, that what you see is just your own reflection and it 
doesn’t cause you very much surprise. You understand, in 
fact, that the mirror is just a trick, a clever dodge for mak- 
ing you see yourself. But if you didn’t understand the ways 
of mirrors and had never seen one before, well, you might 
get rather a shock. There is a story of an old man and his 
wife who used to live on one of the islands off the West 
Coast of Scotland. Their island was slowly being washed 
away by the sea, and at last they had to leave their home 
and go to live on the mainland. When they came to their 
new house, the old man went up into the bedroom and saw 
a curious smooth and flat object on the dressing table the 
like of which he’d never seen before. He walked up to it, 
looked into it and suddenly stepped back in amazement. 
‘“‘Loch!”’ he exclaimed, ‘‘’tis feyther!’’ Well, he got rather 
worried about it and didn’t think his wife ought to see it. 
So he put it under the bed. But he was so intrigued and puz- 
zled by the thing that from time to time he would go up 
to the bedroom during the day to have a look at it. At last 
his wife began to notice that there was something funny 
about him, and she couldn’t account at all for his constant 
visits to the bedroom. So one day while he was out at the 
local pub, she decided she would go upstairs and have a look 
round on her own. And after a while she pulled out this 
thing from under the bed. When she looked at it she nearly 
wept. ‘Ah me!’’ she sighed, ‘‘a might ha’ known it: ’Tis 
anither woman, and loch, ain’t she ugly!”’ 


Well, in rather the same way the ideas and symbols 
of a religion seem to us so entirely strange, and often enough 
our notions about them are quite as curious as those of that 
old Scotch couple. The early stages of religion are concerned 


251 
Part Three 


mainly with gods and other supernatural powers. We pray 
to them, we conceive them as external personalities who 
can, if they choose, bestow all heavenly and earthly bless- 
ings upon us, or, alternatively, all manner of punishments 
and adversity. But in time we begin to understand that we 
must seek God in ourselves, that wisdom must be sought 
from within, that heaven and hell are of our own making, 
and that all the spirits and demons and angels of primitive 
religion are symbols of the vast potentialities for good and 
evil of our own souls. Even so, we have as yet a long way 
to go. For at this stage it is so easy to fall into a subtle trap, 
because the concrete, external gods of the primitive have 
been replaced by other gods which are more misleading 
because they are less obviously naive. These new gods are 
not conceived as external realities at all. On the contrary, 
they masquerade as inner realities, for they are no other than 
our own ideas about life and religion. Thus, instead of seek- 
ing wisdom from gods which we really understand as gods, 
we seek it in ideas which we discover in books, hear at lec- 
tures or think out for ourselves. But these ideas are just as 
much cunning devices, just as much mirrors, just as much 
external deities as Jupiter, Mars, Minerva and the rest. You 
may chase ideas for ever and become no wiser; you may 
work out all-their implications in an unending universe of 
thought which you might explore to the end of time. If you 
wish, you can easily get lost in this universe, for the more 
you explore, hoping to find the place where wisdom is hid- 
den, the further you are led away from the place where it 
actually is, which is right under your own nose, here and 
now in this ordinary life. 


There are others who seek this wisdom not so much 
in ideas as in peculiar states of consciousness. They some- 
how imagine that if they can depart to the astral plane, or 
visit the world of departed spirits, or awaken psychic forces 
in the body, or develop new powers of perception, they will 
find the wisdom which seems to be absent from this ordi- 


252 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


nary world and unknowable through these five ordinary 
senses. Now I have no doubt that there are astral planes, that 
we can speak with departed spirits, that we can exercise 
occult powers, that we can see things which underlie the 
world of the senses on finer planes of matter. But here again, 
if we are going to imagine that any of these admittedly 
diverting pursuits are going to give us wisdom or an under- 
standing of religion, then once more we are just running 
after the old gods. For all these investigations have no more 
to do with religion than with botany. In fact, they have prob- 
ably a great deal more to do with botany than with religion, 
for they are essentially scientific pursuits, and unfortunately, 
it is seldom recognized nowadays that science and religion 
are two things as entirely different as an inch and a joke. 
For one is a question of quantity and the other of quality 
or values. By means of an inch you may understand size, 
and means of a joke you may appreciate the comic. And 
whereas you may presumably have a joke about the inch, 
you cannot possibly have an inch about the joke. That is 
to say, although you may have religious science, in the sense 
of a scientist who can find religion in analysing milk, you 
cannot have scientific religion. For religion is something 
applicable to every possible form of activity; but it does not 
consist in, nor can it be qualified by any particular form of 
activity. Thus there are many activities to which it would 
be unreasonable to apply science, although I regret that some 
people seem anxious to do so. If, for instance, you desired 
a scientific explanation of why you enjoy the music of 
Mozart, of what precisely made it seem beautiful to you, 
you would be confronted by considerable details of nervous 
responses, sense mechanisms and what not which would 
simply explain its beauty away. Science is purely a question 
of measurement, analysis and mechanism. To measure a qual- 
ity is like combing a bald head; to analyse it is like expect- 
ing a post-mortem to reveal the secrets of a woman's beauty; 
to mechanize it is like expecting a pencil mounted on wheels 


253 
Part Three 


with a clockwork engine to write words of wisdom. Thus 
scientific investigation may increase our knowledge, and 
though knowledge may be power, it is no wisdom. It does 
not follow that because you know this world, the astral 
world and all possible worlds, you are therefore capable of 
leading a religious life in any one of them, much less all. 
The Hermetic maxim says, ‘‘As above, so below,’ which is 
to say that all these worlds are based on the same fundamen- 
tal principles, and that when you know one you have the 
key to all. Yet, knowing those principles, you have no more 
than knowledge, which is simply an instrument, a tool, a 
useful gadget. And a carpenter is not a good carpenter on 
account of his amazing faculty for buying immense quanti- 
ties of tools. 


Religion, therefore, is not concerned with the acqui- 
sition of knowledge and experience; it is rather a matter of 
our response to and use of even a little knowledge and of 
any experiences that happen to come our way. In the last 
resort we need no more for it than our ordinary, everyday 
experience, conveyed to our minds through our five senses. 
For here is life as we know it; yet how little we know it, 
for we have to have a cunning device called a religion to 
enable us to live it aright. Even so, it is astonishing how easily 
this device leads us astray, and perhaps we can somehow 
find out just how it does this. Therefore I want you to con- 
sider with me for a while a rather horrifying picture. In some 
ways it is rather an amusing picture; I suppose it depends 
how it strikes you. But the picture I want to show is that 
of ourselves in search of Happiness, Truth, Enlightenment, 
God, Wisdom, or whatever you like to call it. 


Presumably all of us are here to-night because we are 
in search of this mysterious thing, and presumably most of 
us have the idea, common to all mystics, that in some way 
or other we must find it within ourselves. That is to say, 
no one else can give it to us any more than another person 
can eat our own food for us. We cannot find it by going to 


254 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


any particular place or state of consciousness. If there are 
any orthodox Christians here, they may look at it in rather 
a different way. For them, God is the source of all wisdom 
and by reason of Original Sin we cannot find it for ourselves. 
Therefore wisdom must come through opening the soul to 
the Grace of God. In this the Christian is very nearly right, 
but for a reason which cannot quite be shown at the 
moment. If he does not object too strongly, let us leave the 
Christian on one side for the moment and consider those 
of us who are trying to work out our own salvation, who 
either disbelieve or do not care about any supernatural 
power which could simply give us wisdom for the asking. 
Most people in this category would say with the Indian mys- 
tics that man’s real and inmost Self is God, and that our task 
is to realize, to make real, this fact in our lives. To put it 
another way, man is God in potentiality, and religion is the 
task of developing the potential into the actual. Thus in the 
end the Goal is to attain complete unity with God, the Abso- 
lute or the Universal Self. Personally, I prefer a more matter- 
of-fact name for this God. Let us say, shall we, that all of 
us want to discover the mystery of life, to know what life 
is and so to live in harmony with life. I think, if we talk about 
it in this way, it brings us a little nearer to fundamentals, 
for, as we have already seen, religious terminology has a way 
of leading us away from the thing which religion is really 
about, and that is life itself. Even so, life is rather a bad word 
because it has two meanings which are rather apt to get con- 
fused. One is life as opposed to death, and the other is the 
life which is a perpetual process of living and dying. Life 
in this latter sense is also something just a bit more than 
living and dying, in the same way as the whole is greater 
than the sum of its parts. It is also the meaning, the raison 
d tre, the cause and the effect of living and dying, just as 
the child is the meaning, the raison d’étre, the cause and 
effect of man and woman. Neither man nor woman can exist 
for long without each other, and there is no point in hav- 


255 
Part Three 


ing two sexes unless there can be the child to give them a 
point. The same may be said of life and death, and of all 
other pairs of opposites. Therefore I want a term for that 
life which is not only living and dying, but also their mean- 
ing, raison d étre, cause and effect, the source of their mys- 
tery and wonder, of their rhythm and movement. It is just 
that mysterious life which exists in ourselves and everything 
else, which ultimately 7s ourselves, and which we are all so 
anxious to discover. 


Well, if you will excuse me, I will take my word for 
this mystery from a place at the other side of the earth called 
China. The word is untranslatable in any case; it is suffi- 
ciently unfamiliar not to involve the chaos of cross-purposed 
associations which always arise when we use familiar words 
like God and Spirit. This Chinese word is Tao. The first thing 
to remember about Tao is this: that as Tao is, in a sense, life, 
everything which happens, everything we think, do, or say, 
simply is Tao. Therefore, whether we like it or not, we can’t 
help living in harmony with the life or the Tao. We may feel 
that we lack something, whether possessions or wisdom, 
and so go in search of it. But it is Tao which is searching 
through us, and there is nothing in the way of possessions 
or wisdom that can be added to Tao, for Tao includes every- 
thing. This is why religion can be expressed in the paradox, 
‘Become what you are.’ Or as a Buddhist sage put it, ‘‘Ordi- 
nary men are all Buddhas, and the only difference between 
a Buddha and an ordinary man is that the Buddha realizes 
that he is a Buddha, whereas the ordinary man does not.’ 
Yet although in reality we are in perfect harmony with life, 
we feel that something is wrong. But that is only because 
we do not realize that we are in harmony. We do not under- 
stand that each one of us is in fact the all-sufficient Tao, and 
therefore we seek this Tao in external things, whether in pos- 
sessions or ideas. And while we seek it in some ways, we 
try to run away from it in others. Since we do not realize 
our identity with the Tao we fear that certain things such 


256 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


as loss and death can take something away from us. But loss 
and death are themselves included in Tao, and cannot take 
anything away from it. For the Tao is presented to us in all 
forms and in all experiences, and because we are the Tao, 
to run after them is running after ourselves, and running 
away from them is running away from ourselves. Pursuing 
it we cannot catch it; fleeing it we cannot escape it. Indeed, 
one is reminded of the words of the Psalm:— 


Whither shall I go from thy spirit? 

Or whither shall I flee from thy presence? 
If | ascend up into heaven, thou art there, 
If I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there. 
If I take the wings of the morning, 

And dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea; 
Even there shall thy hand lead me, 

And thy right band shall bold me. 


Yet here are all of us searching, searching for this 
Tao—and what a wild, mad picture it is! We are trying to 
find wisdom, and we might as well try to lift ourselves up 
by the seats of our own trousers. Some of you have no doubt 
tried to practise the teaching of the Bhagavad-Gita, to sep- 
arate yourself from all your thoughts and deeds, and to real- 
ize that your Self is the eternal essence which is not affected 
by the forms of the world. But haven’t you found that this 
is rather like trying to see your own eyes, and that you just 
go round in circles? You divide yourself from your thoughts, 
but is not that very dividing itself a thought, and why not 
divide yourself again from that? And then again, why not 
divide yourself from the thought that you were dividing 
yourself? Yes, you could go on like this forever in an infinite 
regress leading to the ultimate madness. But you would not 
be understanding Krishna aright; you would simply be chas- 
ing yourself round in circles indefinitely. That always hap- 
pens when we try to face that tremendous problem, ‘‘What 
am I?”’ And there is its allied problem: If I am what I am, 


257 
Part Three 


how can I make myself different; how can I increase my wis- 
dom? To put it in another way: If I am in a state of darkness 
because my Higher Self is identified with my lower self, how 
then can my Higher Self free itself? It can’t lift itself up out 
of the morass of the lower self—unless perhaps there is 
something higher even than it, some fixed and firm branch 
or hand above it to which it can cling. Indeed, what a strange 
position we are in when we try to help ourselves; if you 
think about it long enough you can easily go mad with dis- 
tress and hopelessness. 


Now it is just at this point that our friend the ortho- 
dox Christian is entitled to interrupt. ‘‘There,’ he will say, 
‘I told you so all the time. Man cannot help himself, and 
only God can help him. For God is the firm branch above 
to Whom we can cling and lift ourselves out of the mire 
of sin. That branch is offered freely through Christ to all; 
its name is Divine Grace, and we have only to desire it sin- 
cerely, only to lay ourselves open to it in all humility, con- 
fessing our own wretchedness, and at once we shall find 
it”’ Well, personally, Iam inclined to feel that the Christian 
is very right, but not quite in the way he thinks he is. I have 
no doubt at all that his solution is wholly effective for a cer- 
tain type of mind, for the mind that can believe in a per- 
sonal, external and transcendental God. But this very belief 
seems to me to complicate the situation unnecessarily. More- 
over, while it will bring some to true salvation, others it will 
simply lead astray into the realm of ideas and feelings about 
Truth, and not to Truth itself. Furthermore the problem of 
the objective and external existence of God is a scientific 
and not a religious problem, resting ultimately on knowl- 
edge. Such a God may or may not exist, but His existence 
is something outside our everyday experience. Is there not, 
perhaps, yet another Way, requiring only the experience of 
ordinary life, a Way which brings us to a condition similar 
to the Christian salvation in its essentials, but differing in 
its theological and philosophical details? 


258 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


Indeed, there is such a Way, but how can I or anyone 
put it into words? The moment we stop to think about it, 
it is lost. It is right here before us at this moment, standing 
perfectly plain and open, and every one of us is travelling 
serenely along it—did we but know it! But how shall we 
see it? I talk about seeing it, yet every word I utter is a black 
devil to hide it from our eyes. But do not be too unkind to 
these devils, for if your eyes are open even these are all the 
perfect Tao and are all walking along this Way with us. If 
we must give this Way a name, let us call it the Middle Way, 
because it is neither pursuing the Tao on the one hand, nor 
fleeing from it on the other. To seek for the Tao is to be like 
the dog which chases its tail; to flee from it is like the dog 
running away from its tail. Yet this is really Tao chasing Tao, 
and Tao running away from Tao, and there has never been 
any mistake at all. Just the same thing happens when you 
try to catch hold of the present moment; try to keep it, and 
before you can so much as wink an eyelid it has become 
the past and has altogether vanished. The more you think 
about this present moment, the more elusive it becomes; 
you cannot say just when and where it is, for before you 
can utter the word NOW! it has already gone. Yet, paradox- 
ically, you have been living in it and moving forward with 
it all the time. It never waits for you to catch it, but you 
can never separate yourself from it. You see, it is the moment, 
or better, the movement of Tao. All you have to do is to go 
straight ahead with it. Do not worry about whether you are 
going along with the Tao or not; you are doing it all the time 
in spite of yourself. If you suddenly understand that it is 
no cause for pride; rather you should laugh at yourself for 
not having seen it before. And is not this just what the Chris- 
tian says about the Grace of God? It is offered freely to you 
in spite of yourself, and if you find it, it is not your doing 
but the work of God and all the praise should be accorded 
to Him alone. You see, all this is just like the story of the 
idiot who went all over the world in search of his head, 


259 
Part Three 


which he had never lost. There is nothing special for you 
to see, nothing special for you to learn; just go straight ahead. 
You cannot find the Tao by pursuit; you cannot avoid it by 
flight, and whether you pursue or avoid, or whether you 
just walk straight on, it is simply Tao that pursues, Tao that 
avoids, Tao that walks straight on. Thus you are no more 
held away from the freedom of the Tao than your eyes are 
separated from your eyes. Well, there you are! Just look right 
ahead and see what you see. 


A Buddhist sage was asked, ‘‘How shall we escape 
from illusion?”’ He replied, ‘‘Who is holding you back?”’ In 
truth there are no obstructions, and if you can really open 
your eyes just for a moment, you will see that this every- 
day life and experience which ordinarily seems so oppres- 
sive, so limiting, is nothing other than the supreme religious 
experience. In getting up in the morning, in dressing, in 
going out to work, in sitting in the train, in washing your 
hands, in greeting a friend in the street, there are no res- 
traints; in all this the Tao is just moving freely along its 
unhurried way. Does the present moment seem like a light- 
ning flash? Does time go too fast? That is only because you 
are running after it. The Tao runs when you run, because 
the Tao is you. And yet there was really no running at all, 
for Time is in itself neither fast nor slow; thus Time is Tao, 
and you are Tao. And perhaps you are now tempted to ask, 
“What IS Tao?”’ I need hardly give you the famous answer 
of the Chinese sage. It was just this: WALK ON! 


However, I am just wondering whether I ought not 
to apologize for inflicting on you my attempts to describe 
the indescribable. Some of you may be thinking that I do 
not understand what I am talking about, and perhaps you 
are right. And some of you may have been having your 
doubts about this thing called Tao. You may be thinking, 
“Well, if everything is nothing but Tao, how dull! A universe 
in which there is really only one thing must be as flat and 
uninteresting as an infinite desert.’’ Of course, you are quite 


260 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


right. All of us know only too well those philosophies, 
which, seizing the hammer of intellect, batter the universe 
into a solid lump of homogeneous mud called the one essen- 
tial Substance, proclaiming all diversity, all individuality, all 
personality to be a vain illusion. But please do not think that 
Tao is this One unindividuated substance, that because I am 
Tao and you are Tao and everything is Tao therefore I and 
you and all created things are just nothing, just unimpor- 
tant and insignificant phantasies. If you can put up with 
another paradox, we should say rather that while there is 
certainly only one Tao, Tao is not only one thing. For it és 
this One Substance which exists undivided in all separate 
things, yet at the same time it is just those very separate 
things; it is each one of them in all its uniqueness. Thus Tao 
is both the One and the many, and here again we see that 
the Tao is the Middle Way; it belongs to neither extreme 
alone, neither to unity alone, nor to diversity alone. If, there- 
fore, we are to realize the Tao in our lives, please do not 
imagine that this in any way denies the value of personality 
and of that variety which is wisely said to be the spice of 
life. I am afraid that so many of the philosophies and 
religions of the East have got themselves a bad name over 
here because they are supposed to be so radically imper- 
sonal and to deny absolutely and entirely the value of 
individual things. But that is only a surface impression, for 
the profoundest philosophies of the East always recognized 
a stage beyond mere unity, mere absorption into the One 
Reality, involving the disappearance of the whole objective 
world of form. Thus the Chinese Buddhists have a saying, 
“If the many are to be reduced to the One, to what is the 
One to be reduced?” Again, there is another saying: ‘“To him 
who knows nothing of Buddhism, mountains are mountains 
and waters are waters. But when he has learnt a little of the 
teaching, mountains are for him no longer mountains, and 
waters no longer waters. (That is to say, all separate things 
become merged into the One Reality.) But the saying con- 


26! 
Part Three 


tinues: Yet when he is thoroughly enlightened, then moun- 
tains are to him once again mountains, and waters once again 
waters.” 


You see, however far away we wander, we are always 
brought back again to this ordinary world where I am I and 
you are you, where this table is this table, and that is all there 
is to it. And, as we have seen, in the last resort our every- 
day experience of walking, sitting, talking, thinking and eat- 
ing is the supreme religious experience. Is this rather 
disappointing? Do we not imagine that the supreme religious 
experience ought to be something much more wonderful 
than this? But, think for a moment; what could be more 
wonderful than the surprising fact that we are alive? And 
can you really conceive anything more astonishing than the 
fact that you can laugh and breathe and sleep and speak and 
see? The philosopher and scientist may try as hard as they 
like to reduce all this to a ‘‘nothing but,’ to nothing but illu- 
sion, nothing but mechanism, nothing but a ‘‘fortuitous con- 
gress of atoms.’’ Yes, if you analyse everything down to its 
elements and beyond in order to explain it, you must finally 
explain away all things. And even then you have to face the 
ultimate problem of: Who is it that explains, and why? And 
that at once sets you off running round in circles to try and 
find out what your self is. It has been said that the mystery 
of life is not a problem to be solved, but a reality to be 
experienced. Perhaps it was for this reason that a Buddhist 
poet once wrote:— 


How wondrous and how miraculous, this,— 
I draw water and I carry fuel! 


For the whole point of the Tao is that it is a mystery; 
you can never turn round and look at it, because it és that 
which turns round, namely, yourself. Indeed, we are ‘‘fear- 
fully and wonderfully made,’ and perhaps the most won- 
derful thing of all is that in spite of ourselves, in spite of 
our stupidity, our sins, our illusions, and our egoism, we 


262 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


are never separated from the Tao for one moment. Nothing 
that we can do can put us out of accord with Tao, or, as the 
Christian would say, no amount of sin can prevent God from 
loving us. In fact, in order to attain salvation, to find har- 
mony with life, we do not have to do a single thing; there 
is nothing that we can do, except, perhaps, to recognize that 
we are saved as we are in spite of ourselves, to acknowledge 
this mystery with reverence and gratitude, and then pass 
freely on our way. That is what is meant when we say that 
the whole thing is right here before us in our ordinary life, 
and that all we have to do is just to go straight ahead with 
it. The only trap is that it’s no good just going straight ahead 
with it én order to obtain this realization. You can’t obtain 
it; you’ve already got it, and you only think you haven’t 
because you try to get it. And when you know this, what 
else would you do than just go on with your life as you find 
it in the joy and freedom of the spirit? Every one of us has 
that freedom whether we know it or not, and no one pre- 
vents us from seeing it but ourselves. In short, we are mak- 
ing a great fuss about trying to lift ourselves with our own 
hands out of a prison from which we are already free. Under 
these circumstances one feels rather like saying with another 
Buddhist sage: ‘‘Nothing is now left to you but to have a 
good laugh.”’ 


263 
Part Three 


APPENDIX I 


BUDDHISM ADVOCATED AT A 
CHRISTIAN RELIGIOUS CONFERENCE 


From Buddhism in England 
March-April, 1933 


A most striking example of the difficulties and problems 
with which the Christian religion finds itself confronted to- 
day was demonstrated at a Conference of Public School Boys 
which was held at Haywards Heath (England) on June 
10th-13th of last year (1932). The Conference was organized 
by the *‘Teaching Church Group for Adult Religious Educa- 
tion,’ and was presided over by the Archbishop of York. 


The Conference took the form of Lectures and Group 
Discussions, the subjects of the Lectures being:— 
Christianity as a Reasonable Faith: His Grace 
the Archbishop of York. 


The Christian Moral Standard: Rev. Canon 
Grensted. 


Prayer: Rev. Canon Grensted. 
Vocation (1): Rev. C.H. Smyth; and (1): Mr. G.K. 
Tattersall. 


265 
Appendix I 


The Group Discussions included the six questions 
detailed below, each question being discussed by two groups. 


I. Do you think modern science makes a reli- 
gious view of life easier, or more difficult? 
I. What is the relationship between creed 
and conduct? What have you tosay about 

the ‘‘necessity of dogma’’? 

Ill, Why should we pray, when God already 
knows our need? 

IV. How far should the individual accept the 
authority of Christian tradition in mat- 
ters (i) of belief, (it) of conduct? 

V. What truth is there in the alleged contrast 
between the “‘Religion of the Church’ and 
the ‘‘Religion of Jesus’’? 


VI. How far should Church-going be consid- 
ered obligatory? What do you take to be 
its purpose? 


Mr. Alan Watts, a member of the Buddhist Lodge, Lon- 
don, took part in this Conference, and whilst the discus- 
sion under heading No. 5 was in progress, he brought 
forward the subject of Buddhism. It had been suggested that 
the Church should follow the example of Christ in giving 
fresh impetus to mission work, and to this Mr. Watts 
objected, asserting that the Church had no business to try 
to do away with religions which were just as good as Chris- 
tianity, as for example, Buddhism. There followed a long 
argument as to the comparative merits of Christianity and 
Buddhism, in which varying opinions were expressed. 


When the report of this group was read before the 
whole Conference, an objection was raised to the statement 
of Mr. Watts, who then made the following reply: 

“‘T trust the Conference will not think that Iam wast- 
ing its time, but the subject of Buddhism is one that merits 


266 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


the attention of all Christians owing to the great revival of 
that religion now in progress. The Christian opposition to 
Buddhism has arisen from the misinterpretations of Buddhist 
scriptures made by scholars of the late XIX century; for 
instance, many westerners are under the delusion that Nir- 
vana, the Goal of Buddhist endeavour, means annihilation 
of the soul, and that the Buddha is a god and his images 
idols. All this is utterly untrue. The Buddha was an ordi- 
nary man whose teaching may be summed up in a line of 
Arnold's Light of Asia: ‘‘Foregoing self, the Universe grow 
‘I’”’ The story told by the Archbishop about Sir Walford 
Davies* and his class of working men is strictly Buddhis- 
tic; the tune is the Universe and we are the singers—if you 
want to sing well, forget yourselves and think only of the 
tune—if you want to live well, forget yourselves and think 
only of Life, the Ultimate Reality. Nirvana is the Christian 
‘‘Kingdom of Heaven’—not annihilation, but Understand- 
ing of Reality. 


‘‘In the personality of the Buddha we find stoic-calm 
combined with Christ-like compassion—here indeed is the 
highest form of man—and he reached this state without any- 
thing we should understand as prayer. It can be done—the 
Christian God is not necessary for the perfect life. Both Bud- 
dhism and Christianity are manifestations of the same spirit 
which strives for perfection through conquest of self, and 
though Buddhism is often criticized because of its corrup- 
tions, it must not be forgotten that Christianity also is 
corrupt.” 


* The story about Sir Walford Davies referred to above ts this: Str Walford was 
teaching a class of working-men bow to sing. Firstof all, be gare them a song 
which they allknew, and they sang tt so lustily that tt sounded abominable. Then 
be gare them a song which they did not know, and be bad to call in bis choir 
in order to shou them bow to sing tt. Then be said to them: "Now whatever you 
do you must not try to sing this song. Just let yourselves sing tt and listen to the 
tune: think only of the tune, cand don't ty.”’ And the result was that they sang 
it excellently, because they no longer “forced” tt. 


267 
Appendix 1 


This was replied to by Canon Grensted, Professor in 
the Philosophy of Religion at Oriel College, Oxford, who 
submitted that the personality of Christ was to be preferred 
to that of the Buddha because of what he suffered. He admit- 
ted that the story of the Buddha’s life was one of the most 
beautiful in the world, and that he had a great respect for 
his teachings, but at the same time he could not help feel- 
ing that his renunciation was not quite so great as that made 
by Jesus. Citing the story of the ‘‘Agony in the Garden,’ he 
said that there was something about the essential humanity 
of Christ’s prayer, ‘‘Let this cup pass from me,’ which the 
Buddhist would consider rather weak, though he himself 
thought it the sign of a Divine suffering which the Buddha 
had never had to undergo. 


Mr. Watts comments: Quite why the suffering of Christ 
should have been greater than that of any other person who 
was crucified he did not explain unless it were through his 
deep compassion for the sufferings of the world—but did 
not the Buddha also feel this? And which is worse, the mental 
agony of leaving one’s wife and child—more dear to one 
than anything else—or the physical agony of crucifixion? 
Who knows?—but Christ's claim to supremacy in this respect 
is not quite so obvious as it might seem. 


Mr. Watts’s address aroused a great deal of interest, and 
he was asked numerous questions as to the teaching of Bud- 
dhism on God, Fate and Free-will, Grace, etc., and also, what 
did he think was the essential difference between Buddhism 
and Christianity, and why did he prefer the one to the other. 


Mr. Watts tells us that one of the outstanding features 
of the Conference was the highly tolerant spirit displayed 
by the managers of the Conference, and he adds that it was 
gratifying to see that the ‘‘Christianity’’ advanced by the 
speakers, was an infinitely more enlightened type than the 
crude conceptions we are accustomed to hear taught as 
“orthodox.” 


268 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


SOME EXPLANATORY NOTES 


The origins of the above Conference date back to an address given by the Arch- 
bishop of York to the Head Masters’ Conference, in December, 1930, on the sub- 
Ject of Adult Religious Education. From this resulted a Conference of beadmasters, 
chaplains and parish priests in 1931, at which the suggestion was made thata 
conference of Public School Boys should be held, at which masters were to be 
excluded and only boys in their last term at school invited. The above Conference 
was the result. A report of the Conference bas been published, but it is much to 
be regretted that it consists only of ‘‘Impressions’’ made by one of six visitors who 
acted as Chainnen to the discussion groups. A detailed report, not necessarily 
a verbatim one, would have been a most interesting and valuable subject for study 


by all who are interested in the attitude of modern youth towards the subject of 
religion. 


269 
Appendix I 


APPENDIX II 


BOOKS REVIEWED BY ALAN WATTS 
IN BUDDHISM IN ENGLAND: 1934-1938 


Essays in Zen Buddhism (Second Series), by Prof. DT. 
Suzuki. (London: Luzac, 1933) 
Nov/Dec 1934 


Outlines of Buddhism. An Historical Sketch, by Mrs. 
Rhys Davids. (London: Methuen) 

and: 

The Book of Gradual Sayings, 111. Translated from the 
Anguttara-Nikaya, by E.M. Hare, with an introduction by 
Mrs. Rhys Davids. (Oxford U.P. for the Pali Text Society) 
May/June 1934 


Islamic Sufism, by Sirdar Ikbal Ali Shah. (London: Rider, 


1933) 
July/August 1934 


Essays in Zen Buddhism (Third Series), by Dr. DT. 
Suzuki. (London: Rider, 1933) 
Nov/Dec 1934 


An Introduction to Zen Buddhism, by Dr. DT. Suzuki. 
(Kyoto: Eastern Buddhist Society, 1934) 
Sept/Oct 1935 


270 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


Buddhist Meditation in the Southern School, by G. Con- 
stant Lounsbery. (London: Kegan Paul, 1935) 
Jan/Feb 1936 


Manual of Zen Buddhism, by Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki. 
(Kyoto: Eastern Buddhist Society) 
March/April 1936 


A Dictionary of Religion and Religions, by Richard Ince 
M.A. (London: Arthur Barker, 1935) 

and: 

A Survey of the Occult, ed. Julian Franklyn. (London: 
Arthur Barker, 1935) 

May/June 1936 

A Guide to Philosophy, by C.E.M. Joad. (London: 
Gollancz) 

and: 

Ancient Buddhism in Japan, by M.W. de Visser. (Leyden: 
Brill, 1935) 

July/August 1936 

Faiths and Fellowship. The Proceedings of the 2nd 
International Congress of the World Fellowship of 
Faiths. (London, 1936) 

Sept/Oct 1936 


Zen Buddhism and the Japanese Love of Nature, by 
Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki. (London: Luzac) 

Nov/Dec 1936 

The Web of the Universe, by E.L. Gardner. (London: T.P.H., 
1936) 

and: 

Self-Realization Through Yoga and Mysticism, by 
Josephine Ransom. (London: T.P.H., 1936) 

Jan/Feb 1937 

What is Your Will? by Mrs. Rhys Davids. (London: Rider, 


1937) 
March/April 1937 


271 
Appendix I] 


The Ten Principal Upanishads. Put into English by Shree 
Purohit Swami & W.B. Yeats. (London: Faber, 1937) 

and: 

The Venture of Faith, by Sir Francis Younghusband. (Lon- 
don: Michael Joseph, 1936) 

and: 

The Gnosis or Ancient Wisdom in the Christian Scrip- 
tures. No author given. (London: Allen & Unwin, 1937) 
and: 

War Dance. A Study of the Psychology of War, by Eric 
Graham Howe. (London: Faber, 1937) 

July/August 1937 

The World’s Need of Religion, Being the Proceedings of 
the World Congress of Faiths in Oxford, 1937. Preface by 
Sir Francis Younghusband. (London: Nicholson & Watson, 
1937) 

March/April 1938 

World Vision. by Leslie J. Belton. (Lindsey Press) 
March/April 1938 


Shinran & His Religion of Pure Faith, by Gendo Nakai. 
(Kyoto: Shinshu Research Institute, 1937) 
March/April 1938 


Sage Ninomiya’s Evening Talks, trans. Isoh Yamagata. 
(Tokyo: Kyo Bun Kwan, 1937) 

March/April 1938 

The Aryan Path. Sept. 1938. Special Hind Swaraj Number. 
(Theosophy Co. (India) Ltd.) 

Nov/Dec 1938 


272 
The Early Writings of Alan Watts 


