MYTH 


AND 
RELIGION 


THE EDITED TRANSCRIPTS 


AGy WAM 


= THE “LOVE OF WISDOM” LIBRARY @& 


MYTH 
AND 


RELIGION 


AQGywaMs 


ALAN WaTTs 
at a seminar aboard the SS Vallejo, 1966 


MYTH 
AND 


RELIGION 


THE EDITED TRANSCRIPTS 


Charles E. Tuttle Co., Inc. 
Boston + Rutland, Vermont + Tokyo 


Published in the United States in 1996 by 

Charles E. Tuttle Company, Inc. of Rutland, Vermont & Tokyo, Japan, 
with editorial offices at 153 Milk Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02109. 
Copyright © 1996 Mark Watts 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without prior permission from the publisher. 

Library of Congress Catalog Card number 96-60087 

ISBN 0-8048-3055-X 


Photo courtesy of Alan Watts Electronic Educational Programs 


First Edition 


00 99989796 13579108642 


Printed in the United States of America 


Western civilization is in a state of chaos. It bas lost effective 
knowledge of man’s true nature and destiny. Neither philosophy 
nor religion as they are known today do much to give man the 
consciousness that the deepest center or “ground” of bis being is to 


be found in that eternal reality which is in the West called God. 


—Alan Watts, 1951 


CONTENTS 


Introduction 
I. Ultimate Authority 
II. Not What Should Be, 


But What Is! 

III. Jesus—His Religion, or the 
Religion About Him? 

IV. Democracy in the Kingdom 
Of Heaven 


V. The Images of Man 
VI. Religion and Sexuality 


INTRODUCTION 


uring his last television appearance in 1973 

Alan Watts was asked what it was he found 

lacking in modern Christianity that led him 

toward Far Eastern philosophies, and he 

replied that it was an experiential basis. Simply put, the 

knowledge of transcendental or mystical experience has 

been lost in the mythology of modern Western religions, 

and with it has disappeared the original source of spiri- 
tual authority. 

In the West ultimate authority is based on “the 

word of God” as it has been handed down to us as part 

of a mythology in which humans are the creations of a 


i 


INTRODUCTION 


mighty father image symbolic of the powers of heaven. 
In contrast, most original tribal religions worship 
the Earth powers as the source of creation. Typically 
Western myths are intellectually abstract. However, in 
the Far East, doctrine is regarded as secondary to the 
student’s direct experience of enlightenment. Zen mas- 
ters are legendary in their insistence on the “original 
mind,” and the famous “koan method” of instruction is 
dedicated exclusively to achieving liberation. As Huston 
Smith wrote in his introduction to The Zen Eye, a col- 
lection of talks by Sokei-an Sasaki, 


It is the distinguishing genius of Zen Buddhism 
(and its Chinese antecedent, Ch’an) to refuse to 
dislodge earth from heaven. That emphasis is 
(in its degree) unique within the historical reli- 
gions, but it is the way tribal, pre-writing peo- 
ples see things regularly. Considered in this 
light, Ch’an and Zen are rivulets that perpetu- 
ate, in history, an early talent. 


In this volume of his edited transcripts, Alan Watts 
brings the question of spiritual authority sharply into 
focus. Continuing in the tradition of mystics and sages 
who point to a direct connection between man and God, 
he identifies the individual as the true source of religion. 

In this light he discusses the historical Jesus and 
examines the nature of the “religion about Jesus” as it 
has evolved since biblical times. Watts goes on to exam- 
ine the subtle meaning of the “God is dead” theology, 
which emerged out of a dissatisfaction with a religion 
“about Jesus” that failed to offer a mystical experience. 
Here he identifies a striking similarity between the most 
hopeful expressions of the “God is dead” concept and 
the essential teaching of Buddhism. Recalling the teacher 
who told his students, “If you meet Buddha on the road, 


Le] 


INTRODUCTION 


kill him,” he challenges Christian practitioners to aban- 
don intellectual idolatry—in which dogma is favored 
over a direct, personal experience of the transcenden- 
tal—and suggests, as one exercise for bringing about the 
abandonment of this idolatry, that Christians consider 
burning the Bible every Easter as an affirmation of true 
faith. 

In contrast to this suggested ritual, Watts describes 
the actual ritual of his initiation into the Church of 
England. As the reader will see, this ceremony lacked the 
qualities that distinguish the passage of a young man 
into adulthood that are common to cultures in which 
personal mystical experience is respected. Given this, one 
wonders whether the state of chaos in which modern 
civilization finds itself might not be the result of the fail- 
ure of our culture to encourage the transition through 
adolescence into adulthood, with the result that our cul- 
ture is now one in which personal development is rou- 
tinely arrested in early adolescence. We see this in our 
worship of youth, and as Alan Watts points out, attach- 
ment to the body formed in youth is a denial of the 
transformative power of life. 

This volume will guide the reader toward an 
encounter with the transcendental source of true religion 
and, through it, away from the chaos of our present 
predicament. 


—Mark Watts, 
San Anselmo, California 


MYTH 
AND 


RELIGION 


THE EDITED TRANSCRIPTS 


ULTIMATE AUTHORITY 


CHAPTER ONE 


take the liberty of beginning by saying something 
about myself and my role in talking about philo- 
sophical matters, because I want to make it per- 
fectly clear that J am not a guru. In other words, | 
talk about what we call “these things” that comprise a 
multitude of interests concerning Oriental philosophy, 
psychotherapy, religion, and mysticism because I am 
interested in them and because I enjoy talking about 
them, and that explains me. In saying that I am not a 
guru, that means I am not trying to help you or improve 
you. I accept you as you are. I am not out to save the 
world. Of course, when a stream, a bubbling spring, 
flows out from the mountains, it is doing its thing. And 


Ea 


CHAPTER ONE 


if a thirsty traveler helps himself, that is fine. When a 
bird sings, it does not sing for the advancement of music. 
But if somebody stops to listen, and is delighted, that is 
fine. And I talk in the same spirit. 

I am not trying to create disciples. I work on the 
principle of a physician rather than a clergyman. A 
physician is always trying to get rid of his patients and 
send them away healthy to stand on their own feet. A 
clergyman is trying to get them as members of a religious 
organization, so that they will continue to pay the clergy, 
pay off the mortgage on an expensive building, and gen- 
erally belong to the church, boost its membership, and 
thereby prove by sheer weight of numbers the veracity of 
its tenants. My objective is really to get rid of you so 
that you won’t need me or any other teacher. I am afraid 
some of my colleagues would not approve of that atti- 
tude because it is widely said that in order to advance in 
the spiritual life, whatever that is, it is essential that you 
have a guru, and that you accord to that guru perfect 
obedience. 

I am often asked the question, “Is it really neces- 
sary to have a guru?” I can answer that only by saying, 
“It is necessary, if you think so.” That is said in the same 
spirit as one might say that anybody who goes to a psy- 
chiatrist ought to have his head examined. There is more 
in that saying than meets the ear, because if you really 
are sincerely concerned with yourself, and are in such 
confusion that you feel you have to go to a psychiatrist 
to talk over your state, then of course you need to go. 
Likewise, if you are in need of someone to tell you how 
to practice meditation, or to attain a state of liberation, 
nirvana, moksha, or whatever it may be called, and if 
you feel that necessity very strongly, then you must do it 
because, as the poet William Blake said, “The fool who 
persists in his folly will become wise.” However, I do 


ULTIMATE AUTHORITY 


want to ask you, What is the source of a guru’s authority? 
He can tell you that he speaks from experience, that he 
has experienced states of consciousness that have made 
him profoundly blissful, understanding, compassionate, 
or whatever. You have his word for it and you may have 
the word of other people who likewise agree with him. 
But each one of them, and you in turn, agrees with him 
from out of your own opinion, and by your own judg- 
ment. So it is you who are the source of the teacher’s 
authority. That is true whether he speaks as an individ- 
ual or as the representative of a tradition or a church. 

You may say that you take the Bible as your 
authority, or the Roman Catholic Church, and the 
Roman Catholic follower very often says that the indi- 
vidual mystical experience is not to be trusted, because 
of its tendency to be interpreted in a purely personal 
way; it is the substantial and objective traditions of the 
church that will guard against these excesses. However, 
those traditions are held to be substantial and objective 
only because followers of those traditions believe them 
to be so. They say they are so, and if you follow them, 
you are also saying they are. The question comes back to 
you. Why do you believe; why do you form this opinion; 
upon what basis does all this rest? 

Almost everybody is looking for help, except, 
“When I was younger, so much younger than today, I 
never needed anybody’s help in any way.” But there is 
this feeling of a certain helplessness, of being alone and 
somewhat confused in an unpredictable, wayward, 
external world of happenings. This world of happenings 
includes an enormous amount of suffering and tragedy. 
We wonder why we are here, how we got here, and in 
short, what to do about the “problem of life,” to which 
should be added the problem of death, because it seems 
to be certain that we are all going to die, and those we 


CHAPTER ONE 


love are going to die, and that death and dying may be a 
painful process. Is there any way in which we can 
become masters of this situation? 

There are all sorts of ways of trying to escape 
from the human predicament, which is that of a lonely, 
isolated consciousness in the midst of an enormous non- 
self. We can try to beat the game on a material basis by 
becoming very wealthy or very powerful. We may resort 
to all kinds of technology to get rid of our sufferings: 
hunger, pain, sickness, and so forth. But it will be 
noticed that as we succeed in these enterprises, we are 
not satisfied. In other words, if you feel at this time that 
an increase in income would solve your problems, and 
you got that increase in income, this would give you a 
pleasant feeling for a few weeks. But then, as you well 
know if that has ever happened to you, the feeling wears 
off. You may stop worrying about paying your debts, 
and start worrying about whether you will get sick. 
There is always something to worry about. Even if you 
are very rich indeed, you will still have anxiety about 
sickness and death, and also anxieties about whether the 
Internal Revenue Service will take all your money away 
from you, or catch you for cheating on your taxes, or 
put you in prison for no good reason. There is always 
such worry. 

You realize that the problem of life does not really 
consist in your external circumstances. You will worry, 
whatever your external circumstances will be. Rather, 
the problem consists in what you call your mind. Could 
you, by some method, control your mind so that you 
won’t worry? How on earth would you do that? Some 
people tell you that the best answer is to think positive 
thoughts, to be peaceful, to breathe slowly and hum gen- 
tly, and to get yourself into a peaceful state of mind by 
repeating affirmations such as “All is light,” “All is 


ULTIMATE AUTHORITY 


God,” “All! is good,” or whatever. But unfortunately 
that doesn’t always work, because you may still have a 
nagging suspicion in the back of your mind that you are 
simply hypnotizing yourself and whistling in the dark. 
This is what in German is called a hintegedanka, which 
is the thought—concealed way back behind your intel- 
lect—that has a gnawing persistence. 

Perhaps you realize that this matter of controlling 
of the mind is no superficial undertaking, because 
although you may be able to smooth the ruffles of your 
consciousness, beneath that is a vast area of uncon- 
sciousness, which erupts as unpredictably as events in 
the external world. You may consider seriously the pos- 
sibilities of psychoanalysis, of going down into those 
depths to see if oil can be put on those troubled waters. 
Perhaps then you will look into going to some guru 
against whose mirror you can reflect those aspects of 
yourself of which you are not directly aware. 

As the process goes on, you may find there is 
something awkward about all this. This awkwardness 
can be expressed in many different ways. One is this: 
How on earth are you to get at yourself, to do some- 
thing about yourself? This is a project not unlike trying 
to pierce the point of the pin with the point of the 
same pin. 

In other words, if you feel that you need to make 
some sort of psychological or spiritual improvement, 
obviously you are the character who is going to have to 
bring this about. But if you are the one who needs to be 
improved, how are you going to accomplish the 
improvement? You are in the predicament of trying to 
lift yourself up off the floor by pulling at your own boot- 
straps, and you are likely to land with a bang on your 
fanny and end up lower down than you were in the first 
place. 


CHAPTER ONE 


This problem continually arises, and it has arisen 
historically in all the great religious traditions. We find it 
in Christianity, in Saint Augustine, who replied to the 
argument “God would not have given us a command- 
ment to love him, and to love our neighbors, if we could 
obey it,” by answering, “Yes, but the commandment 
was not given in order for it to be obeyed. God never 
expected that it would be obeyed, because we were inca- 
pable of loving anyone but ourselves.” The command- 
ment was therefore given to convince us of our 
sinfulness from which we could be rescued only by 
divine grace, by the infusion of our souls with a power 
beyond them. That was more or less the doctrine on 
which the church settled. Therefore the puzzle has 
always been how to get grace. Grace is apparently freely 
offered to all, but some people get it, and some don’t. 
With some, the medicine takes, and with others it doesn’t. 
Apparently you have the power to resist grace, but if you 
do, you also have the power to accept it. We would like 
therefore to know how to accept it, to be open. 

This brings us back to exactly the same place we 
began. It is like saying “You must relax, damn you. Let 
go! Give in!” Of course I know I ought to give in; I 
know I ought to let go, abandon my will to the divine 
will. But as Saint Paul puts it so well, “The will is pre- 
sent with me, but how to do that which is good, I find 
not. For the good that I would do, I do not, and the evil 
that I would not do, that I do.” In other words, we all 
come down to something in ourselves that is called the 
yetzer ha-ra, the wayward spirit that God is supposed to 
have put into the soul of Adam. In my translation, it is 
our element of “irreducible rascality.” We are all basi- 
cally scamps in one way or another. I know all sorts of 
people who are full of outward virtue, but it always 
turns out that they need money. Of course, when it 


Es 


ULTIMATE AUTHORITY 


comes to money, virtue flies out the window. We do 
have an element of rascality in ourselves; we know it 
very well. The question again is How can it be trans- 
formed? If the transformer is also the one who is afflicted, 
how can the afflicted be transformed? It is the old prob- 
lem of who guards the guards, who polices the police, 
who governs the government? It is a vicious circle. There 
is a great deal of talk about our having two selves, a 
lower self or ego, and a higher self called the spirit or the 
atman. The duty of the atman seems to be to transform 
the wretched little ego. Sometimes it does, but many 
times it doesn’t. So we might ask, “Why doesn’t So-and- 
so’s atman succeed in getting through? Is his ego too 
strong? If so, who will weaken it? Is his atman too weak, 
and if so, how can that be, for surely aren’t all atmans 
the same?” Still, the puzzle remains. 

Let us take a look at what we are trying to accom- 
plish by this. We are trying to get better. We seek out 
those types of experiences that we call the positive, the 
good, the light, the living, and we wish to avoid the neg- 
ative, the evil, the dark, and the dead. Unfortunately, we 
are equipped with a nervous system in which the neu- 
rons either fire or don’t fire. Everything we are aware of 
is created out of an extremely complicated arrangement 
of yes and no. We can put colored television on tape so 
that it is all reduced to a matter of yes and no. And that, 
you will understand, is the philosophy of the Chinese 
Book of Changes, the I Ching, which represents all the 
situations of life in terms of combinations of yang, or the 
positive principle, and yin, the negative. Interestingly 
enough, the Latin translation of the I Ching was read by 
the philosopher Leibniz, and from this he invented binary 
arithmetic, in which all numbers can be represented by 
zero and one, which is the number system used by the dig- 
ital computer that lies behind all our electronic ingenuity. 


CHAPTER ONE 


Our great extension of the nervous system is based on 
the same principle. 

Can you see, then, what we are trying to do when 
we seek the positive and avoid the negative? We are try- 
ing to have yang without yin. We are trying to arrange a 
life game in which there is winning without losing. How 
can you arrange such a state of affairs? If we are all 
equally happy, it is impossible to know that we are 
happy, because a certain flatness will come over every- 
thing. If we lifted up all valleys, and lowered all moun- 
tains, we should have the sort of destruction of the 
ecology that they are achieving with bulldozers in the 
Hollywood Hills, in ghastly fulfillment of the biblical 
prophecy that every valley should be exalted and every 
mountain laid low, and the rough places made even. But 
Isaiah also said something that Christians, at least, do 
not often quote, which is, “I am the Lord, and there is 
none else. I form the light and create the darkness. I 
make peace and I create evil. I, the Lord, do all these 
things.” In spite of this, everybody is busy trying to be 
good, not realizing that we would not recognize saints 
unless there were sinners, or sages unless there were 
fools. There is no way out of that dilemma. 

Buddhism represents existence in terms of a wheel, 
called the pavarachakra, the wheel of becoming, of birth 
and death. On the top of that wheel are devas who we 
could call angels. At the bottom of the wheel there are 
naraka, or tormented people in purgatory. You go round 
and round, now this way, now that. It is really like a 
squirrel cage, where you are running and running to get 
to the top, and you have to run faster and faster just to 
stay where you are. That is why there is always the sense 
that the more you succeed in any scale of either worldly 
or spiritual progress, the more you are still in the same 
place. Perhaps there is something ambitious, proud, and 


ULTMATE AUTHORITY 


wrong in aspiring to be enlightened or compassionate. 
Perhaps there is a great dose of spiritual pride in think- 
ing that I, by my efforts, could make myself into a bud- 
dha or a saint. Therefore, perhaps the thing to do is to 
try to eliminate all desire, not only thé desire for worldly 
success, but also for spiritual success. The Buddha pro- 
posed that desire was the root of suffering, and therefore 
suggested to his disciples that if they eliminated desire or 
clinging, they might cease from suffering. But you must 
realize that the teachings of the Buddha are not doctrines 
in the sense that the Jews and the Christians and the 
Moslems have doctrines. They are proposals. They are 
the opening steps in a dialogue. If you go away and try 
to cease desiring, you will very quickly discover that you 
are desiring not to desire. So you very rapidly come to a 
situation where you discover that with regard to your 
own transformation, everything you try fails to work. 
Some sort of temporary success may make you feel bet- 
ter, but again and again you will still come back to the 
same old gnawing problem. That is why people inter- 
ested in spiritual things tend to move from one sect to 
another, from one teacher to another, always hoping 
that they will meet the one who has the answer for them. 

Indeed, many teachers say, “There is nothing you 
can do.” Then you have to practice nondoing, what the 
Taoists call wu wei, nonstriving. Of course, you will find 
that it is extraordinarily difficult not to strive. It is like 
trying not to think of a green elephant; immediately you 
think of one. You come to the dismal conclusion that 
you can neither achieve liberation from the alternation 
of opposites by striving, nor can you achieve it by not 
striving. It is like trying to be unselfconscious through an 
act of will, or to be genuine, or to love. It puts you in a 
double bind. When we say of a person that he has 
trained himself to be deliberately unselfconscious and 


[| 


CHAPTER ONE 


that he has very disciplined spontaneity, we are looking 
for somebody whose spontaneity is genuine, so that the 
scaffolding does not show. We believe that there are such 
people. Like children, they do not know how interesting 
they are, but when they find out, they become brats. 

Imagine for a moment that it is your privilege to 
have a brief interview with God, in the course of which 
you are allowed to ask one question. What would you 
ask? You would have to think this over very carefully, 
because this golden opportunity would come to you only 
once, and you would have to be most careful not to ask 
a silly question. You might try God out with a Zen 
Buddhist koan such as “Beyond the positive and the neg- 
ative, what is reality?” The Lord would turn to you and 
say, “My dear child, your question has no meaning.” 
And you would not have the opportunity to think up a 
meaningful response. 

Perhaps you should have asked, “What question 
should I ask?” And the Lord would say to you, “Why do 
you want to have a question?” You want one because 
you would feel that something was wrong if you didn’t 
have one. But you have got a question: the insoluble 
problem of trying to win without losing, and as long as 
you have that problem you will be kept busy, until you 
see that it is meaningless because it cannot be solved. 
However, there are all sorts of ways of thinking about 
that problem in ways so as to prevent yourself from see- 
ing that it is meaningless. 

The better gurus are very clever at bringing these 
ways out. If you are invited to practice intense concen- 
tration, after a while you may find yourself thinking 
about concentrating, and therefore see that your concen- 
tration is somewhat divided. The guru may ask, “Why 
are you concentrating? What is your motivation for this 
activity?” And you may find out that the answer is your 


ULTIMATE AUTHORITY 


irreducible rascality. However, the teacher, once he has 
seen that you have mastered that lesson, has something 
still more ingenuous to teach. He says, “You have made 
progress. Finding out that you cannot concentrate has 
begun to prick the illusion of your ego, but you have 
only got your foot in the door. Beyond this are many 
higher learnings, and you must redouble your efforts.” 
And so you apply yourself all the more, again and again, 
to all sorts of tricks that these old gentlemen can come 
up with. You keep at it as long as he can make you fall 
for it, but in the end, you see that it was all tricks. 

The great Zen master Rinzai said, “After all, there 
was nothing much in Obaku’s Buddhism.” He went on 
to explain to his students that the art of Zen, or teaching 
Zen, is like deceiving a child with an empty fist. You 
know how you intrigue a child by pretending you have 
something very precious in your fist. You can play this 
game for an hour, provoking the child to ever greater 
enthusiasm to find out what you have. At the end, the 
revelation is that nothing was there. Many people say in 
the course of their Zen training, “I realize there was 
nothing to realize. It was all there from the beginning.” 
Standing opposite this realization—that you cannot do 
anything about your desires, and equally that you can- 
not do nothing about them—is the awakening that this 
realization is true because there is no you separate from 
you. In other words, when you try to control your 
thoughts, or feelings, there is no difference between the 
thoughts and the controller. What you call the thinker is 
simply your thought of yourself. The thinker is a 
thought among thoughts, and the feeler is a feeling 
among feelings, but trying to control thoughts with 
thoughts is like trying to bite your own teeth. 

The other side of the picture is that when you do 
discover that the project of controlling yourself was 


[ ] 


CHAPTER ONE 


unnecessary, it will be because you were yourself a 
Buddha from the very beginning. That is what the 
Upanishads mean when they say quite simply Tat tuam 
asi—“You are it”—you, as you are. How can you con- 
ceive that? Suppose you let your imagination go, and 
really think through what you would like to have hap- 
pen. Imagine the most gorgeous state of bliss that you 
can conceive, where there are no worries, no anxieties, 
and no haunting future with unpleasant consequences. 
You are in control of the whole works, and you are sit- 
ting on your lotus, perfectly content. I ask you seriously, 
are you quite sure that is really what you want? Imagine 
the situation. You have everything you want. You are in 
the highest possible spiritual state that you can conceive, 
and yet you have not really surrendered yourself, 
because you know everything. 

The feeling of self depends on there being, at the 
same time, a contrasting feeling of other. The self has a 
sensation of being in control of life to some extent 
through voluntary action. The will seems to have a cer- 
tain freedom, and yet on the other hand, there are lim- 
its. It seems that in the end, life sweeps us away. We are 
overwhelmed by the involuntary, yet the voluntary 
keeps popping up. New voluntaries come into the world 
with every baby. So you could not have the experience 
you call “being a voluntarily acting self” without the 
contrast of the involuntary happening. Would you want 
to be without the involuntary happening? If you could 
get rid of that, you wouldn’t have the experience of the 
voluntary self. To turn it the other way around, would 
you like to have the experience of no voluntary self, 
where everything just happens? You may say, “I’m not 
sure about that, because then I would feel that I was 
just walking on air, floating along, with no further 
responsibilities.” 


ULTIMATE AUTHORITY 


Of course, we do get that feeling sometimes. If you 
take the ideas of determinism and fatalism to their final 
conclusion, you do have that sense of freedom from all 
responsibilities, from worry and care. However, it wears 
off, and it seems to be impossible to fellow out that phi- 
losophy consistently, especially if you have children. 
Somehow society begins to push you to be responsible, 
just as it pushes children to be responsible, and this nag- 
ging duality keeps returning. I cannot realize the irrespon- 
sible condition of involuntary life unless I have the 
contrast of the possibility of the voluntary, and vice versa. 

These two aspects of our experience—which we 
can call the voluntary and the involuntary, the knower 
and the known, the subject and the object, the self and 
the other—although appearing to be two, are indeed 
one. You cannot have one without the other. Whenever 
it seers that you do, you should know at once that there 
is a conspiracy, that when two things seem as different as 
different can be, they are actually, for that very reason, 
the same. You can detect this even within those actions 
that you call voluntary. In the voluntary movement of 
the muscles or of the mind there are processes that are 
not voluntary. You do not will your blood to circulate, 
you do not control by intention the synapses in your ner- 
vous system, and yet you would be incapable of any vol- 
untary action unless those involuntary processes were 
going on. So, therefore, these differences go together. 

You begin to realize something that is rather diffi- 
cult to describe: that what you call your experience is a 
do-happening. We do not have good words for this. We 
have some words that convey this sense, like the word 
cleave, which means “to stick together” or “to hold 
together” and also “to split.” So I would like to propose 
we find some word for a do-happening, because every- 
thing is a do-happening. 


CHAPTER ONE 


When Buddhists talk about karma, they mean 
action, and when something happens to you, be it good 
or bad, they say it is your karma. That means quite sim- 
ply, “It is your doing.” Now, you may say, “I did not 
mean to do that.” One school of thought will explain 
events by saying, “You did something in a former life, or 
at a former time, that is now having this consequence.” 
However, that is a very superficial understanding of 
karma. You do not need to believe in reincarnation to 
understand karma. Karma is simply not letting your left 
hand know what your right hand is doing. With one 
aspect you are doing what you call the environment, and 
with the other aspect you are doing what you call the 
organism, this living body. Since you cannot possibly 
conceive of the existence of a living body with no envi- 
ronment, there is the clue that the two are basically one. 
As with the two poles of a magnet, north is quite differ- 
ent from south, and yet they are both part of one magnet. 

In precisely the same way, you are both what you 
do and what happens to you. You have a little game in 
which you play that you are not responsible for what 
happens to you, you are only responsible for what you 
do. This illusion allows you to compete with the two 
sides of yourself. It is like getting two knitting pins, one 
in each hand, and having a fencing match with yourself. 
If you sincerely try to stick one hand with the other, the 
first hand must really try to stick the other, just to 
defend itself. You will come to a sort of standstill, unless 
you decide that your right hand is the one that is going 
to win, and then you have broken the rules of the game, 
which is what we do all the time. 

Both the Hindus and the Buddhists call this 


rule-breaking avidya, “ignorance,” which really means 
ignorance. Basically it comes down to the fact that you 


are responsible for everything. The guru’s authority 


ULTIMATE AUTHORITY 


comes from you. The place in life where you are is where 
you have put yourself. Just as on the surface of the 
sphere every point may be regarded as the center of the 
surface, so every place may be regarded as the true place. 
Everyone is in their true place. In whatever language you 
say it, everybody is a manifestation of the divine, playing 
this game and that game. Your not knowing it, if you do 
not know it, is part of the game. It makes it all the more 
fun. “Get lost,” you say to yourself, and lost you get. 

We all like to go to a horror movie and have the 
cold shivers because we think something awful is going 
to happen, something is going to be seen on the screen 
that we cannot stand to see. We all expose ourselves to 
thrills like that. Children and young people expose them- 
selves to dreadful things. Their parents get the heebie- 
jeebies. If it isn’t getting drunk or driving hot rods, they 
take drugs that may ruin their sanity for life. If they do 
not take drugs, they do something else to see how close 
to the point of danger they can get. Most people who go 
in for racing cars usually end up crashing. Life is geared 
to being played dangerously. I would say to those among 
you who are the most ignorant, unspiritual, and stuffy, 
Congratulations! You are so lost in the game you do not 
even know where you stand, and are taking a gorgeous 
risk. Because of you we might even blow up the planet, 
and how close are we going to get with that one? In 
the same way as that car racer watches the speedometer 
needle going up, up, and up, there are people feeling 
more and more self-righteously determined that good 
shall prevail in the world, all the while watching the needle 
of world tension go up. It is getting hotter and hotter 
and hotter, and finally we may all go out in a blaze of 
glory. When the dust settles they will say, “That was 
quite a dream we have just woken up from. What shall 
we do next?” 


CHAPTER ONE 


That is why I say that my function is that of a lib- 
erator. I want you to see that it is you, not me, not 
Swami So-and-so, not Buddha So-and-so, not Saint So- 
and-so who is responsible, it is you. Sir Edwin Arnold 
put these words into the mouth of the Buddha: “You suf- 
fer from yourselves. No one else compels you to live and 
die and whirl upon the wheel and hug and kiss its spokes 
of agony, its tire of tears, its nave of nothingness.” 

One of the old Zen masters went to his teacher 
and said, “What is the way to liberation?” 

The teacher said, “Who is restraining you?” 

He answered, “No one.” 

“If so,” his teacher asked, “why need you ask for 
liberation?” 

It all bounces back to you. What do you want? Do 
you know what you want? Think it through and say 
exactly what you want. Invariably you will get back to 
where you are. It is all happening because you are doing 
it. Why meditate, then? Why do anything of a so-called 
spiritual nature? 

People do not really understand what meditation 
is. Meditation is the one human activity that has no pur- 
pose. Buddhists who are supposed to have attained 
everything are invariably shown in some sort of medita- 
tion posture. Why should they meditate anymore? 
Because that just happens to be the way a Buddhist sits. 
When he sits, he sits. When he walks, he walks. He is 
not going anywhere. He is just going for a walk because 
he digs it. The very word dig means not merely to appre- 
ciate, but to penetrate, to go to the heart of the matter, 
to penetrate the moment. To get to the root of the 
moment is to get to the center of you. Where you are is 
where you start, where you begin all this questioning. 
Where does the question and the desire spring from? 
That is you, and that you is the point from which the 


ULTIMATE AUTHORITY 


whole universe is created, flowing back into the past like 
the wake of a ship. The wake does not drive the ship, it 
is the ship that makes the. wake. Meditation is just sitting 
and watching it happen. It is not done because it is good 
for you. It is done for fun. Meditation is an enjoyable 
thing. If it is not, you are not really meditating. 

There is an awful game that meditators play, 
which is competitive suffering. They go to some place 
where they sit for hours on end, until their legs ache and 
practically fall off. Then they come back and brag about 
sitting through all those hours of leg ache. It is very diffi- 
cult to put down people who are suffering. One has a 
natural sympathy for pain, but I sometimes want to say, 
“For goodness sake, do not throw your suffering at me 
in that way and in that spirit. Do not brag about it. Do 
not one-up me by saying you have suffered more than I 
have.” People say many things like, “I am more aware of 
my shortcomings than you are.” “I am more tolerant 
than you are.” “I recognize more than you what a rascal 
I am.” There are many kinds of ways of one-upping 
somebody else in order to play the game in which you 
always win. Once we get into that kind of thing with 
meditation, we get into hierarchies, ranks, and degrees, 
and end up by asking, “Who has attained level seven, 
who has attained level nine?” 

The expert guru will always set you a stage higher 
than you have ever thought of, in order to see how far 
your ambition will run. This goes on endlessly, endlessly, 
endlessly, until you suddenly wake up and begin real 
meditation, by realizing that you are there, that you 
really do meditate all the time just by virtue of existing 
all the time. 


NotT WHAT SHOULD BE, 
BuT WHAT Is! 


CHAPTER Iwo 


wonder what is meant when we use the word I. I 
have been very interested in this problem, and have 
come to the conclusion that what most civilized 
people mean by that word is a hallucination, a false 
sense of personal identity that is at complete variance 
with the facts of nature. As a result of having a false 
sense of identity, we act in a way that is inappropriate to 
our natural environment, and when that inappropriate 
way of action is magnified by a very powerful technolo- 
gy, we see a profound discord begin to separate man and 
nature. As is well known, we are now in the process of 
destroying our environment as a result of an attempt to 


CHAPTER Two 


conquer it and master it. We believe that our environ- 
ment is something other than ourselves, and in assuming 
that, we make a great mistake and are now paying the 
price. 

Most people would agree with the lines of the poet 
who said, “I, a stranger and afraid in a world I never 
made.” We have the strong sensation that the being 
inside our skin is extremely different from the world out- 
side our skin. We believe that while there may be intelli- 
gence and values and loving feelings inside human skins, 
outside them is a world of mechanical process that does 
not give a damn about any individual. We believe the 
physical world is a result of unintelligent gyrations of 
blind forces, while the biological world consists merely 
of gyrations of libido, Freud’s word for blind lust. There 
are many people who say they do not believe that the 
world is like that, but is under the control of a wise, just, 
and beneficent God. Although many people say they 
believe that to be the case, very few in fact, actually do. 
A great many think that they ought to believe in God, 
but they actually do not, because the idea of God, as 
handed down in popular Christianity, Judaism, and 
Islam, has become implausible to most educated people. 
They would love to believe it, but they cannot. What 
was avant-garde thinking in the eighteenth and nine- 
teenth centuries in the West—that the universe is a 
machine—has become the common sense of the average 
person of today. Most people have not caught up in 
their common sense with the universe of modern 
physics. We still think about the world in Newtonian 
categories, not in the categories of quantum theory. 

Psychoanalysis, for example, is a Newtonian con- 
ception of our psychological mechanisms—and notice 
that we speak of unconscious mental mechanisms. We 
think of the libido in the same way as Ernst Hekel 


Not WHAT SHOULD BE, BUT WHAT Is! 


thought of the energy of the universe as blind or uncon- 
scious. Psychoanalysis is in a sense psychohydraulics, 
because of its analogy between psychic energy and 
the flow of water. In all this, the view of the nineteenth 
century is that the human psyche—tht mind, the ego, 
the superego, the id—is all basically a mechanical func- 
tioning. 

The nineteenth century strove to take an objective 
attitude to nature and to be the very opposite of what 
we presume to call “primitive” animism, the point of 
view that sees everything as alive, held by people who 
converse with animals, plants, rivers, mountains, and 
stars. Thinkers of the nineteenth century said that this is 
the pathetic fallacy, a projection of intelligent human 
characteristics on unintelligent entities in nature. We 
withdrew that projection in the nineteenth century and 
said, “Let us look at everything objectively, as it is.” 
Then we turned that attitude on ourselves, and studied 
human physiology and human psychology as objects. 
However, when we discovered ourselves to be objects, 
we decided that the time had come for suicide, because 
all objects, as the name implies, are of course objection- 
able. I found that phrase, which I thought I had invented 
myself, in the writings of Weston La Barre, who is a 
great anthropologist, but definitely of the psychoanalytic 
school that shares this nineteenth-century philosophy of 
so-called scientific naturalism. He uses the phrase, “the 
objectionable, objective world.” So when everything is 
deprived of subjectivity and is regarded as simply a 
mechanism, with nobody home as it were, then the 
world is seen as futile. And indeed we are preparing to 
destroy the planet with nuclear energy, and other 
processes. 

I submit that this nineteenth-century view of the 
world is pure mythology, and not very good mythology 


CHAPTER TWO 


at that. It is fundamentally based on the hallucination 
that we have about our own existence. It should be obvi- 
ous that the human being goes with the rest of the uni- 
verse, even though we say in popular speech, “I came 
into this world.” It is not true that you came into this 
world. You came out of it, in the same way as a flower 
comes out of a plant, or a fruit comes out of a tree. An 
apple tree apples, the solar system—and therefore the 
galaxy, and therefore the whole system of galaxies in 
which we live—that system peoples. People, therefore, 
are an expression of its energy and of its nature. 

If people are intelligent, and I suppose we have to 
grant that, then the energy that people express must also 
be intelligent, because one does not gather figs from this- 
tles, or grapes from thorns. But it does not occur to ordi- 
nary, civilized people to regard themselves as expressions 
of the whole universe. It should be obvious that we can- 
not exist except in an environment of earth, air, water, 
and mild temperature, and that all these things go with 
us and are as important to us—albeit outside our skins— 
as our internal organs, our stomachs, and our brains. 

If we cannot describe the behavior of organisms 
without at the same time describing the behavior of their 
environments, we should realize that we have a new 
entity of description. It is not the individual organism 
alone but a “field of behavior,” which we must call, 
rather clumsily, the organism/environment. You go with 
your environment in the same way as your head goes 
with the rest of your body. However, it is not this way 
when we think of a person. If you suddenly think of 
your mother, what you think of is her face. We are used 
to representing people in the newspapers, magazines, 
books, and in art galleries with a head-and-shoulders 
portrait. We think of the feet, the legs, the back of the 
torso, as all somehow irrelevant. Here is a truncated 


Not WHAT SHOULD BE, BUT WHAT Is! 


face, and that is the person. So we say, “Put a good face 
on it,” and endeavor to save face, to preserve the front. 

Oddly enough, the very word person is in Latin 
persona, that through which sound passes. It refers to 
the megaphone mask worn by actor$ in Greco-Roman 
drama. The dramatis personae, the list of the characters 
to appear in the play, was originally the list of masks 
that were to be worn. Therefore your person, your per- 
sonality, is your mask. So the question is, What is 
behind the mask? Notice that the whole body goes with 
this face. You do not find in nature faces arriving in the 
world sui generis; they go with a body. Also, bodies do 
not arrive on a plain ball of scrubbed rock floating with- 
out an atmosphere far away from a star. That world 
would not grow bodies. There would be no soil for bod- 
ies. There would be no body-producing complexity of 
environment. Bodies go with a very complicated natural 
environment. And if the head goes with the body, and 
the body goes with the environment, then the body is as 
much an integral part of the environment as the head is 
part of the body. It is deceptive, of course, because the 
human being is not rooted to the ground like a tree. A 
human being moves about, and can therefore shift from 
one environment to another. However, these shifts are 
superficial. The basic environment of the planet remains 
a constant, and if the human being leaves the planet, 
they have to take with them a canned version of the 
planetary environment. 

We are not really aware of this relationship. On 
taking thought and due consideration it does occur to us 
that, yes, indeed, we do need that environment, but ordi- 
narily we do not feel it. That is to say, we do not have a 
vivid sensation of belonging to our environment in the 
same way that we have a vivid sensation of being an ego 
inside a bag of skin, located about halfway between the 


CHAPTER TWO 


ears and a little way behind the eyes. Since we feel the 
ego that way, and that is not the way we really exist, I 
call the “I” 
disastrous results of the ego, which, according to nine- 


a hallucination. So, today we live with the 


teenth-century common sense, feels that it is a fluke in 
nature and that if it does not fight nature it will not be 
able to maintain its status as an intelligent fluke. 
Therefore the geneticists and many others are now say- 
ing that man must take the course of his evolution into 
his own hands. He can no longer trust the wiggly, ran- 
dom, unintelligible processes of nature to develop him 
any further; he must intercede with his own intelligence 
and through genetic alterations breed the kind of people 
who will be viable for future human societies. This, I 
submit, is a ghastly error, because human intelligence 
has a very serious limitation. It is a scanning system of 
conscious attention that is linear, and it examines the 
world in lines, rather as you would pass the beam of a 
flashlight or a spotlight across a room. The reason our 
education takes so long is that we have to scan miles of 
lines of print, and we regard that as essential informa- 
tion. However, the universe does not come at us in lines. 
Instead, it comes at us in a multidimensional continuum 
in which everything is happening altogether everywhere 
at once, and it comes at us much too quickly to be trans- 
lated into lines of print or other information, however 
fast it may be scanned. That is our limitation, so far as 
the intellectual and scientific life is concerned. The com- 
puter may greatly speed up linear scanning, but it is still 
linear scanning. 

So long as we are stuck with that linear form of 
wisdom, we cannot deal with more than a few variables 
at once. Now, what do I mean by that? A variable is any 
one linear process. Let us take music. When you play a 
Bach fugue, and there are four parts to it, you have four 


Not WHAT SHOULD BE, BUT WHAT Is! 


variables. You have four moving lines, and you can take 
care of that with two hands. An organist using two feet 
can put in two more variables and have six going. You 
may realize, if you have ever tried to play the organ, that 
it is quite difficult to make six independent motions go 
at once. The average person cannot do that without 
training. In fact, the average person cannot deal with 
more than three variables at once without using a pencil. 

When we study physics, we are dealing with 
processes in which there are millions of variables. 
However, we handle this problem with statistics, in the 
same way as insurance companies use actuarial tables to 
predict when most people will die. However, if the aver- 
age age of death is sixty-five, this average does not apply 
to any given individual. Any given individual will live to 
an individual age, and the range of individual ages at 
death may be very wide indeed. But that is all right, 
because the sixty-five guess works when you are doing 
large-scale gambling. In a similar way, the physicist is 
able to predict the behavior of nuclear wavicles. But the 
practical problems of human life deal with variables in 
the hundreds of thousands. Here statistical methods are 
very poor, and reaching accurate conclusions by linear 
means is impossible. 

Now then, with such limited equipment we are 
proposing to interfere with our genes, and with that 
equipment we are trying to solve our political, economic, 
and social problems. Naturally, everybody has a sense of 
total frustration and asks, “What on earth can I do?” 
We do not seem to know a way of calling on our brains. 
This is unfortunate because our brains can handle an 
enormous number of variables that are not accessible to 
conscious attention. Your brain and your total nervous 
system are now handling your blood chemistry, the 
secretions from your glands, the behavior of millions of 


CHAPTER Two 


cells. It is doing all that without thinking about it, with- 
out translating the processes it is handling into con- 
sciously reviewed words, symbols, or numbers. When I 
use the word thinking, I mean precisely that process of 
translating what is going on in nature into words, sym- 
bols, or numbers. Of course, both words and numbers 
are kinds of symbols. Symbols bear the same relation to 
the real world that money bears to wealth. You cannot 
quench anybody’s thirst with the word water, just as you 
cannot eat a dollar bill and derive nutrition from it. But 
scanning, using symbols and using conscious intelli- 
gence, has proved very useful to us. It has given us such 
technology as we have; but at the same time, it has 
proved too much of a good thing. We have become so 
fascinated with it that we confuse the world as it is with 
the world as it is thought about, talked about, and fig- 
ured about—the world as it is described. The difference 
between these two is vast, and when we are not aware of 
ourselves except in a symbolic way, we are not related to 
ourselves at all, and that is why we all feel psychologi- 
cally frustrated. 

Thus we come back to the question of what we 
mean by “I.” First of all, obviously we mean our symbol 
of ourselves. Ourselves, in this case, is the whole psycho- 
physical organism, conscious and unconscious, plus its 
environment. That is your real self. In other words, your 
real self is the universe as centered on your organism— 
that is you! Now, allow me to clarify that just a little. 
What you do is also a doing of your environment. Your 
behavior is its behavior, as much as its behavior is your 
behavior. It is mutual. We could say it is transactional. 
You are not a puppet that your environment pushes 
around, nor is the environment a puppet that you push 
around. They go together, and they act together—in the 
same way, for example, one side of a wheel is going 


NoT WHAT SHOULD BE, BUT WHAT Is! 


down as the other side of it is going up. When you turn 
the steering wheel of a car, are you pulling it or are you 
pushing it? You are doing both, aren’t you? When you 
pull it down one side, you are pushing it up on the other. 
It is all one, and in the same way tHere is a push-pull 
between organism and environment. 

We are only rarely aware of this in curious alter- 
ations of consciousness that we call mystical experiences 
or cosmic consciousness, when an individual gets the 
feeling that everything that is happening is of his own 
doing. Or it could be the opposite of that feeling, that 
they are not doing anything, but that all their doings, 
their decisions and so forth, are happenings of nature. 
You can feel it either way, and you can describe it in 
these two completely opposite ways, but you are talking 
about the same experience. You are talking about expe- 
riencing your own activity and the activity of nature as 
one single process. You can describe it as if you were 
omnipotent, like God, or as if it were completely deter- 
ministic and you hardly existed at all. But remember, 
both points of view are right, and we will see where that 
gets us. 

We do not feel that ordinarily, do we? What we 
feel, instead, is an identification of ourselves with our 
idea of ourselves—I would rather say, with our image of 
ourselves. That is the person, or the ego. You play a 
role; you identify with that role. I play a role called Alan 
Watts. And I know very well that it is a big act. I can 
play some other roles besides Alan Watts if necessary, 
but I find this one is best for making a living. But I 
assure you that is a mask and I do not take it seriously. 
The idea of my being a kind of guru, or savior of the 
world just breaks me up, because I know me. Besides, it 
is very difficult to be holy, in the ordinary sense. 

So, I know I am not that, but most of us are taught 


CHAPTER Two 


to think that we are whom we are called. When you are 
a little child and you begin to learn a role, your parents 
and your peers approve of your being that. In that way 
they know who you are. You are predictable, so you can 
be controlled. However, when you act out of role and 
you imitate some other child’s behavior, everybody 
points the finger and says, “You are not being true to 
yourself. Johnny, that’s not you, that’s Peter.” So you 
learn to stay Johnny, not Peter. But, of course, you are 
not either, because these are just images of you. They are 
as much of you as you can get into your conscious atten- 
tion, which is precious little. 

Your image of yourself contains no information 
about how you structure your nervous system. It con- 
tains no information about your blood chemistry. It con- 
tains almost no information about the subtle influences 
of society on your behavior. It also does not include the 
basic assumptions of your culture, which are all taken 
for granted and unconscious. You cannot make them 
conscious unless you study other cultures to see how 
their basic assumptions differ. Your self-image includes 
all kinds of illusions of which you are completely 
unaware, for example, that time is real and that there is 
such a thing as a past, which is pure conjecture. 
Nevertheless, all these things are unconscious in us, and 
they are not included in our image of ourselves, nor is 
there any information included in our image of ourselves 
about our inseparable relationships with the whole nat- 
ural universe. In all this is a very impoverished image. 

When you ask a person, “What did you do yester- 
day?” they will give you a historical account of a certain 
number of events in which they participated, and a certain 
number of things that they saw, used, or were clobbered 
by. You will realize at once that this history leaves out 
most of what happens. If I try to describe what happens 
to me this evening, I will never be able to describe it, 


Not WHAT SHOULD BE, BUT WHAT Is! 


because there are so many people here that if I were to 
talk about everyone whom J have seen, what they were 
wearing, what color their hair was, and what sort of 
expressions they had on their faces, I would have to talk 
until doomsday. So instead of this rlch physical experi- 
ence, which is very rich indeed, I have to attenuate it in 
memory and description and say, “I met a lot of people 
in Philadelphia. There were men and there were women; 
lots of them were young and some of them were old.” 
Now this is an utterly impoverished account of what 
went on. Therefore, in thinking of ourselves in this 
way—in terms of this stringy, mangy account, of what I 
did yesterday, and the day before—all I have is a carica- 
ture of myself. Of course a caricature does not really 
draw us in, but just puts on certain salient features 
whereby people can recognize you. It’s a sort of skele- 
ton, and in this way we are conceiving of ourselves as a 
bunch of skeletons. They have no flesh on them, and just 
a bunch of bones. 

It is no wonder we all feel inadequate. We are all 
looking for something in the future to bring us a golden 
goodie at the end of the line somewhere. We hope that 
there is a good time coming—be it ever so far away— 
some far-off, divine event to which all creation moves. 
Therefore, when we say of something that it is no good, 
we mean “It has no future.” I would say, “It has no pre- 
sent.” When everybody says “It has no future,” that is 
plainly ridiculous. 

As a result, we are psychically starved and there- 
fore always looking, and seeking. This confused seeking 
is going on everywhere because we do not know what 
we want. Nobody really knows what they want. Instead 
we think of what we want in vague terms of pleasure, 
money, wealth, love, fulfillment, or personal develop- 
ment. However, we do not know what we mean by all 
of that. 


CHAPTER I WO 


If a person really sits down to write a twenty-page 
essay on their idea of heaven, it will inevitably be a sorry 
production. This can be seen in medieval art, where we 
find depictions of heaven and hell. Hell is always much 
better than heaven, and although it is uncomfortable, it 
is a sadomasochistic orgy. Hell is really rip-roaring, 
whereas all the saints in heaven are sitting smugly as if 
they were in church. Looking down you can see all the 
heads of the multitudes of the saved, which the artist has 
drawn to abbreviate them. They look like cobblestone 
streets. 

What has happened is that our eye has been 
trained to see an illusion. It is merely an image, and it is 
no more ourself than an idol is the Godhead. Yet we say, 
“That cannot be so, because I feel I really exist. It is not 
just an idea in my head. It is a feeling; I feel me.” 
However, what is it that you feel when you feel “I”? I 
will tell you. What is the difference between looking at 
something and taking a hard look at it, or hearing some- 
thing and listening intently? What is the difference 
between waiting while something goes on, and enduring 
it? The difference is that when you pay attention, instead 
of just looking, you screw up your face. You frown and 
stare in a futile muscular activity. When you listen 
intently, you start by doing some face squeezing, then 
you grit your teeth, or clench your fists. When you 
endure, you pull yourself together physically, and there- 
fore you sit upright. You hold your breath. You do all 
kinds of muscular things to control the functioning of 
your nervous system, and none of them have the slight- 
est effect on its proper operation. If you stare at things, 
you may fuzz the image rather than seeing it clearly. If 
you listen intently by concentrating on muscles around 
the ears, you will be attending to your muscles so much 
that you may not hear things properly. If you tighten up 


Not WHAT SHOULD BE, BUT WHAT Is! 


your body to pull yourself together, all you accomplish 
is to constrict yourself. 

I remember sitting next to a boy in school who 
had great difficulty in learning to read. Teachers always 
say to children, “Try. If you cannot d¢ it, you must try.” 
So the boy tried, and when he was trying to get out 
words he grunted and groaned as if he were lifting 
weights. The teacher was impressed because the boy was 
really trying. The boy got a B for effort, but all he was 
doing was straining uselessly. We all make this muscular 
strain in the belief that it is achieving the sort of psycho- 
logical results we intended to achieve. But this is like 
taking off in a jet plane, and when you get a mile down 
the runway and the plane is not up in the air yet, you 
begin to get nervous. So you start pulling at your seat 
belt. That is symptomatic of the chronic feeling we have 
in us all the time that corresponds to the word I. 

When you see yourself as “I,” you feel that chronic 
tension. In much the same way when an organ is work- 
ing properly, you do not feel it. If you see your eye, you 
may have cataracts. If you hear your ears, you have ring- 
ing in your ears getting in the way of hearing. When you 
are fully functioning you are unaware of the body. When 
you are thinking clearly, your brain is not getting in your 
way. Of course, you are seeing your eyes in the sense 
that everything you see out in front of you is a condition 
in the optic nerves at the back of the skull. That is where 
you are aware of all this, but you are not aware of the 
eye as the eye, the optical eye. When we are aware of the 
ego as “I,” we are aware of a chronic tension inside our- 
selves, and that is not us. It is just a futile tension. And 
then we wonder why “I” 


baal fig 


cannot do anything, why 
feel impotent in the face of all the problems of the 
world, and why “I” somehow cannot manage to trans- 


form “I.” Here we come to the real problem, because we 


CHAPTER Two 


are always telling each other that we should be different. 
However, I am not going to tell you that because I know 
that you cannot be different, nor can I. That may sound 
depressing, but I will show you that it is not. It is actually 
very heartening. Everybody who is at all sensitive and 
awake to their own problems, and humanity’s problems, 
is trying to change themselves. We know we cannot 
change the world unless we change ourselves. If we are 
all individually selfish, we are going to be collectively 
selfish. As it is said in the Bible, “Thou shalt love the 
Lord thy God, and love your neighbor as yourself.” We 
all agree that we must love, but we do not, and this 
becomes particularly appalling when we enter into the 
higher realm of spiritual development. 

Everybody these days is interested in spiritual 
development, and wisely so, because we want to change 
our consciousness. Many people are well aware that this 
egocentric consciousness is a hallucination, and they pre- 
sume it is the function of religion to change it. After all, 
that is what the Zen Buddhists, and all these yogis in the 
Orient are doing. They are changing their state of con- 
sciousness to get something called satori, or mystical 
experience, or nirvana, or moksha. 

Everybody is really enthused about that because it 
is the definitive spiritual experience, and you do not get 
that in church. Although there have been Christian mys- 
tics, the church has been very quiet about them. In the 
average church, all you get is talk—there is no medita- 
tion and no spiritual discipline. They interminably tell 
God what to do, as if He did not know. Then they tell 
the people what to do, as if they could do what they’re 
told, or even wanted to. Then they sing religious nursery 
rhymes. And then, to cap it all, the Roman Catholic 
Church—which at least had an unintelligible service that 
was real mysterious and suggested vast goings-on—went 


Not WHAT SHOULD BE, BUT WHAT Is! 


on to put the service into bad English. They took away 
incense, and became essentially a bunch of Protestants, 
and so now even the Catholics are at loose ends. As 
Clare Boothe Luce said, “It is no longer possible to prac- 
tice contemplative prayer at mass.” You are being 
advised, exhorted, and edified all the time, and that 
becomes a bore. Think of God, listening to all those 
prayers. Talk about grieving the Holy Spirit. It is just 
awful; people have no consideration for God at all. 

In pursuing spiritual disciplines, however, such as 
yoga, Zen, and also psychotherapy, there arises a diffi- 
culty. This difficulty lies in wanting to find a method 
whereby I can change my consciousness and improve 
myself. But the self that needs to be improved is the one 
that is doing the improving, and so I am rather stuck. I 
find out that the reason I think I believe in God is that I 
hope that somehow God will rescue me. In other words, 
I want to hang on to my own existence and feel rather 
shaky about doing that for myself, so I hope there is a 
God who will take care of it. Or I may think that if only 
I could be loving, I would have a better opinion of 
myself. I could face myself if I were more loving. So by 
some gimmickry the unloving me has to turn itself into a 
loving me. This is just like trying to lift yourself off the 
ground with your own bootstraps; it cannot be done. 
That is why religion, in practice, mainly produces 
hypocrisy and guilt, due to the constant failure of these 
enterprises. 

People study Zen, and they say that getting rid of 
your ego is a superhuman task. I assure you it is very, 
very difficult to get rid of your ego. You have to sit for a 
long time, and you are going to get the sorest legs. It is 
hard work, and all you wretched kids who think you are 
getting rid of your ego with easy yoga do not know what 
you are in for. The biggest ego trip is getting rid of your 


CHAPTER I WO 


ego, and of course the joke of it all is that your ego does 
not exist. There is nothing to get rid of. It is an illusion, 
as I have tried to explain, but still you ask how to stop 
the illusion. But who is asking? In the ordinary sense in 
which we use the word I, how can I stop identifying 
myself with the wrong me? The answer is simply that 
you cannot. 

The Christians acknowledge this by saying that 
mystical experience is a gift of divine grace. Man, as 
such, cannot achieve this experience; it is a gift of God, 
and if God does not give it to you there is no way of get- 
ting it. That is solidly true, since you cannot do anything 
about it because you do not exist. You might say that is 
pretty depressing news, but the whole point is that it is 
not depressing news. It is the joyous news. There is a 
Zen poem that talks about “it,” meaning the mystical 
experience, satori, the realization that you are, as Jesus 
was, the eternal energy of the universe. The poem says, 
“You cannot catch hold of it, nor can you get rid of it. 
In not being able to get it, you get it. When you speak, it 
is silent. When you are silent, it speaks.” 


” 


This phrase—not being able to get it, you get it—is 
the feeling Krishnamurti tries to convey to people when 
he says, “Why do you ask for a method? There is no 
method. All methods are simply gimmicks for strength- 
ening your ego.” How do we not ask for a method? He 
answers, “In asking that you are still asking for a 
method.” There is no method. If you really understand 
what your “I” is, you will see there is no method. We 
think this is so sad, but it is not. This is the gospel, the 
good news, because if you cannot achieve it, if you can- 
not transform yourself, that means that the main obsta- 
cle to mystical vision has collapsed. That obstacle was 
you. What happens next? By now you are at your wit’s 
end, but what are you going to do—commit suicide? 


Not WHAT SHOULD BE, BUT WHAT Is! 


Suppose you just put that off for a little while, and wait 
and see what happens. You cannot control your thoughts, 
and you cannot control your feelings, because there is no 
controller. You are your thoughts and your feelings, and 
they are running along, running along, running along. 
Just sit and watch them. There they go. You are still 
breathing, aren’t you? Still growing your hair; still seeing 
and hearing. Are you doing that? Is breathing something 
that you do? Do you see? Do you organize the opera- 
tions of your eyes, and know exactly how to work those 
rods and cones in the retina? Do you do that? It hap- 
pens, and it is a happening. Your breathing is happen- 
ing. Your thinking is happening. Your feeling is 
happening. Your hearing, your seeing, the clouds are 
happening across the sky. The sky is happening blue; the 
sun is happening shining. There it is: all this happening. 
May I introduce you? This is yourself. This is a 
vision of who you really are, and the way you really 
function. You function by happening, that is to say, by 
spontaneous occurrence. This is not a state of affairs 
that you should realize. I cannot possibly preach about it 
to you, because the minute you start thinking “I should 
understand that,” the stupid notion that “I” should 
bring it about arises again, when there is no “you” to 
bring it about. That is why I am not preaching. You can 
only preach to egos. All I can do is talk about what is. It 
amuses me to talk about what is because it is wonderful. 
I love it, and therefore I like to talk about it. If I get paid 
for it, it is because sensible people get paid for doing 
what they enjoy doing. My whole approach is not to 
convert you, not to make you over, not to improve you, 
but for you to discover that if you really knew the way 
you were, things would be sane. However, you cannot 
do that. You cannot make that discovery because you 
are in your own way so long as you think “I” am “I,” so 


CHAPTER TWO 


long as that hallucination blocks it. The hallucination 
disappears only in the realization of its own futility, 
when at last you see that you cannot make yourself over. 

A lot of yoga teachers may try to get you to con- 
trol your own mind, mainly to prove to you that you 
cannot do it. “A fool who persists in his folly will 


become wise,” and so they speed up the folly. Initially 
you may have a certain amount of superficial success by 
a process commonly called self-hypnosis, and you may 
think you are making progress. A good teacher will let 
you go along that way for a while, until he really throws 
you by asking, “Why are you concentrating?” 

Buddhism works very much in this way. Buddha 
said, “If you suffer, you suffer because you desire, and 
your desires are either unattainable or always disap- 
pointed. So cut out desire.” So those disciples went away 
and they stamped on desire, jumped on desire, cut the 
throat of desire, and threw out desire. When they came 
back, Buddha said, “But you are still desiring not to 
desire.” They wondered how to get rid of that desire. 
When you see that all of this is nonsense, there naturally 
comes over you a quietness. Seeing that you cannot con- 
trol your mind, you realize there is no controller. What 
you took to be the thinker of thoughts is just one of the 
thoughts. What you took to be the feeler of the feelings 
is just one of the feelings. What you took to be the expe- 
riencer of experience is just a part of the experience. 

There is not any thinker of thoughts or feeler of 
feelings. We get into that bind because our language has 
a grammatical rule that states that verbs must have sub- 
jects. The funny thing about this is that verbs are 
processes, and so are subjects and nouns, which are sup- 
posed to be things. How does a noun start a verb? How 
does a thing put a process into action? Obviously it can- 
not, but we always insist that there is this subject called 


NoT WHAT SHOULD BE, BUT WHAT Is! 


the knower, and without a knower there cannot be 
knowing. However, that is just a grammatical rule, not a 
rule of nature. In nature there is just knowing. If you say 
that you are feeling, it is as if you were somehow differ- 
ent from the feeling. When I say “I ‘am feeling,” what I 
mean is, there is feeling here. When I say “You are feel- 
ing,” I mean there is feeling there. 


JESUS—HIs RELIGION, OR 
THE RELIGION ABOUT HIM? 


CHAPTER THREE 


ome years ago I had just given a talk on televi- 
sion when one of the announcers came up to me 
and said, “If one can believe that this universe is 
in the charge of an intelligent and beneficent 
God, don’t you think He would naturally have provided 
us with an infallible guide to behavior and to the truth 
about the universe?” Of course I knew he meant the 
Bible, and so I said, “No, I think nothing of the kind, 
because [ think a loving God would not do something to 
His children that would rot their brains.” If we had an 
infallible guide we would never think for ourselves, and 
therefore our minds would become atrophied. It is as if 
my grandfather had left me a million dollars, and I am 


CHAPTER THREE 


glad he didn’t. Therefore we have to begin any discus- 
sion of the meaning of the life and teachings of Jesus 
with a look at this thorny question of authority, and 
especially the authority of Holy Scripture. 

In this country in particular there are an enormous 
number of people who seem to believe that the Bible 
descended from heaven with an angel in the year 1611, 
which was when the so-called King James, or more cor- 
rectly, the Authorized Version of the Bible was translated 
into English. I had a crazy uncle who believed that every 
word of the Bible was literally true, including the mar- 
ginal notes. Whatever date it said in the marginal 
notes—for instance, that the world was created in 4004 
B.c.—he believed as the word of God. One day he was 
reading a passage in the Book of Proverbs and found a 
naughty word, and from that time on he was through 
with it. How Protestant can you get? 

The question of authority needs to be understood 
because I am not going to claim any authority in what I 
say to you except the authority, such as it is, of history. 
Of course, that is a pretty uncertain authority, but from 
my point of view the four Gospels are to be regarded, on 
the whole, as historical documents. I will even grant the 
miracles because speaking as one heavily influenced by 
Buddhism, I do not find miracles particularly impressive. 
The traditions of Asia—Hindu, Buddhist, Taoist, and so 
forth—are full of miraculous stories. We take them in 
our stride and don’t think they are signs of anything in 
particular except psychic power. Of course, we in the 
West have, by scientific technology, accomplished things 
of a very startling nature. We could blow up the whole 
planet, and even Tibetan magicians have never promised 
to do anything like that. I am really a little scared of the 
growing interest in psychic power, which I call psy- 
chotechnics. We have made such a mess of things with 


JESUS—HIs RELIGION, OR THE RELIGION ABOUT Hiv? 


ordinary technics that heaven only knows what we 
might do if we got hold of psychotechnics and started 
raising people from the dead and prolonging life insuf- 
ferably and doing everything we wished. 

In the whole, the idea of mira‘cles is simply this: 
Imagine that you are God and that you can have any- 
thing you want. After a while you would say, “This is 
getting pretty dul! because I know in advance everything 
that is going to happen.” So you would wish for a sur- 
prise, and you would find yourself this evening in this 
church as a human being. I think miracles are probably 
possible. Miracles do not bother me, and as a matter of 
fact, when you read the writings of the early fathers of 
the church, the great theologians like Saint Clement, 
Gregory of Nyssa, Saint John of Damascus, and even 
Saint Thomas Aquinas, are not interested in the historic- 
ity of the Bible. They take miracles for granted, and for- 
get about it. They are interested in a deeper meaning. 
Therefore they see in the story of Jonah and the whale a 
prefiguration of the resurrection of Christ. Even when it 
comes to the resurrection of Christ they are not worry- 
ing about the chemistry or the physics of a risen body. 
What they are interested in is that the idea of the resur- 
rection of the body has something to say about the 
meaning of the physical body in the eyes of God. They 
have discovered that the physical body, in other words, 
is not something worthless and unspiritual but some- 
thing that is an object of the Divine Love. Therefore, I 
am not going to be concerned with whether or not 
miraculous events happen. That seems to me entirely 
beside the point. 

I regard the four Gospels, including the Gospel of 
John, as, on the whole, as good a historical document as 
anything we have from that period, and that is impor- 
tant. It used to be fashionable to regard the Gospel of 


CHAPTER THREE 


John as late. At the turn of the century, the higher critics 
of the New Testament assigned the Gospel of John to 
about 125 A.D., and the reason was simple. Those higher 
critics just assumed that the basic teachings of Jesus 
could not possibly have included any complicated mysti- 
cal theology. Therefore they said, “It must be from a 
later time.” But as a matter of fact, in the text of the 
Gospel of John, the topography of Jerusalem and the ref- 
erences to the Jewish calendar are more accurate than 
those in any of the other three books, Matthew, Mark, 
and Luke. Therefore it seems to me perfectly simple to 
assume that John recorded the inner teachings that Jesus 
gave to his disciples, and that Matthew, Mark, and Luke 
recorded the more exoteric teaching, which he gave to 
people at large. 

Now, what about the authority of these 
Scriptures? A lot of people do not know how we got the 
Bible at all. We in the West got it thanks to the Catholic 
Church. The Catholic Church and members of the 
church wrote the books of the New Testament, and they 
took over the books of the Old Testament. So it was the 
Catholic Church that promulgated the Bible and said, 
“We give you these Scriptures on our authority, and by 
the authority of the informal tradition that has existed 
among us from the beginning, inspired by the Holy 
Spirit.” So, historically, we have received the Bible on 
the church’s say-so. 

The Catholic Church insists, therefore, that it, 
speaking collectively under the presumed guidance of the 
Holy Spirit, has the authority to interpret the Bible, and 
you can take that or leave it. Obviously the authority of 
the Bible is not, first of all, based on the Bible itself. I 
can write a bible and state within that book that it is 
indeed the word of God that I have received, and you 
are at liberty to believe me or not. Hindus believe that 


JESUS—HIs RELIGION, OR THE RELIGION ABOUT Him? 


the Vedas are divinely revealed, and they are inspired 
with just as much fervor as any Christian or any Jew. 
Muslims believe that the Koran is divinely inspired, and 
some Buddhists believe that their sutras are also of 
divine, or rather, Buddhistic origin. The Japanese believe 
that the ancient texts of Shinto are likewise of divine ori- 
gin. And who is to judge? If we are going to argue about 
which version of the truth is the correct one, we will 
always end up in a dispute in which the judge and the 
advocate are the same person, and you would not want 
that if you were brought into a court of law. If I were to 
say that I find Jesus Christ to be the greatest being who 
ever came onto this earth, by what standards do I judge? 
Why, obviously, I will judge by the sort of moral stan- 
dards that have been given to me as somebody brought 
up in a Christian culture. There is nobody impartial who 
can decide between all the religions because everybody 
has been, in one way or another, influenced by one of 
them. So, if the church says the Bible is true, it finally 
comes back to you. Are you going to believe the church 
or aren’t you? If nobody believes the church, it will be 
perfectly plain that the church has no authority, because 
the people are always the source of authority. That is 
why Tocqueville said that people get the government 
they deserve. 

You may say, “God Himself has the authority.” 
Well, how are we to show that? That is your opinion. So 
you say, “You wait and see. The Day of Judgment is 
coming, and then you will find out who is the authority.” 
Yes, but at the moment there is no evidence for the Day 
of Judgment. It remains simply your opinion that the 
Day of Judgment is coming. There is nothing else to go 
on except the opinion of other people, whose opinion 
you buy. Really, I will not deny anybody’s right to hold 
these opinions. You may indeed believe that the Bible is 


CHAPTER THREE 


literally true and that it was actually dictated by God to 
Moses and the prophets and the apostles. That may be 
your opinion and you are at liberty to hold it. 

Llowever, I do not agree with you. I do believe, on 
the other hand, that there is a sense in which the Bible is 
divinely inspired. However, | mean by inspiration some- 
thing utterly different from receiving a dictated message 
from an omniscient authority. | think inspiration comes 
very seldom in words. In fact, almost all the words writ- 
ten down by automatic writing from psychic input that 1 
have read strike me as rather thin. When psychics write 


of deep mysteries—instead of telling you what your sick- 
ness is or who your grandmother was—they become 
superficial. Psychically communicated philosophy is 
never as interesting as philosophy carefully thought out. 

Divine inspiration is not that kind of verbal or psy- 
chic communication anyway. An example of divine 
inspiration is the feeling that, for reasons you cannot 
understand, you love people. Divine inspiration is wis- 
dom, which is very difficult to put into words. It is a 
mystical experience. A person who writes out of that 
experience could be said to be divinely inspired. 
Inspiration might come through dreams, or through 
archetypal messages from the collective unconscious, 
through which the Holy Spirit could be said to work. 
But since inspiration ts always conveyed through a 
human vehicle, it is liable to be distorted by that vehicle. 
]am talking to you through a sound system, but if there 
is something wrong with it, whatever truths I might utter 
to you will be distorted. My voice will be distorted, and 
you might mistake the meaning of what I say. Similarly, 
anybody who receives divine inspiration will express it 
through the language they know. By language I do not 
only mean English, Latin, Greek, Hebrew, or Sanskrit. I 
mean language in the sense of the sort of concepts that 


[+ 


JESUS—His RELIGION, OR THE RELIGION ABOUT Him? 


are available to you, for invariably you will express 
yourself through the concepts of the religion you were 
brought up with. 

Now suppose you were brought up in the Bible 
Belt. If that was all you knew of religion, and you had a 
mystical experience of the type where you suddenly dis- 
covered that you are one with God, you would be liable 
to get up and say, “I am Jesus Christ.” However, the 
culture that we live in just cannot allow that. People 
would say, “You don’t look like you’re Jesus Christ 
coming back again, because it says in the Scripture that 
when he comes back, he will appear in the heavens with 
legions of angels, and you are not doing that. You are 
just the same old Joe Dokes that we knew years ago, and 
now you’re saying you are Jesus Christ.” “Well,” Joe 
Dokes says, “when Jesus Christ said he was God, 
nobody believed him, either.” But Jesus said he was God 
because he was trying to express what had happened to 
him in terms of a religious language that was circum- 
scribed by the Holy Bible. He had never read the 
Upanishads. He had never read the Diamond Sutra. He 
had never read the Tibetan Book of the Dead or the 
I Ching or Lao-tzu. But if he and the culture, the society 
in which he was talking, had read the Upanishads, they 
would have had no difficulty with his claim to being 
God. Because it says in the Upanishads, we are all incar- 
nations of God; although, it is true, they do not mean 
the same thing that a Hebrew meant by God, and of 
course they do not use that word, they use the word 
Brahman. The Brahman is neither personal nor imper- 
sonal. { would say Brahman is suprapersonal. Brahman 
is not he or she. Brahman is not the creator of the 
world—as a thing underneath and subject to Brahman— 
but is the actor of the world, the player of all the parts. 
Like an absorbed actor, the divine spirit gets so involved 


CHAPTER THREE 


in playing the role as to become bewitched. This is all 
part of the game, to be bewitched into believing “I am 
that role.” 

When you were babies you knew who you were, 
and psychoanalysts refer to that as the oceanic feeling. 
They do not really like it, but they admit that the baby 
cannot distinguish between the world and the way it acts 
on the world. It is all one process, which is of course the 
way things are. But we are taught very quickly those 
things that are you and those that are not. We learn very 
quickly what is voluntary and what is involuntary, 
because you can be punished for the voluntary but not 
for the involuntary. So, we unlearn what we knew in the 
beginning. And in the course of life, if we are fortunate, 
we discover again what we really are, that each one of us 
is what would be called in Arabic, or Hebrew, the Son of 
God. The phrase “Son of” means “of the nature of,” as 
when you call someone a “son of a bitch.” So, “Son of 
God” means a divine person, a human being who is in 
the nature of God and realizes it. 

My assumption or opinion is that Jesus of 
Nazareth was a human being, like Buddha, Shri 
Ramakrishna, Ramana Maharshi who, early in life had 
colossal experiences of what we call cosmic conscious- 
ness. Now you do not have to be of any particular kind 
of religion to get this experience. It can hit anyone, any- 
time, like falling in love. There are obviously a number of 
you in this building who have had it in greater or !esser 
degree, but it is found all over the world, and when it 
hits you, you know it. Sometimes it comes after long 
practice of meditation and spiritual discipline, and some- 
times it comes for no reason that anybody can deter- 
mine. We say it is the grace of God, and with this there 
comes an overwhelming conviction that you have mis- 
taken your identity. I’m not just old Alan Watts—that 


JESUS—HIs RELIGION, OR THE RELIGION ABOUT Him? 


was completely superficial. Instead I find I am an expres- 
sion of an eternal something or other, a name that can- 
not be named, as the name of God was taboo among the 
Hebrews. I am, and I suddenly understand exactly why 
everything is the way it is. It is perfectly clear. Further- 
more, I no longer feel any boundary between what I do 
and what happens to me. I feel that everything that is 
going on is my doing, just as my breathing is. Do you do 
it or does it happen to you? You can feel it both ways. 
There is just this great happening going on. If you have 
the name in your background you will say that this hap- 
pening is God, or the will of God, or the doing of God. 
If you do not have that word in your background, you 
might say with the Chinese, “It is the flowing of the 
Tao.” Or if you are a Hindu, you will say, “It is the 
maya of Brahman.” Maya means the magical power, the 
creative illusion, the play. 

You can very well understand how people to 
whom this happens feel genuinely inspired. Very often 
there goes along with it an extremely warm feeling, 
because you see the divine in everybody else’s eyes. 
When the great Hindu-Muslim mystic Kabir was a very 
old man, he used to look around at people and say, “To 
whom shall I preach?” He could see the beloved in all 
eyes. Sometimes I look into people’s eyes and see that 
same beloved in the depth of those pools, and yet the 
expression on the face around those eyes is saying, 
“Who, me?” It is the funniest thing, but everybody is 
playing out an essential part in this colossal cosmic 
drama. Yet, the presence of the beloved is so pervasive 
that you can even feel it in people you thoroughly dislike. 

So let us suppose that Jesus had such an experi- 
ence. These experiences are of all ranges, as I have said, 
and his could have been a very strong one indeed. From 
the sayings of Jesus, especially in the Gospel of John, 


CHAPTER THREE 


anybody who studied the psychology of religion can 
easily detect that that experience must have taken place, 
or something very like it. However, Jesus had a limita- 
tion, in that he did not know of any religion other than 
those of the immediate Near East. He may have known 
something about Egyptian religion, and perhaps a little 
bit about Greek religion, but mostly he knew about 
Hebrew. 

People who think that Jesus was God assume that 
he must have been omniscient. However, Saint Paul 
makes it perfectly clear in the Epistle to the Philippians 
that Jesus renounced his divine powers so as to be Man. 

“Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ 
Jesus, who, being in the form of God, thought not equal- 
ity with God a thing to be hung on to, but humbled him- 
self and made himself of no reputation and was found in 
fashion as a man and became obedient to death.” 
Theologians call that kinosis, which means self-emptying. 
So obviously, an omnipotent and omniscient man would 
not really be a man. 

Even if you take the very orthodox Catholic doc- 
trine of the nature of Christ, that he was both true God 
and true man, you must say that, for true God to be 
united with true man, true God has to make a voluntary 
renunciation, for the time being, of omniscience . . . and 
omnipotence and omnipresence, too, for that matter. 

Now Jesus did say to his elect disciples, as recorded 
in John, “Before Abraham was, I am. I am the way, the 
truth, and the life. I am the resurrection and the life. I 
am the living bread that comes down from heaven. I and 
the Father are One, and who has seen me has seen the 
Father.” There can be no mistaking that language. The 
Jews found out what he said and they put him to death, 
or had him put to death, for blasphemy. This is no cause 
for any special antagonism to the Jews, because it has 


JESUS—HIs RELIGION, OR THE RELIGION ABOUT Him? 


always been done. It happened to one of the great Sufi 
mystics in Persia who had the same experience. 

So, what happened? The apostles did not quite get 
the point. They were awed by the miracles of Jesus, and 
they worshiped him as people worship gurus, and you 
know to what lengths that can go. So the Christians 
said, “Okay, okay, Jesus of Nazareth was the Son of 
God. But let it stop right there! Nobody else!” So, Jesus 
was pedestalized. He was put in a position that was 
safely upstairs, so that his troubles and experience of 
cosmic consciousness would not come again and cause 
other people to be a nuisance. Those who had this expe- 
rience, and expressed it during those times when the 
church had political power, were almost invariably per- 
secuted. Giordano Bruno was burned at the stake. John 
Scotus Erigena was excommunicated. Meister Eckehart’s 
theses were condemned, and so on and so on. A few 
mystics got away with it, but only because they used 
cautious language. 

You see what happens. If you pedestalize Jesus you 
strangle the gospel at birth. Gospel means “good news,” 
and I cannot for the life of me think what is the good 
news about the gospel as ordinarily handed down. Here 
is the revelation of God in Christ, in Jesus, and we are 
supposed to follow his life and example without having 
the advantage of being the boss’s son. Now the tradition 
of both Catholic and Protestant fundamentalists repre- 
sents Jesus to us as a freak, born of a virgin, knowing he 
is the Son of God, having the power of miracles, know- 
ing that it is impossible to really kill him, because he is 
to rise again in the end. We do not know that about our- 
selves at all, but we are asked to take up our cross and 
follow him then. So what happens is this: We are deliv- 
ered a gospel that is in fact an impossible religion. It is 
impossible to follow the way of Christ, and many a 


CHAPTER THREE 


Christian has admitted it. “I am a miserable sinner. I fall 
far short of the example of Christ.” Christianity has 
institutionalized guilt as a virtue. Of course you will not 
come up to Jesus, ever, and therefore you will always be 
aware of your shortcomings. So, the more shortcomings 
you feel, the more you are aware of the vast abyss 
between Christ and yourself. You may go to confession, 
and if you have a nice, dear, understanding confessor, he 
will not get angry with you. Instead, he will say, “My 
child, you know you have sinned very grievously, but 
you must realize that the love of God and of our Lord is 
infinite, and that naturally you are forgiven. As a token 
of thanksgiving say three Hail Mary’s.” You may have 
committed a murder and robbed a bank and fornicated 
around and so on, and you feel awful about it—“I have 


1? 


wounded Jesus, grieved the Holy Spirit!”—but you also 
know in the back of your mind that you are going to do 
it all over again. You will not be able to help yourself. 
You will try and fail, and there will always be a greater 
and greater sense of guilt, and this is the Christianity of 
most people. 

There is also a much more subtle Christianity of 
the theologians, the mystics, and the philosophers. It is 
not what gets preached from the pulpit, I grant you, by 
Billy Graham, and what I will call fundamentalist 
Catholics and Protestants. What would the real gospel 
be? The real good news is not simply that Jesus of 
Nazareth was the Son of God, but that he was a power- 
ful Son of God who came to open everybody’s eyes to 
the fact that you too are a powerful son or daughter of 
God. This is perfectly plain if you go to the tenth chapter 
of John, verse thirty where Jesus says, “I and the Father 
are One.” When he says that, there are some people 
around who are not intimate disciples, and they are hor- 
rified. They immediately pick up stones to stone him, 


JESUS—HIs RELIGION, OR THE RELIGION ABOUT Him? 


and he says, “Many good works I have shown you from 
the Father, and for which of these do you stone me?” 
And they say, “For a good work we stone you not, but 
for blasphemy, because you, being a man, make yourself 
God.” And he replied, quoting the eighty-second Psalm, 
“Is it not written in your law, ‘I have said you are 
Gods?’ If God called those to whom He gave His word 
Gods—and you cannot deny the scriptures—how can 
you say I blaspheme because I say I am a son of God?” 

There is the whole thing in a nutshell. If you read 
the King James Bible—the version that descended with 
the angel—you will see that the words “Son of God,” 
“the Son of God,” “I am the Son of God,” are in italics. 
Most people think the italics are for emphasis, but they 
are not. The italics indicate words interpolated by the 
translators, and you will not find that in the Greek. It 
says “a son of God.” So here it seems to me perfectly 
plain that Jesus has it in the back of his mind that this is 
not something peculiar to himself when he says, “I am 
the way. No man comes to the Father but by me.” This 
“Iam,” this “me,” is the divine in us, which in Hebrew 
would be called the Lord, Adonai. A great deal is made 
of this by the esoteric Jews, the Cabalists and the 
Hasidim. 

This knowledge has been perpetually repressed 
throughout the history of Western religion, because all 
Western religions have adopted the form of celestial 
monarchies and therefore have discouraged democracy 
in the kingdom of heaven. As a consequence of the 
teaching of the German and Flemish mystics in the fif- 
teenth century, there began to be such movements as the 
Anabaptisis, the Brothers of the Free Spirit, the Levelers, 
and the Quakers. These spiritual movements came to 
this country and helped to found a republic and not a 
monarchy. How could you say that a republic is the best 


CHAPTER THREE 


form of government if you think that the universe is a 
monarchy? Obviously if God is on top in a monarchy, 
monarchy is the best form of government. Ever so many 
citizens of this republic think that they ought to believe 
that the universe is a monarchy, and therefore they are 
always at odds with the republic. It is principally from 
white, racist Christians that we have the threat of fas- 
cism in this country, because they have a religion that is 
militant, which is not the religion of Jesus. His religion 
was the realization of divine sonship, but the religion 
about Jesus pedestalizes him, and says that only this 
man, of all the sons of woman, was divine. It speaks of 
itself as the church militant. Onward Christian soldiers, 
marching as to war. It’s utterly exclusive, convinced in 
advance of examining the doctrines of any other religion 
that it is the top religion. So it becomes a freak religion, 
just as it has made a freak of Jesus, by insisting he is an 
unnatural man. 

It claims uniqueness, not realizing that what it 
teaches would be far more credible if it were truly 
Catholic, that is to say, universal, if it restated the truths 
that have been known from time immemorial, and have 
appeared in all the great cultures of the world. I suppose 
even very liberal Protestants still want to say “Yes, these 
other religions are very good. God has no doubt revealed 
Himself through Buddha and Lao-tzu, but they are not 
the top religion.” Now, you can be loyal to Jesus, just as 
you are loyal to your own country, but you are not serv- 
ing your country if you think that it is necessarily the 
best of all possible countries. That is doing a disservice 
to your country because it is refusing to be critical where 
criticism is proper. This is also true of religion. Every 
religion should be self-critical. Otherwise it soon degen- 
erates into self-righteous hypocrisy. When we apply this 
proper criticism to the religion about Jesus we see that 


JESUS—HIs RELIGION, OR THE RELIGION ABOUT Him? 


he was speaking not from a kind of weird, extraordi- 
nary, historical event, but with a voice that joins in say- 
ing what others have said before, in every place and 
time: “Wake up. Wake up and realize who you are.” 

I do not think that the church is going to have very 
much relevance until it gets with Jesus’ actual teachings. 
Popular Protestantism and popular Catholicism are say- 
ing nothing about mystical religion, however. The mes- 
sage of the preacher, fifty-two Sundays a year, is “Dear 
people, be good.” We have heard it ad nauseam. He may 
occasionally give a sermon on what happens after death, 
or on the nature of God, but basically the sermon is “Be 
good.” But the real question is, How are we going to 
change for the good without a vital religious experience, 
and by this I refer to something much more profound 
than emoting over singing “Onward Christian Soldiers.” 

The problem with our ecclesiastical goings-on is 
that we run a talking shop. We pray, we tell God what 
to do or give Him advice, as if He did not know. We 
read the Scriptures. Jesus said, “You search the 
Scriptures daily, for in them you think you have life.” 
Saint Paul made some rather funny references to “the 
spirit which giveth life and the letter which kills.” I think 
the Bible ought to be ceremoniously and reverently 
burned every Easter, in faith that we need it no more 
because the spirit is with us. It is a dangerous book, and 
to worship it is of course a far more dangerous idolatry 
than bowing down to images of wood and stone. 
Nobody can reasonably confuse a wooden image with 
God, but you can very easily confuse a set of ideas with 
God, because concepts are more rarefied and abstract. 

This endless talking and preaching in church does 
nothing, by and large, but excite a sense of anxiety and 
guilt. You cannot love out of that. No scolding or ratio- 
nal demonstration of the right way to behave is going to 


CHAPTER THREE 


inspire people with love. Something else must happen. 
But you say, “Well, what are we going to do about it?” 
Do about it? Have you no faith? Then be quiet. But even 
Quakers are not quiet. They sit in meeting and think. 
However, suppose we are really quiet, and do not think, 
but are absolutely silent through and through. We tend 
to feel uncomfortable with this idea and say, “You will 
just fall into a blank space.” But have you ever tried? 

I feel then, that it is enormously important that 
churches stop being talking shops. They must become 
centers of contemplation. What is contemplation? It is 
what you do in the temple. You do not come to the tem- 
ple to chatter but to be still and know that “I am God.” 
This is why, if the Christian religion, if the gospel of 
Christ is to mean anything at all—instead of just being 
one of the forgotten religions, along with Mithraism— 
we must see Christ as the great mystic, in the proper 
sense of the word. A mystic is not someone who has all 
sorts of magical powers and understands spirits and so 
on. A mystic is one who realizes union with God. This 
seems to me the crux and message of the gospel. It is 
summed up in the prayer Saint John records Jesus speak- 
ing over his disciples: “May you be one, even as the 
Father and I are one, that you may be all one.” May we 
all realize this divine sonship or daughtership or oneness, 
this basic identity with the eternal energy of the universe, 
the love that moves the sun and other stars. 


DEMOCRACY IN THE 
KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 


CHAPTER FOUR 


he great discussion going on in what we call 

the new theology is the revolution within 

standard-brand Christianity. For years and 

years the clergy—the ministry of the various 
churches such as Episcopalian, Methodist, Baptist, 
Congregational, Unitarian, even in some cases Disciples 
of Christ and Lutheran—have been discussing religion in 
their theological seminaries in terms utterly different 
from what you normally hear from the pulpit. Every 
graduate of an intelligent theological school has a sense 
of intense frustration as they go out to work in a com- 
munity or parish church. This is because they do not 
believe in what they are supposed to preach. And this 
has, in a way, been true for a long, long time. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


Clergy, except in the Roman Catholic Church 
where the situation is somewhat different, are very heav- 
ily controlled by the laity because he who pays the piper 
calls the tune. Therefore they are in a state of constant 
frustration because those who contribute most heavily, 
and therefore are most interested in the church, tend to 
be conservative people. They want that old-time religion, 
although as a matter of fact, what they call the old-time 
religion is really quite modern. But that is what they 
want. 

In the British army they have a thing called church 
parade. There is a famous story about a drill sergeant 
who would get all the troops up for church parade on a 
Sunday morning, and then he would call out, “Catholics 
to the right, Protestants to the left, fancy religions in the 
middle.” To the degree that intelligent people in our cul- 
ture have any religion at all, it tends to be a fancy reli- 
gion, one of the new kinds such as Unity, Christian 
Science, Theosophy, Buddhism, Vedanta, or some kind 
of special Protestant offshoot such as the Fellowship 
Church in San Francisco or the Community Church in New 
York, that are very liberal, very left-wing theologically. 

The new theology has emerged at this time because 
to a very large extent, the clergy are fed up. Christianity 
has its back to the wall, and the Pope knows this better 
than anybody. So hand in hand with this ecumenical 
movement there comes a reconsideration of what on 
earth Christianity is all about. Is there one God? Is there 
a God at all? A lot of people are boldly saying all ideas 
of God are to be abandoned. 

As an English priest by the name of Father Mascal 
put it, the basic assumption of the secularist movement 
in Christian theology is that life is a journey between the 
maternity ward and the crematorium. That is all there is; 
that’s it. That is the only life the Christian religion has to 


DEMOCRACY IN THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 


encounter. Therefore, with this abandonment of God, 
and even the idea that the universe is supernaturally con- 
trolled, the Christian religion fastens itself with peculiar 
and increased fervor to the figure of Jesus of Nazareth. 
As one wit put it, there is no God, and Jesus Christ is 
His only son. 

There is something strange about Christianity. It 
shares with Islam and Judaism what we might call theo- 
logical imperialism. Christians of even the most liberal 
stripe fervently believe that their religion is the best reli- 
gion. They say, “Jesus Christ is the only Son of God.” 
That isn’t really an orthodox way of saying it, but it is 
the way orthodox people do say it. Otherwise they say, 
“Jesus is the greatest man who ever lived.” The point is 
that you make a commitment to the following of Jesus 
as an historical personage. And for some reason or 
other, people who commit themselves to this exclusive 
kind of following of Jesus become exceedingly obstreper- 
ous. They will either damn other religions outright or, 
far more insidious, damn them with faint praise. “Old 
Buddha taught some very good things, and we all are 
indebted to his great moral principles.” But there always 
follows a pitch for the sole following of Jesus as the 
Lord and Master, head and shoulders above all. 

The trouble with that has always been that when 
you get into a theological argument with a person who is 
this kind of Christian, you find yourself in a situation 
where the advocate and the judge are the same person. 
That is to say, Jesus is found to be the best man in the 
world by the standards of Christianity, because those are 
the standards with which this kind of person judges. 
Therefore, you will find that people who leap to these 
judgments usually do not know very much about any 
other kind of religion. The courses on comparative 
religion in theological schools are shockingly superficial 


CHAPTER FOUR 


and grossly inaccurate. This is coming to the front now. 
The real purpose of belonging to the church is to be 
saved, and being saved means belonging to the most 
“in” group. You have to be part of a select group if you 
want to know who you are, to distinguish yourself, 
because then vou know vou are different from the peo- 
ple who are not part of your group. There you get a con- 
trast. This is the basic arrangement for a church. If you 
want to be in some kind of an insider’s group, you must 
put everybody else beyond the pale. 

Saint Thomas Aquinas actually gave the show 
away when he said that the blessed in heaven will often 
walk to the battlements and look down and delight in the 
justice of God being properly carried out in hell. But you 
may be very liberal, you may not believe in hell. After all, 
it is not nice or sophisticated nowadays to believe in ever- 
lasting damnation. So we have new phrases for it, such as 
“failing to be a real person,” “sinking below the human 
level.” or “entering into final and irremediable psy- 
chosis.~ All of these are new phrases for either damna- 
tion or heresy. So you can know you are saved only if 
vou know that somebody else is not. It is very difficult to 
imagine a state of affairs wherein everyone and every- 
thing is saved. You have to be a mystic even to think 
about that, because it requires a state of consciousness 
that transcends oppositions, and you cannot do that with 
ordinary logic. You have to have a new kind of logic, the 
kind I am using at the moment when I point out that 
damned people and saved people need each other. They 
are in a symbiotic relationship. They go together in the 
same way as the back and front of something do, because 
if something has a front it has to have a back too. And so 
the very fact that fronts and backs go together indicates 
that there is a unity between opposites, even such appar- 
ent opposites as the damned and the saved. 


oy 


ws 


DEMOCRACY IN THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 


It is only as you begin to realize you need the 
damned people in order to be saved, and they need the 
saved in order to be damned, that you can start laughing 
about it. And of course that laughter is very subversive. 
You know the rules: you are not supposed to laugh in 
church, or in courts of law, either. They are places where 
laughter makes people nervous, because laughter is sup- 
posed to be a sign of disrespect. However, that may not 
be so at all. Dante said that the song of the angels in par- 
adise sounded like the laughter of the universe. But in 
church—especially in the more serious kind—laughing is 
very bad form. Why? Because if you look at the design 
of a Catholic Church you will notice it is based on the 
design of the courtroom of a king. If you look at a 
Protestant church you will see that it is based upon the 
design of a law court. Indeed, the Protestant minister 
wears exactly the same robes as an American judge, and 
all those pews and boxlike stalls are the same as you will 
find in the old-fashioned court with the witness box and 
jury box. This is the original idea of the Christian 
church. 

An ancient Roman church is called a basilica. That 
means the courtroom of a king, or the throne room. The 
altar is the throne of God, but in a courtroom the king is 
very nervous, because anybody who takes it on himself 
to govern other people and rule must always watch out. 
Therefore he always has his back to the wall, and he is 
flanked by attending guards and high ministers of state. 
Just so that nobody will get up and make trouble, he has 
them either on their knees or flat on their faces when 
they are in his presence. And, of course, no one must 
laugh. That would be laughing at Mr. Big. 

This was the pattern or the model on which the 
Judeo-Christian idea of God was based, and it is a politi- 
cal model. The titles for God—King of Kings, Lord of 


CHAPTER FOUR 


Lords—were taken from those of the supreme emperors 
of Persia. So at morning prayer in the English church the 
clergyman gets up and says, “Almighty and everlasting 
God, the only ruler of princes, King of Kings, Lord of 
Lords, who dost from thy throne behold all dwellers on 
earth, most graciously deign to behold our gracious sov- 
ereign lady Queen Elizabeth and all the royal family.” 
You may not believe literally that God sits on a throne, 
or even has a body to put on one, or that He wears a 
crown, or that He has a beard, but that image still colors 
your feeling about the character of God. Images are 
more powerful than intellectual concepts. 

You may know that it says in the prayer book that 
God is a spirit without a body or passions, omnipresent 
to all places, and eternal to all time. Therefore one 
thinks, as Hegel does, of the gaseous vertebrate, or else 
of an enormously diffused sea of luminous Jell-O filling 
all time and space. Everybody uses images. But behind 
those images are the old images that influenced us in 
childhood. If you still attend church and use that 
imagery, emotionally you still feel toward God as you 
would if you took it literally. This political model of 
God has dominated the West. The world is related to 
God as subjects are to a king, or as artifacts are to their 
maker. We have a ceramic model of the universe, 
because it is said in the Book of Genesis that God made 
Adam out of the dust of the ground. In other words, He 
made a clay figure and blew the breath of life into the 
nostrils of the figurine and it came to life. 

The Hindus do not have to cope with this model 
of the universe because they do not see the universe as 
God’s creation—in the sense of being an artifact—they 
see it as God’s drama. They see the world as active, not 
created. God is that which is pretending to be all that is. 
Everybody is really God, a mask of God, who is playing 


[ee] 


DEMOCRACY IN THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 


that He is you. But he is doing it so well that He has 
taken himself in. He is both the audience and the actor. 
He wants to get you crying. He wants to get you sitting 
on the edge of your seat in anticipation. God, the ulti- 
mate actor, has convinced Himself completely that the 
act is real. 

The Chinese have a third model. Theirs is of an 
organic universe, a great organism. It is alive; it grows. It 
is an intelligent order. 

Those are the three great models of the world. 
When, a long time ago, the West stopped believing seri- 
ously in God, we Westerners still retained the idea of the 
world as an artifact, we merely graduated from a ceramic 
model of the universe to a fully automatic, mechanical 
model, which is now common sense for most people liv- 
ing today. 

I return to the point that the clergy and people of 
the church do not really believe at all in God in the old- 
fashioned sense of the word. If they did seriously believe 
the Christian religion in its orthodox form, they would 
be screaming in the street. But even the Jehovah’s 
Witnesses are more or less polite when they come and 
call at your house. If they really believed that you were 
going to hell, they would make a bigger fuss about you 
than they would if you had the bubonic plague. But 
nobody really takes Christianity that seriously anymore, 
because they do not believe in it. They know they ought 
to believe in it. In fact many sermons are exhortations to 
have more faith, which means that we all recognize that 
we do not really believe it, but we ought to. We feel very 
guilty about it, but we do not have the moral strength to 
believe in this. However, it is not only a matter of moral 
strength. It is a matter of being asked to believe in some- 
thing that most people feel is nonsense, which is that the 
world is run on the lines of a state. How can you be a 


CHAPTER FOUR 


citizen of the United States, having taken an oath that a 
republican form of government is the best form of gov- 
ernment, and believe that the universe is a monarchy? 

Intelligent people have always realized that this 
political model for the cosmos will not do. Actually, no 
serious theologian ever did believe that God was an old 
gentleman with whiskers sitting on a golden throne. 
Never. The bishop of Woolidge says in his book Honest 
To God that there is not that sort of a someone out 
there. He is very naive in a way. He could have taken 
huge quotations out of Saint Thomas Aquinas, out of 
the great fathers of the church, from Origen, from 
Clement of Alexandria, from Saint Gregory Nazianzen, 
from Saint John of Damascus, from Saint Basil the 
Great, from Saint Augustine, from Saint Ambrose, from 
Bernard of Clairvaux, and Albert the Great; he could 
have quoted all those perfectly orthodox, very correct 
theologians and shown that they never believed in a God 
with whiskers. He could have come forward and said, 
“See, this is a perfectly orthodox book, and I am not a 
revolutionary. I am just going back to the real old-time 
religion.” He did not do that, and do you know why? 
He told me. He had never read those writers in theologi- 
cal school. His religious training was entirely confined to 
biblical studies, and never got that far. 

It is the same with ever so many people. One of the 
reasons so many people turn to an Oriental religion is 
that the intellectual level at which Oriental religions were 
first presented in the West was so much higher than the 
intellectual level at which Christianity was presented in 
the local church. If you lived in India, or Ceylon, of 
course you would attend the local Buddhist monastery, 
and its sermons would be just as junky as the stuff taught 
at our local churches. They do not tell people about 
things like the great void, or how to practice meditation— 


DEMOCRACY IN THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 


that is for specialists. All they care about is gaining 
merit, earning better circumstances in your next life, or 
getting out of evil karma. That is what popular 
Buddhism really is about. The trouble in the West is that 
everybody is becoming educated, and there is a terrific 
degree of literacy. Therefore the public has to be treated 
with respect. You cannot say “the public be damned” 
anymore. There are too many educated people. 

I would say the God that really is dead is this 
politically modeled God, however conceived. The divine 
paternalistic authority who rules the universe—to whom 
you as an ego are related, by analogy, as a subject is toa 
king—is just not holding up. But what are the alterna- 
tives for Western people with a Christian background? 
What other kind of God could we have? One of the pos- 
sibilities is no God at all. This is what people on the far 
left of this new theology are saying. A man like James 
Pike, on the other hand, is on the new theology’s right 
wing. He very definitely believes in God—he is a theist— 
but he does not believe in anything with whiskers on it, 
nor does he really believe in the political model. 

We must choose, then, between a mechanical uni- 
verse that is no more than it appears to be, and a very 
refined conception of a God that would be called “It” 
instead of “He.” It makes a very powerful difference 


> 


which pronoun you use. Even “He-She,” as the 
Christian Scientists talk about the “father-mother,” is 
sort of complicated. “It” is rather simple. But then when 
you say “it,” does this mean that God is like electricity 
that does not seem to have any independent intelligence 
of its cwn, but is just energy, something that goes 
“zoom?” Is God, as an “it,” something like that? 

The funny thing is it is very difficult to be a real 
atheist. In 1928 in the House of Parliament in England, 


the Church of England wanted a new revised prayer 


CHAPTER FOUR 


book. However, because the church and the state are 
inseparable in England, the houses of Parliament had to 
vote on whether the new prayer book might be used. 
Somebody got up and said, “It is perfectly ridiculous 
that an assemblage which contains a number of atheists 
should vote on the inner politics of the Church of 
England.” But another member got up and said, “I don’t 
think there are any atheists here, not really. We all 
believe in some sort of a something somewhere.” 

Now in the theological world, it just doesn’t do to 
believe in “some sort of a something somewhere,” 
because one thing that theologians detest is vagueness. 
Even no God at all is preferred to vagueness, because at 
least atheism is clear and precise. You should hear what 
they say. “No beating around the bush old man. You 
know it is just fuzzy thinking to believe in a great univer- 
sal mind that is an undifferentiated aesthetic continuum, 
and that is all there is to ‘some sort of a something 
somewhere.’ This is woolly thinking. Either give us no 
God, or else give us a God with a definite character and 
a clear moral will and precise standards who will not be 
pushed around, a God with biblical quality.” 

What do you do? Do you separate your mind into 
two different compartments, in one of which you keep 
abreast of science and the modern world, while in the 
other you simply have nothing to do with all that? To 
combine those two compartments would make very dif- 
ficult the possibility of belief in the ludicrous proposi- 
tions that are usually called religion. But a lot of people 
want a religion that is difficult to believe in because they 
feel that difficult beliefs are a kind of a test of faith. 

So there is a possibility of that kind of God, and 
there is also the possibility of no God. Is life just this trip 
from the maternity ward to the crematorium, and is the 
purpose of religion just the improvement of that trip? 


DEMOCRACY IN THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 


That is to say, is the whole business of religion to get rid 
of poverty and war and exploitation and disease, or is 
there something else? Those who take the view that 
there is nothing else, which we will call the secular posi- 
tion in theology, are of course strongly influenced by 
contemporary philosophy—especially in that form that 
is called scientific empiricism or logical positivism— 
which maintains that the idea of God is not a fallacy, 
but is a meaningless idea. In other words, they maintain 
that the propositions that God exists, and that God is 
the origin and creator and governor of everything that is 
happening are utterly devoid of meaning. It is to them as 
if one were to say “Everything is up.” They maintain 
that no logical proposition whatsoever can be made 
about all propositions because all propositions are labels 
on boxes and you cannot have the box containing all 
boxes, because this box would have no outside, and 
therefore it would not be a box. All propositions, all 
words, must refer to classes of some kind, and you can- 
not have the class of all classes. 

Secularists also say that the notion of a God is 
meaningless on the grounds that it does not help you to 
make any predictions. Or they ask, What evidence would 
completely satisfy you as disproving the existence of 
God? And no believer in God can think of any evidence 
that would conclusively prove that there isn’t a God. 
Similarly, psychoanalysts are completely incapable of 
thinking of any evidence that would disprove the exis- 
tence of the Oedipus complex. So on logical grounds con- 
temporary philosophers take the position that the idea of 
God is a meaningless idea. And since many theologians 
are influenced by modern philosophy, they take these 
arguments seriously and would like to secularize the 
whole conception of religion or, to put it in Bonhoeffer’s 
words, “Have Christianity without religion.” 


CHAPTER FOUR 


When I hear someone say that there is nothing to 
life except the trip between the maternity ward and the 
crematorium, I recall having heard something like that 
before. When asked, “What is the Buddha?” a Chinese 
master replied, “It’s windy again this morning.” Another 
Buddhist master, on his deathbed, wrote the poem, 
“From the bathtub to the bathtub I have uttered stuff 
and nonsense.” This is the bathtub in which the baby is 
washed at birth and the bathtub in which the corpse is 
washed before burial. “All the time between,” he said, “I 
was going yakety-yak.” Now, do those poems mean 
what they say? Not quite. They are based on a life 
devoted to the discipline of a very particular kind of 
meditation that culminates in a completely shattering 
experience, which is very difficult to talk about. 
Generally speaking, it is the encounter with eternity, 
with the eternal—not necessarily in the sense of that 
which goes on and on through time, but the eternal as 
the timeless that transcends time and is beyond measure- 
ment in terms of hours and days. When a person who is 
in that state of consciousness, or has been through it, 
looks at the ordinary, everyday world, he sees the ordi- 
nary, everyday world as we see it, but with a very extra- 
ordinary difference. If we have to put that difference into 
some sort of Western, Christian-influenced language, he 
would perhaps say, “Don’t you realize that sitting 
around here in this room, with our ordinary, everyday 
faces and clothes and personalities, we are sitting smack 
in the middle of the beatific vision? This sitting here in 
this room is precisely infinity and eternity. It is it. This is 
the beatific vision. This is God.” 

In this meditation religion, they still have temples, 
they still have buddhas, and they still chant sutras and 
offer incense and ring gongs and all that kind of thing, 
but they also say that to really get to the highest level of 
religion you have to kill the Buddha. 


DEMOCRACY IN THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 


Supposing a clergyman got up one day in the pul- 
pit and said, “Every time you say Jesus Christ, you have 
to wash out your mouth.” Or, “If you meet God the 
Father, kill Him. If you meet God the Son, kill Him. If 
you meet God the Holy Spirit, kill It» If you meet Saint 
Augustine, kill him. Kill them all right away.” This is 
simply translating into Christian terms what a Buddhist 
teacher said in about the year 800 A.D. 

However, I do not think this “killing Buddha” is 
what is happening in the new theology. I think they are 
just getting rid of God. 

We are supposed to believe in the Ten Command- 
ments, and one of them says, “Thou shalt not make to 
thyself any graven image of anything that is in heaven 
above, or the earth beneath, nor bow down, nor worship 
them.” What I have been talking about—this killing of 
Buddha—is a destruction of idols, because the most dan- 
gerous graven images are not those that are made of 
wood and stone, they are those that are made of ideas. It 
is well known to the great mystical traditions all over the 
world that the supreme vision can only come when you 
have rid your mind of every idea of God whatsoever. It 
would be like cleaning a window on which somebody 
has painted blue sky. To see the true sky you have got to 
scrape off the paint. You may say, “My goodness, you 
shouldn’t take that nice blue painting off. It was done by 
a great artist. See how pretty the clouds are. You mustn’t 
do that because we won’t have any of the blue sky any- 
more.” But the great mystics have always ceased to cling 
to God, because the only God you can cling to is the 
idea of God. 

In order to discover God you have to stop clinging 
entirely. Why does one cling to God? For safety, of 
course. You want to save something; you want to save 
yourself. I don’t care what you mean by saved, whether 
it means just feeling happy, or that life is meaningful, or 


CHAPTER FOUR 


that there is somebody up there who cares. If you do not 
cling to one god, you cling to another: the state, money, 
sex, yourself, power. These are all false gods. But there 
has to come a time when clinging stops; only then does 
the time of faith begin. People who hold on to God do 
not have any faith at all, because real faith lies in not 
holding on to anything. 

In the Christian tradition this nonclinging is called 
the cloud of unknowing. There is a book about it writ- 
ten by a fourteenth-century British monk. He got it from 
a man called Dionysius the Areopagite, who had 
assumed the name of Saint Paul’s Athenian convert, a 
Syrian monk living in the sixth century. Meister 
Eckehart, Saint Thomas Aquinas, John Scotus Erigena, 
and many other great medieval theologians studied 
Dionysius the Areopagite. His book was The Theologica 
Mystica, in which he explained that, in order to come to 
full union with God, you must give up every conception 
of God whatsoever. And he enumerates the concepts 
that must be given up: don’t think that God is a oneness 
or a threeness or a unity or a spirit or any kind of any- 
thing that the human mind can conceive. He is beyond 
all that. 

This is called apophatic theology, a Greek term 
that contrasts with catophatic. When you speak 
catophatically you say what God is like. Dionysius also 
wrote a book of catophatic theology called The Divine 
Names. Catophatic theology tells what God is like 
according to analogy. He is like a father. We do not say 
God is a cosmic male parent but that he is, in some 
respect, like a father. This is the catophatic method. The 
apophatic method says what God is not. All those theolo- 
gians who followed Dionysius said that the highest way 
of talking about God is in negative terms, just as, to use 
Dionysius’s own image, when a sculptor makes a figure 


DEMOCRACY IN THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 


he does it entirely by removing stone, by taking away. In 
that same spirit, Saint Thomas Aquinas said, “Because 
God, by His infinity, exceeds every idea to which the 
human mind can reach, the best way to speak of Him is 
by removal.” That is, removing from our view of God 
every inadequate concept. This is what the Hindus refer 
to as neti neti, saying of the Brahman of the supreme 
reality, “It is not this, it is not this.” 

This intellectual operation of destroying concepts 
must go hand in hand with the psychological operation 
of ceasing to cling to any image whatsoever. Simply 
cease to cling, because there is no need to. There is no 
need to cling because when you were born you were 
kicked off a precipice. There was a big explosion, and 
you are falling, and a lot of other things are falling with 
you, including some pretty large lumps of rock, of which 
one is called the earth. It will not help you to cling to the 
rocks, when they are falling, too. It may give you an illu- 
sion of safety, but everything is falling, and falling apart. 
The ancients said, in the words of Heracleitus, “All is 
transient, all flows.” You cannot cling to anything; it is 
like grabbing at smoke with a nonexistent hand. 
Clinging only makes people anxious. 

When you come to the realization that you cannot 
cling to anything, that there is nothing to cling to, there 
transpires a change of consciousness that we can call 
either faith or letting go. In Sanskrit they put it this way: 
tat tvam asi, meaning literally “That are thou,” or as we 
would say, “You are it.” And if you are God, then you 
cannot have an idea of God any more than you can 
chew your own teeth. You do not need any idea of God. 
The sun does not need to shine on itself. Knives do not 
need to cut themselves. All the things you see on the out- 
side are states of the nervous system in the brain. When 
the Zen master suddenly discovered that carrying a pail 


CHAPTER FOUR 


with water in it was a miracle, he realized there isn’t 
anything except God. If you really know that, you don’t 
need to have a religion. You can have one, because it is a 
free world, but you don’t need one. All religion—any 
outward manifestation of religion—is pure gravy after 
that realization. It is like a man with lots of money mak- 
ing some more; it is quite unnecessary. 

According to the very best theologians, it was 
never necessary for God to create the world; it did not 
add anything to Him. He did not have to do it, was 
under no compulsion. He did it out of what Dionysius 
the Areopagite called—to anglicize it—super fullness, 
or, in other words, for kicks. We do not like using that 
kind of language in connection with God, but it is com- 
pletely contemporary and exactly right. That is what 
the Bible says, only it puts it in a more sedate way. It 
says, “His majesty did it for his pleasure.” That is the 
way you talk about somebody who is the king. As 
Queen Victoria said, “We are not amused.” 

It says in the Book of Proverbs that the divine wis- 
dom speaks as an attribute of God, but standing aside 
from God, in a sort of primitive polytheism. The god- 
dess Wisdom says that in the beginning of the world her 
delight was to play before the divine presence, and espe- 
cially to play with the sons of men. The word in 
Hebrew is “play,” but in the King James translation it is 
“rejoice,” because that is a more sedate word. You may 
rejoice in church, but not play. You may not have fun 
in church, but you may rejoice. Do you see the differ- 
ence? The point of the matter is that there was no rea- 
son to make the world, and it was done just to make 
celestial whoopee. Alleluia. That is why the angels are 
laughing. Only when you hear it in church, everybody 
has forgotten what alleluia means. Alleluia is like bird’s 
song. Bird song is not about anything, it is just for 


DEMOCRACY IN THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 


kicks. Why do you sing? Why do you like dancing? 
What is music for? For kicks. That is what alleluia is. 
When nothing is being clung to, one gets to the point 
where everything blows up. That is what is meant in 
Zen by satori, “sudden awakening.” You suddenly see, 
“Good heavens, what was I making all that fuss 
about?” Because here we are. This, right here, is what 
we have been looking for all the time. It was right here. 

Many little children know from the beginning 
what life is all about, only they haven’t got the words to 
tell us. That is the whole problem with child psycholo- 
gy. What child psychologists are looking for ideally is 
an articulate baby who can explain what it is like to be 
a baby, but they will never find one. By the time you 
teach a child to speak, you mess it up. You give it lan- 
guage, but it can’t think big thoughts with this funny, 
limited language, especially using the words children are 
started out with. Then finally, when they’ve got the 
poor child completely hypnotized, they tell it the most 
preposterous things. They tell it that it must be free. 
They say, “You, child, are an independent agent, and 
you are responsible. Therefore we command you to love 
us. We require that you do something which will please 
us, and that you do it voluntarily.” And no wonder 
people are mixed up! 

I am afraid the new theology really is serious 
about there not being any God. The universe is there- 
fore in rather a pitiful predicament. This is a continua- 
tion of the nineteenth century’s philosophy of the fully 
automatic model, in which the universe is seen as essen- 
tially stupid, a mechanism, a gyration of blind energy in 
which human beings and human intelligence and values 
are flukes, and rather uncomfortable ones, because 
nature does not give a damn about us. And because it 
doesn’t, we have got to fight it. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


All of that is pure mythology. It is grossly unscien- 
tific, but most people believe it. It is common sense, 
today. But what an opportunity there is in the new the- 
ology, and in the whole ferment now going on, to get 
people to see another point of view, and realize that 
when you get rid of God, all you are doing is destroying 
an idol. All idols must be respectfully destroyed, but not 
the way those wretched Puritans went around destroying 
all the figures of saints in the stained glass windows in 
the medieval churches. That was a disrespectful icono- 
clasm. An example of respectful iconoclasm would be 
the ceremonial burning of the Bible every Easter Sunday, 
because if Jesus is truly risen from the dead, you do not 
need the Bible anymore, you do not need any books. 
Burn it ceremoniously, and with great respect, but not 
with too much seriousness, because certainly God does 
not take Himself seriously. If He did, I should not like to 
think what would happen. 


el 


THE IMAGES OF MAN 


CHAPTER FIVE 


want to start by giving what may be a new defini- 
tion of myth. Normally myth means tale, a fable, a 
falsehood, or an idea that is out of date, something 
untrue. But another older, stricter use of the word 
means not something untrue, but rather an image in 
terms of which people make sense of life and the world. 
For example, suppose you do not understand the techni- 
calities of electricity, and somebody wanted to explain 
about the flow of currents. He might compare electricity 
to water, and because you understand water, you may 
get some idea about the behavior of electricity. An 
astronomer explaining what he means by expanding 
space will use the metaphor of a balloon, a black balloon 


CHAPTER FIVE 


with white spots on it. The white spots represent the 
galaxies, and if you blow up the balloon, they all get far- 
ther away from each other at the same speed as the bal- 
loon blows up. We are not saying that electricity is 
water, or that the universe is the balloon with white 
spots on it, but that they are something like that. 

In the same way, the human being has always used 
images to represent his deepest ideas of the working of 
the universe, and man’s place in it. I am going to discuss 
certain aspects of two of the greatest myths, in this sense 
of the word, that have influenced mankind’s thinking. 
First is the myth of the universe as an artifact, something 
made as a carpenter makes tables, chairs, houses, or as a 
potter makes pots, or a sculptor makes figurines. The 
other is the image of the world as a drama, in which all 
the things in the world are not made, but acted, in the 
same way as a player acts parts. These are the two great 
images that govern respectively the religions of the West 
descended from Hebraism—Hebraism itself, Christ- 
ianity, Islam—and the religions of the East, with their 
origin in India: Hinduism in particular, and to a lesser 
extent, Buddhism. 

I want to make it perfectly plain, before I go any 
further, that in talking about these two great religious 
traditions in terms of images, I am talking about the 
way they express themselves at a rather popular level. 
Sophisticated Christians and Hindus think beyond 
images. For example, a Christian may think of God as 
the father, but a sophisticated and educated Christian 
does not imagine that God is a cosmic male parent with 
a white beard sitting on a golden throne above the stars. 
Nor does a Hindu imagine literally that God is the 
super showman, the big actor. These images are what it 
is like, not what it is, and perhaps when I get through 
with discussing them we will be able to ask whether any 


THE IMAGES OF MAN 


of these images still make sense to us in this twentieth 
century, when we have a view of the world so powerfully 
shaped by Western science. 

I begin with a few aspects of the image of the 
world, and thus the image of man, as it comes to us 
from the Hebrew Bible. It says in the Book of Genesis 
that the Lord God created man out of the dust of the 
earth, as if He had made a clay figure of Adam. He blew 
the breath of life into its nostrils and the figurine became 
alive. It says that the figurine was made in the image of 
God. God, who is conceived in this particular image as a 
personal, living, intelligent spirit, creates in man some- 
thing similar. This is very definitely a creation, as the 
potter makes a pot out of clay. For the creature that the 
Lord God has made is not God. The creature is some- 
thing less than God, something like God but not God. 

Some very interesting consequences follow from 
this idea of the world as an artifact. What follows is that 
the whole universe is seen as a marvelous technological 
accomplishment. If it was created, there must be an 
explanation of how it was made, and the whole history 
of Western thought has in many ways been an attempt 
to discover how the creator did it. What were the princi- 
ples; what laws were laid down; what is the blueprint 
that underlies this creation? This image has persisted 
throughout Western history, and continues on into a 
time when very many people do not believe in 
Christianity, or Judaism, or Islam. They are agnostics or 
atheists, but they still carry with them something of this 
idea of the world as an artifact. If you are a Christian or 
a Jew, you believe that the world is an artifact of cre- 
ation of the intelligent spirit called God. But if you are 
an atheist or an agnostic in this culture, you believe that 
the world is an automatic machine without a creator, 
something that made itself. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


We might say that our original model of the uni- 
verse was the ceramic model. The Bible is full of refer- 
ences to God as the potter who makes the world out of 
obedient clay. And even when Western thinkers in the 
eighteenth century began to drop the idea of a personal 
God, they still kept the idea of the artifact. So we could 
say that after the ceramic model of the universe, we got 
the fully automatic model. 

Underlying our way of thinking about things is the 
question, How are they put together? And if you want to 
find out, one of the obvious ways to proceed is to take 
them to pieces. Everybody knows that if you want to 
find out how something is made, you unscrew the parts 
and see what the secret is inside the box. So Western sci- 
ence in its beginnings took everything apart. It took ani- 
mals apart; it took flowers apart; it took rocks apart. 

When they got everything reduced to its tiniest 
pieces, they tried to find methods for taking those apart, 
too, so that we could eventually discover what the very 
smallest things were, and learn what method the creator, 
or the fully automatic universe, used in putting every- 
thing together. It was hoped that this would lead us to 
an understanding of how life works. Man himself was 
also looked on as a creation, as something that had been 
made. But there were some difficulties with this idea, 
because if you believe in the world in accordance with 
the fully automatic model, you really have got to admit 
that man, too, must be fully automatic, a machine rather 
than a person. Man, then, doffs his hat and says, “How 
do you do? I am a person. I am alive. I am sensible. I 
talk, I have feelings.” But you wonder, “Does he really, 
or is he just an automaton?” 

Under the dispensation of the fully automatic 
model, the Western image of man is that we are very 
sensitive, living beings, and that inside the human skin, 


THE IMAGES OF MAN 


by an extraordinary fluke of nature, there has arisen 
something called reason. There have also arisen “val- 
ues,” such as love. But these were flukes because they 
happened inside a fully automatic universe that, because 
it is merely automatic, must be stupi& In other words, 
you won’t find anything really intelligent outside human 
skins. Therefore, the only thing that people can do if 
they want to maintain reason and love in this universe is 
to fight nature, and beat the stupid, external world into 
submission to the human will. So the war against nature 
is the great project of Western technology thus far, 
because each one of us has inherited from thousands of 
years of history a view of man as something made of 
breath breathed into a pot of clay. Each one feels himself 
to be a globule of consciousness or mind living inside a 
vehicle called “my body.” Since the world outside that 
body is stupid, we feel estranged from the world. 

When we find out how enormous the universe is, 
that makes us feel extremely unimportant and rather 
lonely, because our basic image of ourselves is of a soul, 
an ego, a mind by itself in its little house, looking out at 
a world that is strange, and saying, “That is not me.” I 
am therefore a brief interval of consciousness between 
the darkness and the darkness. That is not too happy a 
thought. I would like to be able to believe that there is 
more to life than that. Many of us say, “If only I could 
believe that there is an intelligent and eternal God in 
whose eyes I am important, and who has the power to 
enable me to live forever, that would be very nice.” But 
for many people that is an extraordinarily difficult thing 
to believe. 

I want to contrast this ceramic image of the world 
with the distinctly different dramatic image, which is the 
presiding image of the Hindus. Their idea is that God 
did not make the world, but acted it. That is to say, 


CHAPTER FIVE 


every person and every thing is a role or part that the 
Godhead is playing. Of course, the Hindu image of God 
is a little bit different from the Jewish, the Christian, and 
the Islamic image. When I was a little boy, I used to ask 
my mother interminable questions. When she got sick of 
it, she said, “My dear, there are some things in life that 
we are just not meant to know.” And I said, “Will we 
ever know?” And she said, “Yes, if you die and then go 
to heaven, God will explain it all.” 

I used-to hope that on rainy afternoons in heaven 
we would all sit around the throne of grace and ask the 
Lord, “Why did you do this?” and “Why did you do 
that?” And He would explain. 

Every child in the West asks his mother, “How 
was I made?” No person knows, but we think that per- 
haps God knows, and He will be able to explain. 
Likewise, if anybody becomes mentally deranged and 
claims to be God, we always humor such people by ask- 
ing them technical questions, “How did you make the 
world in six days?” or, “If you are God, why couldn’t 
you change this plate into a rabbit?” We do this because, 
in our popular image of God, God is the supreme tech- 
nocrat. He knows all the answers. He understands every- 
thing in detail and can tell you all about it. 

The Hindus don’t think of God that way. If you 
ask the Hindu God, “How did you create the human 
body?” He would say, “I know how I did it, but it can’t 
be explained in words because words are too clumsy. In 
words I have to talk about things slowly. I have to string 
them out, because words run in a line, and lines add up 
to books, and books add up to libraries. If I explain to 
you how I made the human organism, it will take all 
eternity. I don’t have to understand things in words in 
order to make them happen. Nor do you.” You don’t 
have to understand in words how to breathe. You just 


THE IMAGES OF MAN 


breathe. You don’t have to understand in words how to 
grow your hair, how to shape your bones, how to make 
your eyes blue or brown, you just do it. And somebody 
who does understand to some extent—a physiologist, 
perhaps—can’t do it any better than you. 

That is the Hindu idea of divine omnipotence, and 
that is why their images of the gods very often have 
many arms. You will often see the god Shiva with ten 
arms, or the Buddhist Avalokiteshvara with one thou- 
sand arms. Their image of the divine is of a sort of cen- 
tipede. A centipede can move a hundred legs without 
having to think about it, and Shiva can move ten arms 
very dexterously without having to think about them. 
You know what happened to the centipede when it 
stopped to think how to move a hundred legs; it got all 
balled up. So the Hindus do not think of God as being a 
technician in the sense of having a verbal or mathemati- 
cal understanding of how the world is created. It is just 
done simply, like that. If we had to describe this simple 
way in words it would be very complicated, but God, in 
the Hindus’ idea, does not need to do so. 

The Hindu does not see any fundamental division 
between God and the world. The world is God at play; 
the world is God acting. How did they arrive at such an 
idea? Very simply. When you try to think about why 
there is a world at all, you realize it is extraordinarily 
odd that there should be anything. It would have been 
much simpler and would have required a great deal less 
energy for there to have been nothing. But here every- 
thing is. Why? Well, what would you do if you were 
God? Suppose that every night you could dream any 
dream you wanted. What would you dream? I am quite 
sure that most of us would dream of all the marvelous 
things we wanted to have happen to us. We would fulfill 
all our wishes. We might go on that way for months, 


CHAPTER FIVE 


and we could make it extraordinarily rich by dreaming 
seventy-five years full of glorious happenings in one 
night. 

After you had done that for a few months, though, 
you might begin to get a little tired of it and say, “What 
about an adventure tonight, in which something terribly 
exciting and rather dangerous is going to happen? But | 
will know I am dreaming so it won’t be too bad, and I’ll 
wake up if it gets too serious.” So you do that for a 
while; you rescue princesses from dragons, and all sorts 
of things. Then after doing that for some time, you 
might say, “Let’s go a bit further. Let’s forget it’s a 
dream, and have a real thrill.” Ooh! But you know you 
will wake up. Then, after you have done that for a 
while, you will dare yourself to get out as far as you can, 
and you will end up dreaming the life you are living 
right now. 

The reason for this, the Hindu would say, is that 
the basic pulse of life, the basic motivation of existence, 
is like the game of hide-and-seek. Now you see it, now 
you don’t. Everything is based on that; all life is vibra- 
tion, pulsation. Light is a pulsation of light and dark. 
Sound is a pulsation of sound and silence. Everything is 
going back and forth at various speeds. The motion of a 
wave consists of two pulses, the crest and the trough. 
You can’t have crests without troughs; you can’t have 
troughs without crests. They always go together. You 
can’t have hide without seek; you can’t have seek with- 
out hide. You can’t have here without there; if you didn’t 
know where there was, you wouldn’t know where here 
was. You can’t have is without isn’t, because you don’t 
know what you mean by is unless you also know what 
you mean by isn’t, and vice versa. 

Hide-and-seek is the fundamental game of the uni- 
verse, in the Hindu view. It is as if the Lord God, or 


THE IMAGES OF MAN 


Brahman, had said in the beginning, “Get lost, man. 
Disappear. I’ll find you again later.” When the disap- 
pearance gets very far out, the contrary rhythm begins, 
the dreamer wakes up and says, “Whoo, that’s a relief.” 
Then after a period of rest, in which everything is at 
peace, it starts all over again. The spirit of adventure 
springs eternal. 

The Hindus, for their period in history, had 
extremely vast ideas of space and time. They had the 
theory that the hiding part of the universal game goes on 
for 4,320,000 years; a period called a kalpa in Sanskrit. 
The “dreaming” part is followed by the “waking” part. 
The dreaming is the hiding where the Godhead imagines 
that it is all of us. Then for another 4,320,000 years 
there is a period of awakening, and at the end of that 
begins the dream again. The dreaming period is further 
subdivided into four stages. The first stage is the longest, 
and it is the best. During that stage, the dream is beauti- 
ful. The second stage is not quite so long, and is a little 
unsettling. There is an element of instability in it, a cer- 
tain touch of insecurity. In the third stage, which is 
shorter still, the forces of light and the forces of dark- 
ness—or good and evil—are equally balanced, and 
things are beginning to look rather dangerous. In the 
fourth stage, the shortest of them all, the negative, dark, 
or evil side triumphs, and the whole thing blows up in 
the end. But that is like the bang in a dream when you 
get shot, and you wake up, and see it was just a dream 
after all. There is a waking period, and then the whole 
thing starts again. 

You will notice, if you make the computation, that 
in this drama the forces of the dark side are operative for 
one-third of the time; the forces of the light side for two- 
thirds of the time. This is a very ingenious arrangement; 
we see in it the fundamental principles of drama. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


Suppose this is not a lecture tonight but a show. There 
are actors coming on the stage, but they are real people 
like you. In order for you not to see them in that way, 
they are going to put on their costumes and makeup, 
and then they are going to come out in front here and 
pretend to various roles. And you know you want to be 
half convinced that what they are doing on the stage is 
real. The work of a great actor is to get you sitting on 
the edge of your chair, anxious, or weeping, or roaring 
with laughter, because he has almost persuaded you that 
what is on the stage is really happening. That is the 
greatness of his art, to take the audience in. 

In the same way, the Hindu feels that the Godhead 
acts his part so well that he takes himself in completely. 
And each one of you is the godhead, wonderfully fooled 
by your own act. And although you won’t admit it to 
yourself, you are enjoying it like anything. 

When you say “I am a person,” the word person is 
from the drama. When you open a play script and see 
the list of the actors, this is the dramatis personae, the 
persons of the drama. The word person in Latin is per- 
sona, meaning “through sound,” or something through 
which sound comes; the persona in Greek or Roman 
drama was the mask worn by the actors. And because 
they acted on an open-air stage, the mask’s mouth was 
shaped like a small megaphone that would project the 
sound. So the person is the mask. Isn’t it funny how we 
have forgotten that? Harry Emerson Fosdick could write 
a book called On Being a Real Person, which translated 
literally is, “How to be a genuine fake,” because in the 
old sense, the person is the role, the part played by the 
actor. But if you forget that you are the actor, and think 
you are the person, you have been taken in by your own 
role. You are “en-rolled,” or bewitched, spellbound, 
enchanted. 


THE IMAGES OF MAN 


Something else about the nature of drama is that 
there must be a villain, unless of course you are acting 
some kind of a nonplay that does not have any story. 
Fundamentally, all stories start out with the status quo. 
Everybody is just sort of going alorg, and then some 
problem comes in to upset everything. The interest of the 
play lies in the question, How are we going to solve that 
problem? It is the same when you play cards. If you are 
playing solitaire, you start by shuffling the deck, intro- 
ducing chaos. The game is to play order against chaos. 
In the drama there must be a villain, a dark side, so that 
the hero can play against him, and it. If you go to the 
theater for a good cry, then you let the villain win and 
you call it a tragedy. If you go for a thrill, you let the 
hero win. If you go for laughs, you call it a comedy. 
There can be various arrangements between the hero 
and the villain, but when the curtain goes down at the 
end of the drama, the hero and the villain always step 
out hand in hand and the audience applauds both. They 
do not boo the villain at the end of the play. They 
applaud him for acting the part of the villain so well, 
and they applaud the hero for acting the part of the hero 
so well, because they know that the hero and the villain 
are only roles, masks. 

Behind the stage is the green room. After the play 
is over, and before it begins, the masks are there. The 
Hindus feel that behind the scene, under the surface of 
reality, you are all actors, marvelously skilled at playing 
parts and in getting lost in the mazes of your own minds 
and the entanglements of your own affairs, as if this were 
the most urgent thing going on. But behind the scenes, in 
the green room—in the very back of your mind and the 
very depth of your soul—you always have a sneaking 
suspicion that you might not be the you that you think 
you are. The Germans call this a hintegedanka, a 


CHAPTER FIVE 


thought way back in your head that you will hardly 
admit to yourself, because if you were brought up in the 
Hebrew-Christian tradition, it would be very wicked 
indeed to think that you were God. That would be blas- 
phemy; and don’t you ever dare think such an idea! Of 
course this is all as it should be, because the show must 
go on until the time does come to stop. 

Now you will see that these different images of the 
universe involve two quite different ways of dealing with 
two fundamental questions. The first question is, What 
is man? That is, Who are you? In the Hebrew-Christian 
answer, we more or less say, “I’m me. I am Alan Watts, 
John Doe, or Mary Smith, and I firmly believe that’s 
who I am, because I really oughtn’t to think anything 
else, ought I?” And this “me” is a finite ego, or a finite 
mind, whatever that is. On the other hand, the Hindu 
will say that atman is what we really are. We’re the 
works, the which than which there is no whicher, the 
root and ground of the universe and of reality. 

The next question answered differently by the 
two traditions is, Why have things gone wrong? Why is 
there evil; why is there pain; why is there tragedy? In 
the Christian tradition you must attribute evil to some- 
thing besides God. God is defined as good, and He 
originally created the scheme of things without any evil 
in it. However, in a mysterious accident, one of the 
angels, called Lucifer, did not do what he was told. And 
there was the Fall of Man. Man disobeyed, and went 
against the law of God, and from that point on evil was 
introduced into the scheme of things and things began 
to go wrong, in defiance of the will of the perfectly 
good creator. 

The Hindu thinks in a different way. He feels that 
the creator or the actor is the author of both good and 
evil because, as I explained, you have to have the evil for 


THE IMAGES OF MAN 


there to be a story. In any case, it is not as if the creator 
had made evil and made someone else its victim. This is 
not saying “God creates the evil as well as the good, and 
he inflicts evil upon us poor little puppets.” The Hindu 
says, “Nobody experiences pain ex¢ept the Godhead.” 
You are not some separate little puppet who is being 
kicked around by omnipotence. You are omnipotence in 
disguise. So there is no victim of this, no helpless, 
defenseless, poor little thing. Even the baby with an 
incurable disease is the dreaming Godhead. 

This viewpoint makes people brought up in the 
West extremely uneasy, because it seems to undercut the 
foundations of moral behavior. They say, “If good and 
evil are created by God, isn’t this a universe in which 
anything goes? If I realize that I am God in disguise, I 
can get away with murder.” But think it through. Didn’t 
I point out that in the game as the Hindus analyze it, the 
evil part has one-third of the time and the good part has 
two-thirds? You will find out that all good games, games 
worth playing, that arouse our interest, are constructed 
like this. If you have the good and the evil equally bal- 
anced, the game is boring; nothing happens, it is a stale- 
mate. The irresistible force meets the immovable object. 
On the other hand, if it is mostly good and there is hardly 
any evil, maybe just a teenie little fly in the ointment, it 
also gets boring. For example, suppose you knew the 
future, and could control it perfectly. What would you 
do? You would say, “Let’s shuffle the deck and have 
another deal.” When great chess players sit down to a 
match and it suddenly becomes apparent to both of 
them that white is going to mate in sixteen moves and 
nothing can be done about it, they abandon the game 
and begin another. They do not want to continue if they 
already know the outcome. There would not be any 
“hide,” any element of surprise, if they knew. Again, 


CHAPTER FIVE 


good and evil equally balanced is not a good game, and 
a game with positive or good forces clearly triumphant is 
not an interesting game. What we want is a game where 
it always seems that the good side is about to lose, is in 
really serious danger of losing, but then always manages 
to sneak out a victory. In serial stories, at the end of 
every installment the hero is always in some absolutely 
impossible position—he’s going to be run over by a 
train, and he’s tied with his girlfriend to the rails. You 
know the author is going to get him out of his difficulty, 
but he mustn’t do it too obviously, because that would 
be boring, and you wouldn’t keep reading the install- 
ments. So what is necessary is a system in which the 
good side is always winning but is never the winner, 
where the evil side is always losing but is never the loser. 
That is a very practical arrangement for a game that will 
keep everybody interested. 

Watch this principle at work in practical politics. 
Every in-group of nice people finds that it needs an out- 
group of nasty people so that its members will know 
who they are. If you are part of the in-group, you must 
recognize that the out-group is your necessary enemy, 
whom you need. Therefore you mustn’t obliterate it, 
because if you do you are in a very dangerous state of 
affairs. So you have to love your enemies, and regard 
them as highly necessary adversaries to be respected. We 
need our enemies and they need us. The thing is to cool 
it and maintain what I call a contained conflict. When 
conflicts get out of: hand, all sides blow up. Of course I 
suppose even then there will be another game, in maybe 
a million years. 

Now, let me put these visions of the world together. 
If you believe the Christian, Hebrew, and Islamic view, 
you can’t admit the Hindu view, because if you are an 
orthodox Christian, an orthodox Protestant Bible type, 
or a Roman Catholic, the one thing you cannot believe is 


THE IMAGES OF MAN 


that you are God. But let us go back to Judaism for a 
minute and ask the question, “If Judaism is the true reli- 
gion, can Christianity also be true?” No, because the one 
thing in Christianity the Jew cannot admit is that Jesus 
Christ was God. It is unthinkable for a Jew that any man 
was indeed God in the flesh. 

The next question, then, is, If Christianity is the 
true religion, can Judaism also be true? The answer is 
yes, because all Christians are Jews. They have accepted 
the Jewish religion—in the form of the Old Testament— 
into their own religion. Every Christian is a Jew with a 
particular attitude toward Jesus of Nazareth. 

Let’s play this game once again and ask, “If 
Christianity is true, can Hinduism also be true?” The 
answer is no, because the Christians will say, “Jesus of 
Nazareth was God, but you are not.” 

The final question is, If Hinduism is true, can 
Christianity be true as well? The answer is yes, because 
it can include Christianity. But how? What attitude 
would a Hindu have toward a very sincere and con- 
vinced Christian? He would say, “Bravo, absolutely 
marvelous; what an actor! Here in this Christian soul 
God is playing His most extraordinary game. He is 
believing and feeling that He is not Himself, and not 
only that, but He is living only one life, and in that life 
He has got to make the most momentous decision imag- 
inable.” In the course of the Christian’s four score years 
and ten, he must choose between everlasting beatitude 
and everlasting horror. And he is not quite sure how to 
do it, because in Christianity there are two sins, among 
others, to be avoided. One is called presumption: know- 
ing surely that you are saved. The other is despair: 
knowing surely that you are damned. There is always a 
margin of doubt about being damned or saved, so you 
work out your salvation in fear and trembling. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


Thus Christianity is preeminently the gambler’s 
religion. Imagine you know at some great casino, late at 
night, that there is some marvelous master gambler who 
has been winning, winning, winning all night. Then sud- 
denly he decides to stake his whole winnings on whether 
the ball lands on red or black. Everybody gathers from 
all over the casino to watch this terrific gamble. In the 
same way, the predicament in which the Christian soul 
finds itself is this colossal gamble, in a universe that 
might possibly contain within it ultimate tragedy, an 
absolute, final, irremediable mistake. What a horror that 
thought is! So the Hindu is sitting in the audience fasci- 
nated by this Christian’s extraordinary gamble. He says, 
“That’s a beautiful game.” The Christian does not know 
it is a game, but the Hindu suspects it is. And he is a little 
bit admiring of it, but not quite involved. 

Perhaps you would say, “Once to every man and 
nation comes the moment to decide, in the strife twixt 
truth and falsehood, for the good or evil side. Then it is 
the brave man chooses while the coward stands aside.” 
That old song sounds great, doesn’t it? Commitment; 
stand up and be counted. This is a virtue, but on the 
other hand, there is another virtue, which is called being 
a good sport. If your enemy in the battle of life is to be 
regarded as an absolute enemy, pure evil as black as 
black can be, you cannot be a good sport and you can 
accord him no chivalry, no honors of battle. You have to 
annihilate him by any means possible, fair or foul. And 
that leads to some pretty sticky situations, especially 
when he has the means of annihilating you in just the 
same way. 

If, on the other hand, in all contests you know that 
while you are going to take it seriously and regard it as 
very important, in the back of your mind you know it is 
not ultimately important. Although it is very important, 


THE IMAGES OF MAN 


you are saved, and this enables you to be a good player. 
You may worry about the word play because we often 
use that word in a trivial sense: “You’re just playing. 
You mean life is nothing but a game.” The Hindus 
indeed call the creation of the universe the Jila, or the 
game, or the play of the divine. But we, too, use “play” 
in more profound senses. When you see Hamlet, which 
is by no means trivial, you are still seeing a play. In 
church the organist plays the organ. And in the Book of 
Proverbs, it is written that the divine wisdom created the 
world by playing before the throne of God. When we 
play music—even the music of Bach, to name a great 
master of what we call serious music—we are still playing. 

The Hindus see this world as “play,” in the deeper 
sense of the word, and therefore they see the intense situ- 
ations, personally, socially, and so on, in which we are 
all invelved not as bad illusions but as magnificent illu- 
sions, so well acted that they have got most of the actors 
fooled into forgetting who they are. When he has 
become fooled, man thinks of himself as a little creature 
that has come into this strange and foreign world, and is 
just a little puppet of fate. He has forgotten that the 
whole thing has, at its root, a playful self that is also 
your own self. 


RELIGION AND SEXUALITY 


CHAPTER SIX 


na very special and peculiar way, Western man is 

hung up on sex. The major reason for this is his 

religious background, which is quite unique among 

the religions of the world. I mean specifically 
Christianity, and in a secondary way, Judaism, insofar as 
Judaism in Europe and the United States is strongly 
influenced by Christianity. Of all religions in the world, 
Christianity is the one that is most uniquely preoccupied 
with sex, more so than tantric yoga or any kind of fertil- 
ity cult that has ever existed on the face of the earth. 
There has never been a religion in which sexuality was 
so important. 


ie 


CHAPTER SIX 


In popular speech, when you say a person is living 
in sin, you know very well that you do not mean that 
they are engaged in a business to defraud the public by 
the sale of badly made bread, or setting up a check 
forgery business. People who are living in sin are those 
who have an irregular sexual partnership. In the same 
way, when you say something is immoral, it most often 
means something sexually irregular. When I was a boy 
in school, I remember we used to have a preacher who 
came to us once every year, and he always talked on the 
subject of drink, gambling, and immorality. The way he 
rolled it around his tongue, it was very clear what 
immorality was. 

Most churches in America, England, and other 
parts of the Western world are, frankly, sexual regula- 
tion societies, and precious little else. They occasionally 
get excited about other moral issues, but really not very 
often. To prove this you only have to ask what people 
can be thrown out of a church for. A person can live in 
envy, hatred, malice, and all uncharitableness and still be 
in perfectly good standing. But the moment anything 
about their sexual life becomes a little unusual, out they 
go, and that is about the only thing for which they can 
be removed. 

For example, the Roman Catholic manuals of 
moral theology are technical books about sins of all 
kinds—what they are, how they are done, how grave 
they are—mostly for the advice of confessors. They are 
always arranged according to the Ten Commandments, 
and “Thou shalt not commit adultery” occupies two- 
thirds of the whole book, with all the details. 

In a very special way, we have got sex on the 
brain, which is not exactly the right place for it. This 
needs examination, because it is not as simple as it 
looks. There are really two roots of the problem. One of 


RELIGION AND SEXUALITY 


them is the question of why, of all pleasures, religious 
people are particularly afraid of sexual pleasure. This is 
true not only of Christianity. Christianity emphasizes it 
in a certain way, but in Asian religions also, and espe- 
cially in India, there is a prevailing vitw that if you want 
to attain real heights of spirituality, the one thing you 
must give up is sexuality, in the ordinary sense of genital 
sexual relationships. This reflects an attitude to the phys- 
ical world, because it is through sexuality that we have, 
along with eating, our most fundamental relationship to 
materiality, to nature, to the physical universe. It is also 
the point at which we can become most attached to the 
body, to the physical organism and to material life. That 
is one reason why sexuality is problematic. 

The other reason, which is more subtle, is that sex- 
uality is something you cannot get rid of. Do what you 
may, life is sexual, in the sense that you are either male 
or female. There are various other gradations, but basi- 
cally they are all forms of maleness and femaleness. And, 
of course, every one of you is the result of sexual inter- 
course. This sexual feature of life can be looked at in one 
of two ways. You can say, on the one hand, that all 
man’s higher ideals, his spirituality and so forth, are sim- 
ply repressed sexuality; on the other hand, you can say 
that human sexuality is a physical manifestation, a par- 
ticular form or expression of what is spiritual, metaphys- 
ical, or divine. I hold to the latter view. I do not think 
that religion is repressed sexuality. Sexuality is just one 
of the many forms in which whatever all this is expresses 
itself. And sexuality is something you cannot get rid of. 
A way of life in which sexuality is in some way put 
down or repressed is nonetheless an expression of sexu- 
ality. If you realize this, then you come to a view of 
Christianity in which sex is a very special and unusual 
taboo. 


CHAPTER SIX 


And sex is taboo in Christianity; there is simply no 
getting around that. Up-to-date ministers today say sex 
is all right if you are married and you have a mature 
relationship with a member of the opposite sex. But if 
you read anything in Christian writings prior to approxi- 
mately 1850, you will find that it is not all right at all. It 
is tolerated between married couples for the procreation 
of children, but on the whole it is best to do without. As 
Saint Paul put it, it is better to marry than to burn in 
hell. In all the writings of the church fathers from Saint 
Paul himself to Saint Ignatius Loyola to any of the great 
relatively modern leaders of Catholic spirituality, to 
Calvin and the great Protestants like John Knox, on the 
whole sex is sin and sex is dirt. 

You can say very simply that this is very wrong, but 
I want to point out that there is another side to sexual 
prohibition. There is no way of making a hedge grow 
like pruning it. There is no way of making sex interest- 
ing like repressing it. Therefore, as a result of all these 
centuries of sexual repression and associating it with 
dirt, the West has developed a peculiar form of eroti- 
cism. That is an aspect of this whole problem that I do 
not think is really very profitable to explore, but I just 
want to mention in passing that the whole attitude of 
anti-sexuality in the Christian tradition is not as “anti” 
as it looks. It is simply a method of making sex prurient 
and exciting in a kind of dirty way. I suppose it is to be 
recommended to people who are not feeling very frisky 
and need to be pepped up. 

The other side of the problem is much more inter- 
esting. That is, Why is pleasure a problem for human 
beings? We take sexual activity to be a supreme pleasure, 
and as a supreme involvement of oneself with the body 
and the physical world. Why should there be a problem 
with that? The answer is simply that the physical world 


RELIGION AND SEXUALITY 


is transient and impermanent; it falls apart. Bodies that 
were once strong, smooth, and lovely wither and become 
corrupt and turn at last into skeletons. If you cling to 
one of those bodies and it suddenly turns into a skeleton 
in your arms, as it will if you speéd up your sense of 
time a little, you will feel cheated. There has been for 
centuries a lament about this. Life is so short, and all the 
beauties of this world fall apart. Therefore, if you are 
wise you do not set your heart on mortal beauty, you set 
your heart on spiritual values that are imperishable. 
Even Omar Khayyam says, “The worldly hope men set 
their hearts upon turns to ashes—or it prospers, and 
anon, like snow upon the desert’s dusty face, lighting a 
little hour or two, is gone.” So do not bet on that horse. 

If you read any kind of spiritual literature, whether 
Christian, Buddhist, Hindu, or Taoist, you will find they 
all seem to emphasize the importance of detachment 
from the body, from the physical world, so that you 
won’t be engulfed in the stream of impermanence. The 
idea is that, to the degree that you identify yourself with 
the body and with the pleasures of the body, you are 
simply identifying with something that will be sucked 
away in the course of transience. Therefore hold yourself 
aloof, advise many Hindus who practice yoga, and look 
on all sensory experiences as something out there, that 
you simply witness. You are to identify yourself with the 
eternal, spiritual, unchanging self—the witness of all that 
goes on—and are to be no more involved in the transi- 
tory than a mirror is involved in the things it reflects. 
Keep your mind pure and clean, free from dust, free 
from flaws, free from stain, and like a mirror just reflect 
everything that goes on without being attached. 

It has always seemed to me that this attitude of 
essential detachment from the physical universe raises 
then the very serious question of why then have a physical 


CHAPTER SIX 


universe at all? If God is in some way responsible for the 
existence of creation, and if this creation is basically a 
snare, why did He do it? 

According to some theologies, the physical uni- 
verse is looked on as a mistake, as a fall from the divine 
state, as if something went wrong in the heavenly 
domain, causing spirits, such as we are, in fact, to fall 
from their highest state and become involved with ani- 
mal bodies. There is an ancient analogy, which runs 
right through to the present time, that your relationship 
to your body is that of a rider to a horse. Saint Francis 
called his body Brother Ass. You are a rational soul in 
charge of an animal body, and therefore if you belong to 
the old school, you beat it into submission. Or if you are 
a Freudian you treat your horse not with a whip but 
kindly, with lumps of sugar; but it is still your horse. 
Even in Freud there is a very strong element of 
Puritanism. Read Phillip Rieff’s book, Freud: The Mind 
of the Moralist. In it he shows that Freud basically 
thought that sex was something degrading, though nev- 
ertheless unavoidable and terribly necessary, which 
could not be swept aside but had to be dealt with. But 
there is still in this the heritage of thinking of ourselves 
as divided, of the ego as the rational soul of spiritual ori- 
gin and the physical body as the animal component. 
Therefore, in this heritage, all spiritual success requires 
the spiritualization of the animal component, the subli- 
mation of its dirty and strange urges. I suppose the ideal 
sexual relationship of such persons would be held on an 
operating table under disinfectant sprays. 

Of course, it is true that the physical world and its 
beauty is transient. We are all falling apart in some way 
or other, especially after we pass the peak of youth. But 
this has never struck me as something to gripe about. 
That the physical world is transient seems to be part of 


RELIGION AND SEXUALITY 


its splendor. I can imagine nothing more awful than 
attaining the age of thirty and suddenly being frozen in 
that age for always. You would become a kind of ani- 
mated waxworks; people with a physical permanence 
like that would feel like plastic. As d matter of fact, that 
is what is going to be done about us by technology in 
order to provide perpetual youth. All the parts of our 
bodies that decay and fold up are going to be replaced 
by very skillfully manufactured plastic parts, so that in 
the end we will be entirely made of very sophisticated 
plastic. Everybody will feel like plastic, and everybody 
will be utterly bored with each other, because the very 
fact that the world is always decaying and falling away 
is the source of its very vitality. Vitality is change. Life is 
death; it is always falling apart. 

There are certain supreme moments when, in the 
body, we attain superb vitality. It is just like when an 
orchestra is playing and the conductor wants a certain 
group of violinists to come in at a certain moment, and 
they do. That is the whole art of life, to do it at the right 
time. In the same way, when it comes to love, sexuality, 
or, equally, all the pleasures of gastronomy, timing is of 
the essence. You have them for a moment, and then they 
are gone, but that is not something that one should look 
on with regret. It is regrettable only if you don’t know 
how to accept it when its moment arrives. 

This is really the essence of what I want to talk 
about, because to be detached from the world, in the 
sense that Buddhists and Taoists and Hindus often talk 
about detachment, does not mean to be nonparticipa- 
tive. You can have a very rich and full sexual life, and 
yet all the time be detached. By that I do not mean that 
you just go through it mechanically and have your 
thoughts elsewhere. I mean a complete participation, but 
still detached. The difference between the two attitudes 


CHAPTER SIX 


is this: On the one hand, there is a way of being so anx- 
ious about physical pleasure, so afraid that you won’t 
make it, that you grab it too hard and destroy it com- 
pletely. After every failed attempt to get it you feel disap- 
pointed and empty; you feel something was lost, and so 
you have to keep repeating, repeating, repeating. This is 
the hang-up. This is what is meant by attachment to this 
world, in the negative sense of the word. Pleasure in its 
fullness cannot be experienced when one is grasping it. 

I knew a little girl to whom someone gave a bunny 
rabbit. She was so delighted with it and so afraid of los- 
ing it that taking it home in the car she squeezed it to 
death. Lots of parents do that to their children, and to 
each other. They hold on too hard, and so take the life 
out of this transient, beautifully fragile thing that life is. 
To have life and its pleasure you must, at the same time, 
let go of it. Then you can feel perfectly free to have that 
pleasure in the most gutsy, rollicking, earth-shaking, lip- 
licking way, with one’s whole being taken over by a kind 
of undulative, convulsive ripple, like the very pulse of 
life itself. But, this can happen only if you let go, if you 
are willing to be abandoned. 

That word, abandoned, is funny. We speak of peo- 
ple who are dissolute as being abandoned, but aban- 
doned is also a characteristic of a saint. A great spiritual 
book by a Jesuit father is called Abandonment to Divine 
Providence. There are people who just are not hung up. 
They are those who, out of their spirituality, do not cling 
to any property. They do not carry burdens around. 
They are free, and just that sort of let-go-ness is quite 
essential for the enjoyment of any kind of pleasure at all, 
and particularly sexual pleasure. 

I do not know how typical this would be of chil- 
dren brought up in a religious environment in the United 
States, but my experience as a boy in school in England 


RELIGION AND SEXUALITY 


was quite fascinating. When a child is baptized and is 
too young to know anything about its meaning, its god- 
father and godmother are the sponsors. When you are 
about to enter into puberty, however, and are con- 
firmed, you yourself undertake Your own baptismal 
vows. In confirmation into the Church of England, 
which is Episcopalian in this country, confirmation is 
preceded by instruction. In England this instruction con- 
sisted very largely of lessons in church history, because 
the British approach to religion is peculiarly archeologi- 
cal, based on the great Christian saints and heroes of the 
past. It is really quite interesting, because it somehow 
associates you with the tradition of King Arthur and the 
Knights of the Round Table, and all that sort of thing. 
But the time comes when every candidate for confirma- 
tion has a private talk with the school chaplain. In every 
process of initiation into mysteries, from time immemor- 
ial, there has been the passing on of a secret. So there is 
a certain anticipation about this very private communi- 
cation, because you would think that, being initiated 
into a religion, the secret would consist of some mar- 
velous information about the nature of God or the fun- 
damental reason for being. But it is not so. Instead, the 
initiatory secret talk was a serious lecture on the evils of 
masturbation. What these evils were was not clearly 
specified, but it was vaguely hinted that ghastly diseases 
would result. So, in a perverse sort of way, we candi- 
dates for confirmation used to enjoy tormenting our- 
selves with imagining what kind of terrible 
diseases—venereal disease, epilepsy, tuberculosis, or the 
great Siberian itch—would result from this practice. 

The extraordinary thing is that the very chaplain 
who gave these lectures had, in his own upbringing, been 
given the same lecture by other chaplains, and I imagine 
this went back some distance in history. Of course they 


CHAPTER SIX 


all knew perfectly well that one of the characteristic 
behavior patterns of adolescence is ritual defiance of 
authority. You have to make some protest against 
authority, and in doing so you are in league with all 
your contemporaries, your peer group. Nobody would 
dream of giving anybody else away, because then he 
would be a tattletale, a skunk, and definitely not one of 
the boys. Therefore, obviously, masturbation provided 
the ideal outlet for this ritual defiance because it was 
fun, it was also an assertion of masculinity, and it was 
very, very wicked. 

In the religious background of the Western world, 
we have mainly two traditions, one is Semitic, and the 
other is Greek. So far as the Semitic tradition is con- 
cerned, the material world and sexuality are definitely 
good things. Both Jews and Muslims think that God’s 
creation of beautiful women was a grand idea. The 
Perfumed Garden, the Arabic book that is the Islamic 
version of the Kama Sutra, opens with a prayer to Allah 
that is a very full, detailed thanksgiving for the loveliness 
of women, with which Allah has blessed mankind. In the 
Book of Proverbs, we are enjoined to enjoy our wives 
while they are young. But even so, on the whole it is the 
Semitic belief that sexuality is justified solely for pur- 
poses of reproduction. This is what makes it good in the 
eyes of God, and that is the limitation put on it. Sexual 
energy should not really be wasted for other purposes. 

In contrast to this we have a Greek tradition that 
was strongly influenced by a dualistic view of the uni- 
verse, in which material existence is conceived of as a 
trap, a fall into turgid, clogging matter that is antagonis- 
tic to the lightness and freedom of the spirit. Therefore, 
for certain kinds of Greek religions—among which we 
must name the Orphic Mysteries, the Neoplatonic point 
of view, and the late agnostic points of view—being 


| 100 


RELIGION AND SEXUALITY 


saved means being delivered from material existence into 
a purely spiritual state. From this point of view, sexual 
involvement is the very archetype of material environ- 
ment—martyr, mother, mater, and matter, are really the 
same word. So the love of woman is the great snare. 
This is, incidentally, a doctrine invented by men. It goes 
back to the words of Adam, “The woman that thou 
gavest me, she tempted me, and I did eat.” 

In the development of Christian theology, from 
approximately the time of Saint Paul through the begin- 
ning of the Renaissance, it was universally held that sex 
was a bad thing. Read Saint Augustine; he said that in 
the Garden of Eden before the Fall, reproduction took 
place in just the same place and with just the same lack 
of excitement as one excretes, or passes water. There 
was no shameful excitation of the sexual parts. The 
whole attitude of the church fathers in those centuries 
was that the virgin state was immensely superior spiritu- 
ally to the marriage state, and that sexual relationships 
were excusable only within the bonds of marriage and 
for the sole purpose of reproduction. The manuals and 
moral penitentiaries of the theologians of the Middle 
Ages list all sorts of penances that must be said, even by 
married couples who performed sexual intercourse on 
the night before attending mass or receiving Holy 
Communion. Of course, sex must be avoided completely 
on certain great church festivals. Although in theory 
marriage is a sacrament that somehow blesses this pecu- 
liar relationship, there is a definite attitude that even 
within that sacrament sex is still dirty and not very nice. 

You must realize, also, that in those days the insti- 
tution of marriage was not what it is today. Marriage at 
the time of the rise of Christianity was a social institu- 
tion for creating alliances between families. You did not 
marry the person of your choice except under the most 


CHAPTER SIX i 


unusual circumstances. You married the girl your family 
picked out for you, and they thought it over carefully 
from its political point of view, as well as from the point 
of view of eugenics, and economics. You married this 
girl even though you were not necessarily in love with 
her, and it was perfectly well understood in the secular 
world that on the side you had other arrangements. If 
you could afford them, you had concubines or even sec- 
ond and third and fourth wives. There was somewhat 
more freedom of choice about those subsidiary wives, 
but the first one was definitely a family arrangement. 
That is the context of the church’s saying that only that 
woman whose marriage has been arranged by paternal 
authority should be your bedfellow. 

The idea of romantic love does not arrive in con- 
nection with marriage until the troubadour cults of 
Provence in Southern France in the late Middle Ages. 
Then begins the idealization of woman as the inspiring 
goddess, and also the idea of the knight-errant. Dante’s 
Beatrice is the inspiring woman who leads him to heaven. 
Historians today are not agreed as to whether the 
ladyloves of the chivalrous knights were in fact their 
mistresses or were simply idealized women, but the 
influence of the cult of romantic love on the West was 
profound. And it brought about a weird combination of 
ideas: first, the notion of the married state being the only 
licit relationship in which sexual play might be carried 
on, and second, the notion that the girl you marry 
should be the one with whom you have fallen in love. 
Two more ill-adjusted ideas could hardly be put together, 
because naturally when you love someone very much 
indeed, in your enthusiasm to become involved you say 
things that are hardly logical, or rational. You may 
stand up before an altar and say, “My darling, my 
sweetheart, my perfect pet, I adore you so much that I 


RELIGION AND SEXUALITY 


will live with you forever and ever, until death do us 
part.” Although that is the way you feel at the time, this 
level of enthusiasm may not last. In a rather similar 
mood, ancient people would hail their kings and say, “O 
King, live forever.” Obviously this was not meant lit- 
erally; they were just wishing him a long life. 

The trouble was that when that kind of extrava- 
gant poetic expression fell into the hands of people like 
Augustine and Totalian, who were rather influenced by 
Roman literalists, they wrote it into the law books. 
Thereby an amazing situation came about, and we still 
have not fully explored its subtlety. Consider certain 
periods when this attitude of prudery toward sexuality 
was in ascendancy. Nearest to our time is the bourgeois 
revolution in Victorian England and the United States. 
Victorian is usually a term of invective indicating 
extreme monogamy and a definite disgust for all things 
sexual. Yet, when really examining the history of the 
Victorian period, we find that it was an extremely lasciv- 
ious epoch. One has only to look at the lushness of 
Victorian furniture to realize that chairs were disguised 
women; even the way piano legs were shaped reflects 
this influence. 

People like Freud and Havelock Ellis made a cer- 
tain mistake. They said the church, and religion in gen- 
eral, was nothing but a form of sublimated sex. They 
said, “For whatever curious reasons these people sup- 
pressed sex, and therefore it became a very powerful 
force for them.” To understand this you must remember 
that they used a hydraulic analogy of human psycholo- 
gy. They likened it to a river—if you dammed it up, it 
could burst the dam. It does not actually follow that 
human psychology is akin to hydraulics, but this is the 
metaphor Ellis and Freud used. They said, “The church 
has repressed sex, but if you look at its symbolism you 


103 


CHAPTER SIX 


will see that it is actually a robust expression of sexual- 
ity. Everything is reduced to libido as the fundamental 
reality,” they said. The church replied to this by saying, 
“It is nothing of the kind. Reducing the church to 
repressed sex is just a way of attacking holy things, and 
on the contrary, we would say that people who are fas- 
cinated with sex and make it their god are repressing 
religion.” 

The problem in this debate is that everybody has 
missed the boat. The church should have said to Freud, 
“Thank you very much. Yes indeed, our symbolism is 
sexual. The steeples of our churches, the vesicle-shaped 
windows and heraldic shields on which we put images of 
the crucifix or the Virgin Mother of God, these are all 
quite plainly sexual. However, the sexual form reveals 
the mysteries of the universe. Sex is not mere sex. It is a 
holy thing, and one of our most marvelous revelations of 
the divine.” But the church just could not say that. 

When one looks at Tibetan Buddhist iconography 
and images, or Hindu temples, one finds things that 
Europeans and Americans have never been able to 
understand. Here are images of buddhas and the gods 
engaged in amazing diversions with their female counter- 
parts. Everybody thinks that these are dirty sculptures, 
but they are nothing of the kind. They reveal to the peo- 
ple who look at them that the play of man and woman 
is, on the level of biology, a reflection of the fundamental 
play of the cosmos. The positive and negative principles, 
the light and the dark, the mental and the material, all 
play together. The purpose of sexual play is not merely 
the utilitarian function of reproducing the species, as it 
seems to be among animals to a very large extent. What 
peculiarly distinguishes human sexuality is that it brings 
the partners closer and closer to each other in an intense 
state of united feeling. In other words, it is a sacrament, 


104 


RELIGION AND SEXUALITY 


the outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual 
grace, that brings about love. So, as that union seems to 
be peculiar to human beings, it is perfect nonsense to 
degrade human sexuality by saying it should only be car- 
ried on in the way that animals must, because they have 
not yet evolved to the place where sex is a sacramental 
expression of love. Falling in love, while considered by 
practical people to be a sort of madness, is actually the 
same sort of thing as the mystical vision, or grace. In this 
light we see people in their divine aspect. When the song 
says “Every little breeze whispers Louise,” it is singing 
that there is a sort of extraordinary state of mystical 
intoxication in which every woman becomes a goddess 
and, likewise, every man becomes a god. 

What happened, however, as a result of this con- 
flict between the proponents of religion and the propo- 
nents of scientific naturalism was mutual name-calling. 
They have never come together because neither the 
church nor the opponents of the church has clearly 
understood that sexuality and all that goes with it is a 
triggering forth, on the level of biology, of what the 
whole universe is about—and that is ecstatic play. As a 
result, there has been a kind of compromise. In ecclesias- 
tical circles, sex is being damned with faint praise. 
People are saying, “After all, sex was made by God, and 
perhaps it is something more than reproduction, it may 
bring about the cementing of the marriage ties between 
husband and wife,” but in practice it remains the fright- 
ening taboo. 

At the same time, the opposition to Christian 
prudery always goes overboard in the direction of total 
license. So we have a contest between the people who 
want skirt hems down to the floor and the people who 
want them pulled up over the head, and it seems you 
have to draw the line somewhere. The play between 


105 


CHAPTER SIX 


these forces is over the question of where we shall draw 
the line, and that is very exciting play, providing neither 
side wins. Imagine what it would be like if the libertines 
won and they took over the church on Wednesday 
evenings so the young Presbyterian group could meet for 
prayer through sex. Every child would go to the school 
physician for a course in hygienics, and they would have 
classes and plastic models, and then the children would 
do it in class in a very hygienic atmosphere. Imagine 
how boring it would all become in this setting. So the 
people who say that modesty is important are saying 
something that is quite right. They must not be allowed 
to prevail, but they must not be obliterated either. In life 
the balance of oppositions works that way. 

To use an entirely different analogy, take a given 
biological group, a species we will call A. It has a natural 
enemy, B. One day A gets furious at its natural enemy B 
and says, “Let us obliterate B. They gather their forces 
and knock out their enemy. After a while, they begin to 
get weak and overpopulated. There is nobody around 
to eat up their surplus members, and they do not have to 
keep their muscles strong to defend against any enemy. 
They begin to fall apart because they have destroyed 
their enemy, and they remember that what they should 
do is cultivate the enemy. That is the real meaning of 
“Love your enemy.” There is such a thing as a beloved 
enemy. If the flies and the spiders did not have each 
other, there would be either too many spiders or too 
many flies. These balances maintain the course of 
nature. 

It is exactly the same with the libertines and the 
prudes. They need each other. If you have a prudish 
father and mother, you should be very grateful to them 
for having made sex so interesting. Still, every genera- 
tion must react to the one before it, and this keeps the 


RELIGION AND SEXUALITY 
tension going. It is by this play of opposites that we 


know separation and seek the love that makes the world 
go round. 


107 


