W AT T S 


Author of What Is Tao? 


A LAN 


WHAT IS ZEN? 


WHAT IS ZEN? 


ALAN WATTS 


FB 


wt Woe, 
NEW WORLD LIBRARY 
NOVATO, CALIFORNIA 


New World Library 
14 Pamaron Way 
Novato, California 94949 


Copyright © 2000 by Mark Watts 


Editors: Mark Watts, Marc Allen 
Cover design: Mary Ann Casler 
Text design: Tona Pearce Myers 
Interior calligraphy: Alan Watts 


All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced in whole or in 
part, or 
transmitted in any form, without written permission from the 
publisher, 
except by a reviewer, who may quote brief passages in a review; nor 
may 
any part of this book be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
trans 
mitted in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, 
recording, or other, without written permission of the publisher. 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 


Watts, Alan, 1915-1973. 
What is zen? / Alan Watts. 
p. cm. 

ISBN 1-57731-167-1 


1. Zen Buddhism—Essence, genius, nature. I. Title. 


BQ9265.9.W36 2000 
294.3’°927— 
dce21 00-062216 


First printing, October 2000 
ISBN 1-57731-167-1 
Printed in Canada on acid-free, recycled paper 
Distributed to the trade by Publishers Group West 


10987654321 


“Each one of you 

is perfect as you are. 

And you all could use 

a little bit of improvement.” 


— Suzuki Roshi, 


founder 
San Francisco Zen 


Center 


CONTENTS 


Introduction by Mark Watts 
Preface by Alan Watts 


Part I 
A Simple Way, A Difficult Way 


Part IT 
Zen Reconsidered 


Part III 
Space 


Part IV 
Zen Mind 


About the Author 


INTRODUCTION 
By Mark Watts 


Zen is a method of rediscovering the experience of being alive. It 
originated in India and China, and has come to the West by way of 
Japan, and although it is a form of Mahayana Buddhism, it is not a 
religion in the usual sense of the word. The aim of Zen is to bring 
about a transformation of consciousness, and to awaken us from the 
dream world of our endless thoughts so that we experience life as it is 
in the present moment. 


Zen cannot really be taught, but it can be transmitted through 
sessions of contemplation or meditation, called zazen, and through 
dialogues between student and teacher, called sanzen. In the 
dialogues between the student and Zen master the student comes 
squarely up against the obstacles to his or her understanding and, 
without making the answer obvious, the master points a finger toward 
the way. 


Zen has enjoyed an increasing popularity in Western literature. 
D.T. Suzuki’s book Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism was first 
published in the English language in 1907, and authors R. H. Blythe, 
Christmas Humphries, and Alan Watts all made early contributions to 
Zen literature in the West. Alan Watts wrote his first booklet on Zen 
in 1933, followed by his first book, The Spirit of Zen, in 1936 at the 
age of twenty-one. He moved from London to New York in 1938, and 
after spending nearly ten years in the Anglican Church headed west to 
California in 1950, where he began to teach Eastern thought at the 
American Academy of Asian Studies in San Francisco. 


There he met Japanese artist Sabro Hasegawa and beat poets Gary 
Snyder and Allen Ginsburg. His classroom lectures spilled over into 
the local coffeehouses, and in 1953 he began weekly live radio talks 
on Pacifica station KPFA in Berkeley, California. Early radio series 
included “The Great Books of Asia” and “Way Beyond the West,” 
which were later rebroadcast on KPFK in Los Angeles. In 1955 he 


began work on The Way of Zen with the help of a Bollingen grant 
arranged by Joseph Campbell, and following publication in 1957 he 
went to New York on the first of many cross-country speaking tours 
that continued over the next fifteen years. 


The selections for What Is Zen? were drawn from his later talks, 
given after he had studied and practiced Zen for many years. Most of 
the material is from recordings made during weekend seminars in 
which Watts reconsidered Zen with a small group aboard his 
waterfront home, the ferryboat SS Vallejo, in Sausalito, California. 


Instead of focusing on the historical background of Zen, he 
presented the subject directly, in a way he felt would be most 
accessible to his primarily Western audience. The result is a unique 
and effective example of the sanzen dialogue in practice, and 
although the words were delivered to a group, the individual’s 
psychological hurdles are addressed with uncanny sensitivity to the 
“mind traps” that typically confound students of Zen. 


In a delightful play of words, Watts’s experienced presentation 
gives us a healthy, heaping serving of the essential wisdom one 
discovers with the experience of Zen, and points a finger towards the 
way. 


PREFACE 
By Alan Watts 


Although not long ago the word Zen was unknown to most 
Europeans and Americans, it has for many centuries been one of the 
most potent influences in molding the cultures of Japan and China. It 
would be as great a mistake to leave out the consideration of Zen in a 
history of Japan as to omit Christianity in a history of England. 


Zen remained relatively unknown to the world, however, because 
until rather recently the exponents of Zen were hesitant to spread the 
doctrine abroad for fear its essence would be lost. This is because Zen 
is a practice based entirely upon a certain kind of personal experience, 
and no complete idea of its truths can be given in words. Finally in 
the early years of the twentieth century various Far Eastern writers — 
among them the noted Dr. D.T. Suzuki — made known the details of 
this remarkable way of life. It then became apparent to Westerners 
that Zen is responsible for many of the things that fascinate us about 
the Far East, including the martial arts of judo and aikido and the 
exquisite aesthetic flavor that characterizes Chinese and Japanese art. 


Many hold Zen to be at one with the root of all religions, for it is a 
way of liberation that centers around the things that are basic to all 
mysticism: awakening to the unity or oneness of life, and the inward 
— as opposed to outward — existence of God. In this context the 
word God can be misleading because, as will be seen, the idea of a 
deity in the Western religious sense is foreign to Zen. 


The aim of this book is to act as a guide to give the contemporary 
reader some idea of the basic principles of Zen. My intention is to 
point out the way by offering the rudiments of the path to those whose 
search for truth has been hindered by the dogmas, creeds, and 
misunderstood rituals that choke the road of modern religion. 


In the Western world we have become accustomed to thinking of 
spiritual concerns as being distinct from everyday life. We think of 
the spiritual as being other worldly, and therefore those art forms that 
portray spiritual subjects do so with symbols of the divine that 
transcend everyday materiality. 


But in the art of Chinese Zen Buddhism one finds a supreme 
concentration on the most common aspects of everyday life. Even 
when the great sages of Buddhism are depicted, they are rendered in a 
secular style, just like very ordinary people, and more often than not 
as wandering idiots and tramps. The significance of this extremely 
human portrayal is that it shows us that their attitude about the 
relationship of the soul to the body and of mind to matter is entirely 
different from ours — in fact they do not really consider the spiritual 
life in those categories at all. 


We feel that our soul is separate from the body, that spirit is 
separate from matter, and by extension that God is separate from the 
world. And as we have confronted and tried to reconcile ourselves to 
this material world we have come to identify ourselves as a kind of 
detached soul, and therefore we have come to feel that there is a 
problem with material existence. We believe that life is something 
that we must conquer, or something we must somehow get out of. But 
either way we feel distinct from it, and think of ourselves not as a part 
of the natural material world, but as separate from it, dominating it, 
and trying to master it. 


The art forms of Chinese Buddhism, however, express quite a 
different point of view, a point of view for which the material, 
everyday, ordinary world is not a problem to be solved or a conquest 
to be made. 


It would be a bit of relief for us if we could see the world as an 
extension of ourselves, and ourselves as an extension of the world. In 
order to understand how Zen came upon this view one must consider 
the environment in which Zen first arose, which was the native 
Chinese world of Taosm. When Buddhism first came to China it was 
most natural for the Chinese to speak about it in terms of Taoist 
philosophy, because they both share a view of life as a flowing 
process in which the mind and consciousness of man is inextricably 
involved. It is not as if there is a fixed screen of consciousness over 
which our experience flows and leaves a record. It is that the field of 
consciousness itself is part of the flowing process, and therefore the 
mind of man is not a separate entity observing the process from 
outside, but is integrally involved with it. 


As a result, in this philosophy the fundamental conflict between 
the mind of man and the flow of life is seen to be an illusion, 
something unreal that we have imagined. This illusion arises because 
the human memory is a part of this flowing pattern that has the ability 
to represent former states of the pattern, and this gives the impression 
of a certain permanence to the behavior of the pattern. We must be 
aware, however, that our impression of permanence is a kind of 
thought process that appears to be separate from the pattern upon 
which the record is written, but is really part of the pattern as well. 


The practice of Zen is to experience the overall pattern directly, 
and to know one’s self as the essence of the pattern. 


PART I 


A SIMPLE WAY, 
A DIFFICULT WAY 


FB 


A SIMPLE WAY, 
A DIFFICULT WAY 


Zen is really extraordinarily simple as long as one doesn’t try to 
be cute about it or beat around the bush! Zen is simply the sensation 
and the clear understanding that, to put it in Zen terms, there are “ten 
thousand formations; one suchness.” Or you might say, “The ten 
thousand things that are everything are of one suchness.” That is to 
say that there is behind the multiplicity of events and creatures in this 
universe simply one energy — and it appears as you, and everything 
is it. The practice of Zen is to understand that one energy so as to 
“feel it in your bones.” 


Yet Zen has nothing to say about what that energy is, and of 
course this gives the impression in the minds of Westerners that it is a 
kind of “blind energy.” We assume this because the only other 
alternative that we can imagine in terms of our traditions is that it 
must be something like God — some sort of cosmic ego, an almost 
personal intelligent being. But in the Buddhist view, that would be as 
far off the mark as thinking of it as blind energy. The reason they use 
the word “suchness” is to leave the whole question open, and 
absolutely free from definition. It is “such.” It is what it is. 


The nature of this energy is that it is unformulated, although it is 
not formless in the sense of some sort of “goo” which is just a 
featureless mess. It simply means that at the basis of everything, there 
is something that never could be made an object, and discerned, 
figured out, or explained. In the same way, our eyes have no apparent 
color to us as we look at things, and no form of their own. If they had 
a form of their own, that form would distort all the forms we see — 
and in some sense their very structure does distort what we see. If the 
eyes had a color of their own it would affect everything we see, and 
still we would never become aware of it. As it is, however, we are not 
aware of the color of the eye, or of the lens, because if it has a color 
to it that color is basic to all sight. And so in exactly the same way, 
you might never become aware of the structure and the nature of the 


basic energy of the world because you are it, and in fact, everything is 
it. 


But you might say, “Well, it really doesn’t make any difference 
then.” And that is true, it doesn’t — but it does make a difference in 
the life and feeling of a person who realizes that that is so! Although 
it may not make any particular difference to anything that happens, it 
points directly to the crux of the matter. If there were no eye, there 
would be no sight, and this tells us something important about our 
role in the world. We see this sight and that sight, and the structure of 
the eye does not make any difference from this sight and that, but 
upon it depends the possibility of seeing. And so upon this energy 
depends the very possibility of there being a universe at all, and that 
is rather important. 


It is so important, however, that we usually overlook it. It does 
not enter into our practical considerations and prognostications, and 
that is why modern logicians in their respective philosophy 
departments will argue that all assertions about this energy, including 
the assertion that it is there at all, are meaningless. And that in a way 
is true, because the world itself is — from the point of view of strict 
logic — quite meaningless in the sense that it is not a sign or a 
symbol pointing to something else. But while that is all taken for 
granted, it nevertheless makes a great deal of difference to how you 
feel about this world, and therefore, to how you act. If you know that 
there is just this; and that it is you; and that it is beyond time, beyond 
space, beyond definition; and that if you clearly come to a realization 
that this is how things are, it gives you a certain “bounce.” You can 
enter into life with abandon, with a freedom from your basic fears 
that you would not ordinarily have. 


You of course can become quite “hooked” on the form of life that 
you are now living. I can consider myself as “Alan Watts” to be an 
immensely important event — and one I wish to preserve and 
continue as long as possible! But the truth of the matter is that I know 
I won’t be able to, and that everything falls apart in the end. But if 
you realize this fundamental energy, then you know you have the 
prospect of appearing again in innumerable forms, all of which in due 


course will seem just as important as this one you have now, and 
perhaps just as problematic too. 


This is not something to be believed in, however, because if you 
believe that this is so upon hearsay, then you have missed the point. 
You really have no need to believe in this, and you don’t need to 
formulate it, or to hang on to it in any way, because on the one hand 
you cannot get away from it, and on the other hand you — that is, you 
in the limited sense — will not be there to experience it. So there is 
no need to believe in it, and if you do believe in it that simply 
indicates that you have some doubts in the matter! 


That is why Zen has been called the “religion of no religion.” You 
don’t need, as it were, to cling to yourself. Faith in yourself is not 
“holding on” to yourself, but letting go. And that is why, when a Zen 
master hears from a student the statement, ““Ten thousand formations, 
on suchness, ” the Zen master says, “Get rid of it.” 


That is also why, in the practice of certain forms of Zen 
meditation, there is at times a rugged struggle of the person to get 
beyond all formulation whatsoever, and to throw away all hang-ups. 
Therefore the person endures long hours of sitting with aching knees 
in perpetual frustration to try to get hold of what all this is about. 
With tremendous earnestness they say, “I have to find out what the 
mystery of life is to see who I am and what this energy is.” 


And so you go again and again to the Zen master, but he knocks 
down every formulation that you bring to him, because you don’t 
need one. The ordinary person, however, upon hearing that you don’t 
need one, will forget all about it and go on and think about something 
else, and so they never cross the barrier, and never realize the 
simplicity and the joy of it all. 

But when you do see it, it is totally obvious that there is just one 
energy, and that consciousness and unconsciousness, being and not- 
being, life and death are its polarities. It is always undulating in this 
way: Now you see it, now you don’t — now it’s here, now it isn’t. 
Because that “on” and “off” is the energy, and we wouldn’t know 
what the energy was unless it was vibrating. The only way to vibrate 
is to go “on” and “off, ” and so we have life and death, and that’s the 


way it is from our perspective. 
That is what Zen is about. And that is all it is about. 


Of course, other things derive from that, but in Zen training, the 
first thing to do is to get the feeling of its complete obviousness. 


Then what follows from that is the question, “How does a person 
who feels that way live in this world? What do you do about other 
people who don’t see that that’s so? What do you do about 
conducting yourself in this world?” 


This is the difficult part of Zen training. There is at first the 
breakthrough — which involves certain difficulties — but thereafter 
follows the whole process of learning compassion and tact and skill. 
As Jesus put it, it is “to be wise as serpents and gentle as doves” — 
and that is really what takes most of the time. 


You might then divide the training in Zen into two stages that 
correspond to the two great schools of Buddhism: the Hinayana stage 
and the Mahayana stage. The Hinayana stage is to get to nirvana — 
to get to “living in the Great Void.” But then the Mahayana stage is to 
“come back, ” as the Bodhisattva comes back from nirvana out of 
compassion for all sentient beings to help even the grass to become 
enlightened. And it’s that Mahayana aspect of Zen that occupies most 
of the time of learning to be proficient in Zen. 


I offer this by way of introduction just to make everything clear 
from the start, and to begin without being deceptive about it or 
befuddling you with cryptic Zen stories! Although the stories are 
really quite clear, the point often does not come across very easily to 
Westerners. The fascinating principle underlying Zen stories with all 
their seemingly irrelevant remarks is quite simple. It is all explained 
in the Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, when Hui-neng says, 


If somebody asks you a question about matters sacred, 
always answer in terms of matters profane. If they ask you 
about ultimate reality, answer in terms of everyday life. If 
they ask you about everyday life, answer in terms of 
ultimate reality. 


Here’s an example: Someone says, “Master, please hand me the 
knife, ” and he hands them the knife, blade first. “Please give me the 
other end, ” he says. And the master replies, “What would you do 
with the other end?” This is answering an everyday matter in terms of 
the metaphysical. 


When the question is, “Master, what is the fundamental principle 
of Buddhism?” then he replies, “There is enough breeze in this fan to 
keep me cool.” That is answering the metaphysical in terms of the 
everyday, and that is, more or less, the principle Zen works on. The 
mundane and the sacred are one and the same. 


PART II 


ZEN 
RECONSIDERED 


» Un 


FB 


ZEN RECONSIDERED 


Why study Zen? The first reason that occurs to me is that it is 
extremely interesting. Since childhood I have been fascinated by the 
mystery of being, and it has always struck me as absolutely 
marvelous that this universe in which we live is here at all. And just 
out of sheer wonder I have become interested in all of the various 
answers that people have given as to why all of this is here. 


In this sense my approach to religion is not so much that of the 
moralist as of the scientist. A physicist may have a well-developed 
and highly concrete experimental approach to nature, but a good 
physicist is not necessarily an improved man or woman in the sense 
of being morally superior. Physicists know certain things, and their 
knowledge is power, but that does not automatically improve them as 
people. And the power they have may be used for good or for evil. 


But indeed, they do have power, and they have gained that power 
through their knowledge. I have always thought that in many ways 
Zen is like Western science; Zen has been used for healing people’s 
sicknesses, but it has also been used by the samurai for chopping off 
people’s heads! 


I am interested in Zen for what it reveals about the way the 
universe is, the way nature is, and what this world is doing. My 
interest is part and parcel of a greater inquiry, which boils down to 
this: If you read the literature of the great religions, time and time 
again you come across descriptions of what is usually referred to as 
“spiritual experience.” You will find that in all the various traditions 
this modality of spiritual experience seems to be the same, whether it 
occurs in the Christian West, the Islamic Middle East, the Hindu 
world of Asia, or the Buddhist world. In each culture, it is quite 
definitely the same experience, and it is characterized by the 
transcendence of individuality and by a sensation of being one with 
the total energy of the universe. 


This experience has always fascinated me, and I have been 
interested in the psychological dynamics of it: why it happens, what 


happens, and how it comes to be described in different symbols with 
different languages. I wanted to see if I could discover the means of 
bringing this kind of experience about, because I have often felt that 
the traditional ways of cultivating it are analogous perhaps to 
medieval medicine. There a concoction is prepared consisting of 
roasted toads, rope from the gallows, henbane, mandrake, a boiled red 
dog, and all manner of such things, and a great brew is made! I 
assume that someone in the old folk tradition from which these 
recipes came understood the potencies of the brew, and that this thing 
really did do some good. But a modern biochemist would take a look 
at that mixture and say, “Well, it may have done some good, but what 
was the essential ingredient?” 


In the same way, I ask this question when people sit in Zen 
meditation, practice yoga, or practice the bhakti way of religious 
devotion. What is the essential ingredient? In fact I ask this question 
of all the various things people do, even when they take psychedelic 
chemicals. No matter what methods people choose, it is interesting to 
look at what element these methods share in common. If we eliminate 
the nonsense and the nostalgia that go with people’s attachment to a 
particular cultural approach, what is left? 


It has always struck me as a student of these things that Zen has 
come very close to the essentials. At least this was my first 
impression, partly because of the way D.T. Suzuki presented Zen. It 
seemed to me to be the “direct way, ” the sudden way of seeing right 
through into one’s nature — right now, at this moment. There is a 
good deal of talk about that realization in Zen circles, and in some 
ways it is more talk than practice. I remember a dinner once with 
Hasegawa, when somebody asked him, “How long does it take to 
obtain our understanding of Zen?” 


He said, “It may take you three minutes; it may take you thirty 
years. And, ” he said, “I mean that.” 


It is that three minutes that tantalizes people! We in the West want 
instant results, and one of the difficulties of instant results is that they 


are sometimes of poor quality. I often describe instant coffee as a 
punishment for people who are in too much of a hurry to make real 
coffee! There is something to be said against being in a hurry. 


There are two sides to this question, and it strikes me in this way: 
It’s not a matter of time at all. The people who think it ought to take a 
long time are of one school of thought, and the people who want it 
quickly are of another, and they are both wrong. The transformation 
of consciousness is not a question of how much time you put into it, 
as if it were all added up on some sort of quantitative scale, and you 
got rewarded according to the amount of effort you put into it. Nor is 
there a way of avoiding the effort just because you happen to be lazy, 
or because you say, “I want it now!” 


The point is, rather, something like this: If you try to get it either 
by an instant method because you are lazy or by a long-term method 
because you are rigorous, you'll discover that you can’t get it either 
way. The only thing that your effort — or absence of effort — can 
teach you is that your effort doesn’t work. 


The answer is found in the middle way — and Buddhism is called 
the Middle Way — but it is not just some sort of compromise. 
Instead, “middle” here means instead “above and beyond extremes.” 


It is put this way in the Bible: “To him that hath shall be given.” 
Or, to put it another way, you can only get it when you discover that 
you don’t need it. You can only get it when you don’t want it. And so 
instead you ask, “How do I learn not to want it, not to go after it, 
either by the long-term method or by the instant method?’ But 
obviously if you ask that, you still are seeking it, and thereby not 
getting it! 

A Zen master says, “If you have a stick, I will give you one. If 
you have not, I will take it away from you.” Of course this is the same 
idea as “to him that hath shall be given; and from him that hath not, 
shall be taken away even that which he hath.” So we find ourselves in 
a situation where it seems that all our normal thinking — all the ways 
we are accustomed to thinking about solving problems — doesn’t 
work. All thinking based on acquisition is rendered obsolete. We 
have, as it were, to get into a new dimension altogether to approach 


this question. 


A young Zen student I know said to me recently, “If I were asked 
what is really essential in Zen, it would be sanzen.” Sanzen is the 
dialogue between the master and the student, the person-to-person 
contact. He said rather than zazen, or sitting meditation, it is sanzen 
that is the crux of it. It is in the peculiar circumstances of that dialog 
that we can get into the frame of mind I am talking about. 


In effect this dialog acts as a mirror to one’s own mind, because 
the teacher always throws back to the student the question he’s asked! 
He really does not answer any questions at all, he merely tosses them 
back at you, so that you yourself will ask why you are asking it, and 
why you are creating the problem the question expresses. 


And quickly it becomes apparent that it is up to you. “Who, me?” 
you may ask. Yes, you! “Well,” you may say, “J can’t solve this 
problem. I don’t know how to do it.” 


But what do you mean by you? Who are you, really? Show me the 
you that cannot answer the question. It is in this kind of back-and- 
forth dialogue that you begin to understand. Through relationship 
with the other person you discover that it is you who’s mixed up, and 
that you are asking the wrong questions! In fact, you are trying to 
solve the wrong problem altogether. 


There is a curious thing about gurus — including Zen masters: 
you notice how people feel that gurus have marvelous eyes, and that 
they look right through you. And people think, “Oh dear me, they can 
see to the bottom of my soul. They can read my history, my secret 
thoughts, my awful misdeeds, and everything. At one glance they 
know me through and through!” 


Such matters are of very little interest to real gurus, however. 
When they look at you with a funny look, they see who you really 
are, and are looking through your eyes to the divine center. And here 
one sees Buddha, Brahma, or whatever you want to call it, pretending 
not to be at home! It’s no wonder the guru has a funny look — they 
are beholding the incongruity between the divine being that looks out 
through you in your eyes, and the expression of puzzlement on your 


face! And so what the guru is going to do in the dialog is to “kid” you 
out of this irresponsibility — this playing that you are someone other 
than who you really are. And this, you see, is of the essence. 


Don’t mistake me, however: I am not saying in order to get there 
you have to have a guru, and have to go and find one somewhere. 
That, too, is to go back into the ordinary dimension, back into a state 
of inner irresponsibility. It is important to realize that you give the 
gurus their authority to do what they do. It is you who says, “be my 
teacher” — and in Zen they make it very tough for you to get a 
teacher at all. The Hindus do likewise, and they have various ways of 
explaining that gurus have to take on the karma of their students, and 
that is a dangerous thing to do because they become responsible for 
their students. But this is really just a ploy to force the students to 
take greater responsibility for their choice in selecting a guru. In Zen 
they make this process very difficult in the theory that, if you are 
going to make a fool of yourself by projecting authority onto a guru, 
you might as well make a big fool of yourself. There is no 
compromise about this! 


The point then is this: insofar as you accord spiritual authority to 
someone, you must recognize that you do it on your own authority. It 
was you who set this person up as your master. Now you may say, 
“Well, there were a lot of other people who have done it too, and they 
can’t all be wrong!” And these people form a kind of community, and 
that gives the appearance of authority to this. 


You may want to study with the best Zen master, but who is the 
best master, and how do you know? If you go around asking people, 
you are invariably asking the Zen cliché. When you ask someone, 
“Who do you think is the best master?” you find that people tend to 
recommend their own teacher, and when a teacher has enough people 
apply, then they receive great collective authority. So if you accept 
that, and say, “I’ll go study Zen here,” do you see what is happening? 
You have made the decision to use this group as a pretext upon which 
to project your own authority without realizing that you have done it! 


You set the whole thing up, and then the task of the teacher is to 
show you just what you did. But it all came from you. As the 
Buddhists say, “All this world is in your own mind.” 


In the Tibetan Book of the Dead, when the instructions are given 
as to what happens when someone leaves their body after death, it 
says something like, “When the clear light of the void comes, it is 
followed by the vision of the blissful Bodhisattvas; then comes the 
vision of the wrathful Bodhisattvas, ” and so on. And then it says, 
“Realize, oh nobly born, that all this is but the outpouring of your 
own mind.” 


We don’t accept this very easily, however, because we’ve been 
most assiduously taught that we are but “little things” in this world. 
You must be humble, after all, you did not create this world, 
somebody else made it. So watch your “p’s” and “q’s, ” and do not 
for one minute have the spiritual pride of thinking that you are the 


cause of it all! 


And you may very well ask, “How could I have made all this? I 
certainly don’t know how it was made!” But a Zen poem says, 


If you want to ask where the flowers come from, 
even the God of Spring doesn’t know. 


There is no way of defining the creative energy of the universe. 
Suppose God could come and talk to you, and you said, “God, this is 
a pretty complicated universe — in fact, it is amazing! How did you 
do it?” And God would say, “I don’t know, I just did it.” 


Of course God does not know — if God had to think out every 
detail of it, it never would have happened. In just the same way, you 
breathe and you live: You don’t know how you do it, but you are still 
doing it! 

We have been taught by social convention, though, to restrict the 
concept of “myself” to “what I do voluntarily and consciously.” This 
is a very narrow view of the self. Certainly if you say, “I, by my ego 
and my intelligence, created all this,’ you would be conceited, and 
you know you are a liar. But you is much deeper than that; you 
includes far more than your conscious mind. It is the total you that 


not only is responsible for the infinitely complex structure of your 
physical organism, but also for the environment in which you find 
yourself. You runs that deep. 


It is you in that sense, the total you, that is the root and ground of 
everything. And yet we arrange our image of who we are around a 
principle of human sociability, which is measured by our ability to 
get along together according to our system of social convention. And 
as a result we so often end up putting everyone down, including 
ourselves, because nobody’s perfect, and because, as my mother used 
to say to me, “You’re not the only pebble on the beach!” 


Why don’t we instead try the other technique, and put everyone 
“up” instead of down? It might be that everyone would get along far 
better that way than they do by putting everybody down! Of course, 
whatever you do, you have to do it uniformly for everyone. You can’t 
say, “Well, Johnny is the Lord God, but Peter isn’t!” 


As a result of our social conventions, we all feel ourselves to be 
strangers in the world. We are disconnected from it all, and it is 
something that “happens” to us that we endure passively, and that we 
receive passively. And we never get to the point where we realize we 
are actually doing the whole thing! It is up to you. You make your 
troubles, and you put yourself into a trap. You confuse yourself, and 
forget that you did it, and then ask how to get out of it! A verse from 
the Mumonkan, a famous book of koans, puts it this way: “Asking 
where Buddha is, is like hiding loot in your pocket and declaring 
yourself innocent!” 


To finally admit it, and to come to the recognition that it was you, 
requires a certain kind of nerve. I don’t mean “nerve” in the sense of 
being brash and cheeky. I mean the sort of sense that you use when, 
for the first time, you take a plane off the ground, or when you pull a 
cloth off the table and leave all the dishes on the table! That sort of 
nerve has nothing to do with pride in the ordinary sense. It is being 
ready to leap in, somehow. You see it, and jump in. 

But most of us lack that kind of sense. Instead we have what I 
would call an ambivalent sense of responsibility. We say, “Now, 
look: It is only me here — just little me. I have certain 


responsibilities, and they are such and so, but that means as well that 
there are a lot of things I am certainly not responsible for.” And in our 
social conventions we play games about where we are going to draw 
the line that defines what we are — and what we’re not — 
responsible for. 


When someone is in some kind of social or psychological 
difficulty, and someone has been irresponsible in some way, we 
wonder what caused the problem: “Why are they like that?” And 
instead of attributing the problem to the person, our psychologists 
tend to refer it back to other things and other people: It was because 
of their environment, or because of family conditioning, or because of 
their father and mother. But there is no end to that, because you can 
take the blame straight back to Adam and Eve! And responsibility is 
evaded, because it was limited in the first place. 


We think that the world is limited and explained by its past. We 
tend to think that what happened in the past determines what is going 
to happen next, and we do not see that it is exactly the other way 
around! What is always the source of the world is the present; the 
past doesn’t explain a thing. The past trails behind the present like the 
wake of a ship, and eventually disappears. 


Now you would say that obviously when you see a ship crossing 
the ocean with the wake trailing behind it that the ship is the cause of 
the wake. But if you get into the state of mind that believes in 
causality as we do, you see that the wake is the cause of the ship! And 
that is surely making the tail wag the dog! 


The point is this: You will never find the mystery of the creation 
of the world in the past. It never was created in the past. Because truly 
there is nothing else — and never was anything else — except the 
present! There never will be anything else except the present. 


Life is always present, and the past is a kind of echo, a tracing 
within the present of what the present did before. We can say, “Oh 
well, we can guess what the present will do next because of what it 
has done in the past.” And this is true: Because of what it does 
habitually, you may guess it will go on doing it like that. But still it is 


not the past that controls the present any more than the wake controls 
the ship. Now from the record of the past you can study the nature of 
the present and predict what sort of things it’s likely to do. But 
sometimes it surprises you when something new happens, as every so 
often it does. 


It is always in the immediate here and now that things begin. And 
so, one of the essentials of Zen training is, to quote a certain parrot 
from Huxley’s Jsland, “Here and now, boys!” Be here. 


And in order to be here, you can’t be looking for a result! People 
keep asking me, “Why do you do this? What do you want to get out 
of it?” But these questions imply that my motivation is different from 
my action. It is talking about it in terms of Newtonian billiards — in 
Newton’s explanation of mechanics and behavior he used an analogy 
with billiards. The balls — the fundamental atoms — are banging 
each other about; a ball will be still until something bangs it, and that 
bang will be its motivation, and set it in motion. So when we say, 
“Human beings behave in such-and-such a way because of 
unconscious mental mechanisms, ” this is really Newtonian 
psychology, and it is out-of-date. Today we need a psychology that is 
current with quantum theory at least, not one that is tied to 
mechanical causality. 


It is difficult for us to understand this, however, unless we turn 
things around, as in the analogy of the ship and the wake. If you 
understand fully that it is from the present that everything happens, 
then the only place for you to be, the only place for you to live, is 
here, right now. 


People immediately say, however, “Now wait a minute. That’s all 
very well, but I want to be sure that under such-and-such 
circumstances and in such-and-such eventualities I will be able to 
deal with it. It’s all very well to live in the present when I am sitting 
comfortably in a warm room reading this, or meditating, but what am 
I going to do if all hell breaks loose? What if there’s an earthquake, or 
if I get sick, or my best friends get sick, or some catastrophe happens? 
How will I deal with that? Don’t I have to prepare myself to deal with 
those things? Shouldn’t I get into some sort of psychological training, 
so that when disasters come I won’t be thrown?” 


That, you would ordinarily think, is the way to proceed — but it 
doesn’t work very well. It is much better to say, “sufficient unto the 
day is the trouble thereof,” and to trust yourself to react appropriately 
when the catastrophe happens. Whatever happens, you’ll probably 
have to improvise, and failure of nerve is really failure to trust 
yourself. You have a great endowment of brain, muscle, sensitivity, 
intelligence — trust it to react to circumstances as they arise. 


Zen deals with this. Studying Zen will change the way you react 
to circumstances as they arise. Wait and see how you deal with 
whatever circumstances come your way, because the you that will 
deal with them will not be simply your conscious intelligence or 
conscious attention. In that moment it will be all of you, and that is 
beyond the control of the will, because the will is only a fragment 
having certain limited functions. 


But if you really know how to live from your center, you live 
now, and know that now is the origin of everything. This way, you 
stand a much better chance of being able to deal with the unforeseen 
than if you keep worrying about it and considering past lessons and 
future possibilities. 


I know that this sounds impractical to some of you, or perhaps 
revolutionary, or perhaps not even possible, but it is simply living in 
the present. It requires a certain kind of poise: If you make exact 
plans to deal with the future and things don’t happen at all as you 
expected, you are apt to become thoroughly disappointed and 
disoriented. But if your plans are flexible and adaptable, and if you’ re 
here when things happen, you always stay balanced. 


As in movement or martial arts, keep your center of gravity 
between your feet, and don’t cross your feet, because the moment you 
do you are off balance. Stay always in the center position, and stay 
always here. Then it doesn’t matter which direction the attack comes 
from; it doesn’t matter what happens at all. 


If you expect something to come in a certain way, you position 
yourself to get ready for it. If it comes another way, by the time you 
reposition your energy, it is too late. So stay in the center, and you 
will be ready to move in any direction. 


This is the real meaning of the practice of zazen, or sitting Zen: to 
sit in the center. As you begin sitting meditation the first thing to do is 
to find your center, and become comfortable with it, so that you are 
neither leaning forward nor sitting back. When one’s body is 
balanced in this way the forces of high and low, the heart and breath, 
and mind and feeling merge at the center. 


To sit in zazen in order to perfect a technique for attaining 
enlightenment, however, is fundamentally a mistaken approach. Sit 
just to sit. And why not sit? You have to sit sometime, and so you 
may as well really sit, and be altogether here. Otherwise the mind 
wanders away from the matter at hand, and away from the present. 
Even to think through the implications of the present is to avoid the 
present moment completely. 


When you are meditating, it is perfectly fine to be aware of 
anything that’s around: things on the floor, the smell of the 
atmosphere, the little noises going on. Be there! But when you hear a 
dog bark, and that starts off a train of thought about dogs in general, 
about your dog, or somebody else’s dog, then you have wandered 
away from being here. Of course you finally will come to the point 
where you realize there is no way of wandering away from being 
here, because there is nowhere else to be. Even if you think about 
somewhere else, past or future, this is all happening now. 


Through this you will also come to understand how to be a 
scholar and a historian, if you wish to, and still live in the present. 
That was how D.T. Suzuki was able to be scholarly and intellectual, 
and yet at the same time not to depart at all from the spirit of Zen, 
which is beyond the intellect. You can intellectualize in a Zen way, 
just as you can sweep floors in a Zen way, but of course the key to the 
matter is centering — being really here. Because this is the point of 
origin of the world, and it is at the same time the destination of the 
world. 


This is the real meaning of dhyana, which in Sanskrit is the kind 
of concentration or meditation that constitutes Zen. Zen is simply the 
Japanese way of pronouncing dhyana, and it is that state of 
centeredness which is here and now. 


When you practice zazen, just sit and enjoy yourself being quiet. 
It is not a duty at all; it is a great pleasure! Get up early in the 
morning when the sunlight is just beginning to show. It doesn’t 
matter where you are, just sit. 


Don’t have any thoughts, but don’t compulsively try to get rid of 
thoughts. It’s just not important. The real thing is what is — what is 
here, now. After all, here you are, and you may as well see it! 


Eventually, a curious feeling will overcome you, one that is very 
hard to describe in words. I just said that the origin of the world is 
now — and there is this odd sensation that now comprises everything: 
the most distant past, the most remote future, the vastness of space, 
all states of experi- ence, all joy, all sorrow, all heights, all depths. 
Everything is now. There isn’t anywhere else to be — there never 
was, and never will be! 


That is why you never were born, and therefore cannot die. You 
never came, so you won’t go. You were always here. It’s a very 
curious feeling, so different from what we ordinarily think. In 
entering into the now, we find the eternal now. We find infinity in the 
split second. 


As they say in Yoga, liberation lies in the interval between two 
thoughts. Between the past thought and the future thought lies now — 
there is no present thought. 


As one of the Zen texts puts it, “One thought follows another 
without interruption. But if you allow these thoughts to link up into a 
chain, you put yourself in bondage.” 


Actually, this present moment never comes to be and it never 
ceases to be, it is simply our minds that construct the continuity of 
thoughts we call time. In the present moment is nirvana. 


As the great Zen master Dogen explains, in the course of the 
seasons, the spring does not “become” the summer. And when wood 
burns, the wood does not “become” the ashes. There is the state of 
wood, and then there is the state of ashes. There is the state of spring; 
there is the state of summer. The spring does not become the summer; 


the wood does not become ashes; the living body does not become the 
corpse. That only happens in us, in our minds, when we link our 
thoughts together. “Oh, no! I will become a corpse!” But you won’t. 
You won’t be there when there is a corpse! 


If we are going to introduce Westerners to the fundamentals of 
Zen, we need to revise our understanding of the procedures and 
rationale of meditation. It should not become a competitive game of 
one-upmanship, or a marathon to see who can take it, and who can 
endure. That puts the whole affair right back under the domain of 
time. 


The important thing to emphasize is presence, being completely 
here, and not feeling guilty if you enjoy it. You can do that most 
easily in any kind of activity that does not require much discursive 
thought. Anything that you can do without a great deal of thought 
becomes a perfect form of meditation, whether it’s shucking peas, 
digging up a plot of ground, putting up a fence, or doing dishes. 


In Buddhism one hears of “the four dignities of man.” It is an 
extraordinary phrase, when you think about it, especially when you 
learn the “four dignities” are simply walking, standing, sitting, and 
lying. Zazen is simply “sitting Zen.” There is also “lying Zen, ” 
which is sleeping Zen — when you sleep, sleep. There is “standing 
Zen,” and there is “walking Zen.” Walking is a very good method of 
meditation. You simply stroll around, but be right with it! Be here. 


People have difficulties with these simple forms of meditation. 
Thoughts and feelings come up: “Is it only this? Is this all there is? 
Nothing seems to be happening. What’s going on? I feel a little 
frustrated, and I don’t particularly feel enlightened. There’s just 
nothing ‘special’ about this at all. Do I have to do this longer in order 
for something to happen?” 


But nothing special is supposed to happen. It’s just this. This is it, 
right here. 

You may have difficulty in accepting it because you still feel the 
lack of nerve to see that you are all of it. You are not an observer who 


is witnessing the present moment as something happening to you. The 
present that you are experiencing is all of you. It’s not “you” here 
looking at “the floor” there. The floor is just as much you as the 
organism looking at it. You are doing the floor, just like you’re doing 
your feet. It is all one world — and you’re responsible for it. 


So enjoy it! Have a good time! 


PART III 


SPACE 


» Do 


SPACE 


Zen represents a simplified way of life. The style and way in 
which a Zen temple is furnished is completely uncluttered. The rooms 
of a temple are mostly empty. They are just spaces — but they are 
gorgeous spaces. 


Space is the most valuable thing in Japan, and it is treated with 
great reverence. Here in the United States, where we have so much 
space, we do not appreciate it. We think that space is equivalent to 
“nothing, ” something that simply isn’t there. We think of space as a 
“blank, ” but in a more crowded situation, people really notice space. 


It is interesting that China too is a country where there is also a lot 
of space, yet I think it was the Chinese who above all through the arts 
first taught man to appreciate space. Today we are living in a “space 
age” and, strangely enough, even though our culture is a pioneer in 
space navigation and space exploration, we really don’t understand 
the value of space at all. One of the great contributions of Zen to the 
Western world is understanding space. 


The most desirable land for residences in Japan is in the hills. The 
hills are full of parks and water springs, but the curious thing is that 
the best land and the most gorgeous sites are occupied by Zen 
temples. These temples were originally taken away from the brigands, 
who somehow let the Zen monks come in. These monks essentially 
put one over on the brigands and occupied the space. 


In the Kamakura epoch, Zen had an enormous influence on the 
samurai warrior caste. This was a time when Japan was torn by 
internal strife, and constant war was waged between the various 
feudal lords as they fought to gain control of the imperial power. 
They went to study Zen as soldiers in order to learn fearlessness — 
and that was where the Zen monks outfoxed the samurai. The samurai 
prided themselves on their manly and warrior-like qualities, but they 
couldn’t scare the Zen monks because the monks were just not fazed 
— not stopped at all — by the idea of death! 


A classic Zen story about their fearlessness is the tale of a young 
man who applied to a fencing master to be his student. The master 
looked at him and said, “Who did you study with before? ” 


He said, “I’ve never studied fencing before.” 


The master looked at him in a funny way and said, “No, surely, 
come now, you have studied with someone.” 


He said, “No sir, I never have studied.” 


“Well, ” the master said, “I’m an experienced teacher, and I can 
tell at once by looking at a person whether he has studied fencing or 
not. And I know you have! ” 


But the young man shook his head and said, “Sir, I assure you, 
I’ve never studied fencing at all with anybody.” 


“Well,” said the master, “there must be something peculiar about 
you — what do you suppose it could be? ” 


“Well,” he young man said, “when I was a boy, I was very 
worried about dying. So I thought a great deal about death. And then I 
came to the realization that there’s nothing in death to be afraid of.” 


“Oh, ” said the master, “that explains it.” 


One of the results of the initial part of Zen training — the 
beginning of Zen — is overcoming the fear of death. What I 
described to you earlier as the Hinayana stage of Zen study is where 
you go deeply into meditation and withdraw your consciousness, as it 
were, back to its source. 


This is the initial stage, and as you go into it, you go down into 
that dimension of your being where you are deeper than your 
individuality. And you realize that you belong down here, because 
this is where you truly exist. What you feel as your individuality is 
really something temporal, like the leaves of a deciduous tree. In the 
season of the fall, they dry up and drop off. 


The Japanese in their poetry and aesthetics always liken death to 
the fall and winter season. They have a feeling about a human life that 


is harmonious with the seasons of the year. This theme goes through 
Japanese poetry, and therefore old people are looked upon as those 
who are in the “winter” of life, or the “fall” of life. And just as the 
maple trees in Japan become absolutely gorgeous in the fall, there is 
an appreciation and a respect for this season of life. Old people in 
Japan look much better than our old people because they’re not 
fighting with age, they’re cooperating with it. It is an honorable thing 
to be old. 


For women and for men, age means respect and authority. This 
feeling of the harmoniousness of human life with the life cycles of 
nature makes aging and death less problematic for people with that 
sort of psychology. They see old age as the proper rhythm of time, 
not as the deterioration of a living being, just as they don’t see the fall 
and winter as a deterioration of time. 


I suppose this may be a difficult correspondence for us to 
understand, because we simply don’t feel the seasons in the same 
way. So many of us live in a seasonless world. 


I mentioned earlier the idea that the great Zen master Dogen put 
in his book, the Shobogenzo — actually, he got the idea from a 
Chinese student of Kumarajiva, who lived about A.D. 400. Dogen 
noted that, contrary to appearance, events in time are eternal, and that 
each event “stays” in its own place. The burning wood does not 
become ash. First there is wood and then there is ash. The spring does 
not become the summer. There is spring, then there is summer; then 
there is fall, then there is winter. 


And, curious as it may sound, the sun in its rotation does not 
move, and the river doesn’t flood. It sounds paradoxical to us. It’s like 
the saying from Heraclitus: You never step into the same river twice. 


There is a very close parallel between the thinking of Heraclitus 
and Taoist philosophy; both understand the yang and the yin. 
Heraclitus is the most original thinker in Western thought. (Phillip 
Wheelwright published an excellent translation of what remains of 
the fragments of Heraclitus’ philosophy.) If the West had founded 


itself on Heroclitus rather than Aristotle, we would have been a lot 
better off, because he was a most ingenious man, and his thought is 
far closer to Eastern thought. 


The Japanese feel that death is a completely natural event; it is 
only, as it were, the dropping of the leaves, and yet the root 
underneath is always there. This is difficult for most people to 
appreciate; the root doesn’t seem to enter into our ordinary lives at 
all. “I feel that ’'m only ‘on top’ — how do I ‘get down’?” Well of 
course the fop is the top and it can’t get down and be the bottom! 


This is the same question people raise when they ask, “How do I 
get rid of my egocentricity?” Well, obviously, you can’t get rid of 
egocentricity with your egocentricity — as the master Bankei said, 
“You can’t wash off blood with blood! ” And frying to realize your 
Buddha-nature by some sort ofegocentric effort is like trying to wash 
off your ego with your ego, and blood with blood. 


In his teaching Bankei emphasized the way in which you have 
this root in you. He said, “When you hear a bell ringing, you don’t 
have to think about it — you know at once that it’s a bell. When you 
hear the crow cawing, you don’t by any effort or cleverness of your 
conscious will know that it’s a crow — your mind does that for you.” 


Once Bankei was being heckled by a Nichiren priest — those 
Nichirens can be very fanatical. The Nichiren priest was standing on 
the fringe of a crowd listening to Bankei, and he called out, “I don’t 
understand a single word you’re saying! ” 


And Bankei said, “Come closer, and I'll explain it to you.” 


So the priest walked into the crowd, and Bankei said, “Come on, 
come closer.” 


And he came closer. “Come closer still! ’» And he came closer. 
“Please, closer still” — until he was right next to Bankei. And Bankei 
said, “How well you understand me! ” 


Bankei emphasized that we have what he called the “unborn 


mind” in us, the level of mind that doesn’t arise, that isn’t born into 
individuality. We all have that original endowment. When somebody 
says “good morning, ” we say “good morning, ” and we don’t “think” 
to do this — that’s the unborn mind. It’s the unborn mind through 
which your eyes are blue or brown; it’s the unborn mind by which 
you see and breathe. 


Breathing is important in the practice of meditation because it is 
the faculty in us that is simultaneously voluntary and involuntary. 
You can feel that you are breathing, and equally you can feel that it is 
breathing you. So it is a sort of bridge between the voluntary world 
and the involuntary world — a place where they are one. 


Through focusing on our breathing, and by understanding this 
concept, we can acquire the sense that our unconscious life is not 
unconscious at all, in the sense that it lacks consciousness; instead, it 
is the root of consciousness, the source from which consciousness 
comes. Just as the leavescome every year on the tree, so 
consciousness perpetually comes and goes out of the unconscious 
base, or what we could call the supra-conscious base. 


In order to appreciate this, you don’t need to believe literally in 
reincarnation — the idea that you have an individual, enduring center 
or soul that is born into existence time after time after time. Zen 
practitioners are divided as to whether they think this is so or not. P’ve 
met masters who believe in reincarnation, and ve met masters who 
don’t believe in it at all. 


When they talk of the continual reappearance of individuality and 
consciousness out of the base, what they mean is simply something 
all of us can see: We see human beings in all stages of life coming 
and going. We don’t see any continuity between them. 


But that is only because we don’t see space. It is the interval 
between people — the space between lives — that constitutes the 
bond between them. This is very important — the philosophy of 
space — and we will get into it in more depth, but thepoint here is 
that through realizing this, those Zen monks had enormous nerve. 
They could look a samurai in the face and say, “Okay, cut my head 


off! What does it prove? ” 


The samurai were amazed by this, and regarded those monks as 
sort of magical people. They asked the monks to teach them, because 
they felt if they had that kind of fearlessness, they could never be 
defeated by an enemy. 


Zen is like a spring coming out of a mountain. It doesn’t flow out 
in order to quench the thirst of a traveler, but if the travelers want to 
help themselves to it, that’s fine. It’s up to you what you do with the 
water; the spring’s job is just to flow. Zen masters will teach anyone 
who has the tenacity to go after it, whoever they are. The samurai 
became grateful students of the Zen monks, and let them occupy the 
best land in town! 


On that land they built buildings that are essentially great, heavy 
roofs in the Tang Dynasty Chinese style supported by a kind of 
elegant flimsiness underneath. They’ re like lanterns — under the roof, 
empty floors are covered with straw mats; there are sliding screens, 
and occasional cushions to sit on, and nothing else. You get a feeling 
of “living” space inside. 

Let’s consider that a moment. I said earlier that in the West we 
disregard space. We know space here on the planet is full of air, and 
we know that is “something.” Air occupies space and is very 
important to us, essential to life in fact, but we think of air as simply 
filling a “void.” When astronomers start to talk about curved space, or 
properties of space, the average person feels that their common sense 
has been offended. “How could space be curved? How could it have 
any properties? It isn’t there. It’s nothing! ” 


But the folly of thinking that way becomes apparent the moment 
you realize that solidness, materiality, or density is inconceivable 
apart from space. Space is the interval between solids, and thus in 
some sense is the relationship between them. 


To understand this, consider for a moment another kind of space 
altogether: “musical” space— the interval between notes in a melody. 
When you play a sequence of notes in a melody, there is no pause, no 
silence between one note and another; they follow each other 


immediately. But it is only because of the interval — something that 
is not stated, not “sounded” — that you hear a melody. If you don’t 
hear the interval, you don’t hear the melody. The space between the 
notes, the step, the interval is an essential element in melody. In 
exactly the same way, it is space — be it interior space or interstellar 
space — that goes hand in hand with there being any solids or stars. 
Space isn’t just “nothing, ” it is the other pole of something. 


Let’s look at it from another point of view. We have looked at 
space astronomically, and musically; let’s look at it for a moment 
aesthetically. In a motel room, for example, when you see the typical 
“Western” flower print — for some reason or other hotels and motels 
love flower or bird prints in frames over the bed — you see a bunch 
of flowers set directly in the middle of a piece of paper. This shows 
that the person who designed the print hasno conception of space, 
because the space in that print serves merely as background, and is 
nothing more. It has no function whatsoever; the space is not part of 
the picture. 


When Chinese painters use space, however, you see that if they 
paint a spray of grass or bamboo or a pine tree, they never set it 
directly in the middle of the paper. It is set off to one side, so that the 
object painted is, as we say, “balanced” by the space, and the space is 
an essential part of the painting. By putting the spray of bamboo to 
one side, you immediately see the part of the painting that hasn’t been 
touched as something — as mist, or even water. The painter doesn’t 
have to do a thing to it — somehow it is all in the picture. The 
bamboo is not merely set against the background — everything right 
out to the edge of the piece of paper has been included in the piece by 
doing this. The artist sees the polarity of space and solid, and uses this 
polarity in the painting by balancing them against each other. 


But you do not feel that balance if the solid area — the painted 
subject, whatever it may be — is putsmack in the middle of the space. 
Instead, you abolish the importance of the space; it has no “place” in 
the painting. When we think of a solid object simply sitting in the 
middle of a canvas, we ignore space. 


I have had great fun when visiting college communities by doing 
experiments in Gestalt psychology that illustrate figure and ground. 
The Gestalt theory of perception is that we tend to notice the figure 
and ignore the background. We tend to notice a moving object and 
ignore what is relatively still. We tend to notice areas that are tightly 
enclosed rather than those that are diffused. 


I draw a circle on the blackboard and say to the group, “What 
have I drawn? ” They inevitably say, “A circle, a ball, a ring, ” or 
something like that. And I say then, “Why didn’t anybody suggest 
that I have drawn a wall with a hole in it? ” It shows us that we tend 
to ignore the background and pay attention to the figure. 


Western artists almost inevitably paint the entire background, 
because they don’t realize that “empty” space is important. 


Architects, however, will talk about the “properties” of a space, 
because they know that what they’re doing is making living spaces 
for people. They are enclosing space, and so space has a certain 
reality to the architect. But to the ordinary person, space just isn’t 
there! We’re not aware of it. 


It’s very interesting that in meditation experiments you can 
experience various kinds of space: optical space, auditory space, and 
tactile space. By closing your eyes for a while, you can realize what a 
blind man’s conception of space would be. Every sense has its own 
appreciation of space. 


There was a time in our own history when we can see, by reading 
between the lines of ancient literature — as late as Dante — that they 
regarded “space” and “mind” as the same thing. And if you think 
about it, you can see it is rather obvious. Take the “mind of the eye” 
— what Buddhists call the vijnana — which corresponds to seeing. 
The basis of sight is a sort of screen, and just as you have a screen on 
which to project a slide or a movie, there is a kind of ground or area 
in which everything that is seen must be. You have what wecall a 
“field of vision, ” which is an oval, with fuzzy edges. You “see” an 
oval area, this field of vision. There has to be that open field for there 
to be any vision at all and, though we ignore it, it is the background. 


There was once an Englishman and an Indian sitting in a garden 
together, and the Hindu was trying to explain basic Indian philosophy 
to the Englishman. So he said, “Look now, there is a hedge at the end 
of the garden — against what do you see the hedge? ” 


The Englishman said, “Against the hills.” 
“And what do you see the hills against? ” 
He said, “Against the sky.” 


“And what do you see the sky against? ” And the Englishman 
didn’t know what to say. 


So the Hindu said, “You see it against consciousness.” 


In the same way, the space for “being” itself — for material 
vibration — is the space that we think of as existing between bodies. 
That is the ground— the field — which quanta must have in order to 
play. In the same way that space itself is invisible, consciousness is 
unknown, because it is not an object of our knowledge. This 
dimension of your being is like space. This basis is called amala 
vijnana in Buddhist teachings, and it means “without taint.” You 
can’t make a mark on space! 


The Buddha said, “The path of the enlightened ones leaves no 
track — it is like the path of birds in the sky.” 


The Buddhists describe the ultimate reality of the world as 
shunyata, which is often translated as “emptiness” or “the void, ” or 
even “the plenum void, ” meaning it is void, but full of all 
possibilities. The basic doctrine of Buddhist Mahayana philosophy is 
given in the Heart Sutra: 


Form is emptiness; emptiness is form. 


To indicate this idea in Chinese, they use a character for shunyata 
or emptiness that also means “sky” and “space.” Space is contrasted 


with theword for form (which also means “shape” and “color"), and 
the character between them means something like “exactly is” — 
space exactly is, or is precisely the same as form. And when the 
characters are reversed it says form is precisely emptiness. 


The Chinese word for “is,” however, is not quite the same as the 
English or European “is” (in Latin est); it means rather “‘is inseparable 
from,” or “always goes with.” The two are interdependent. You can’t 
have space without form; you can’t have form without space. They 
are relational, and in that sense, they are each other, because 
underneath every inseparable relation is a common ground. 


To perceive that form reveals the void, and to see that the void 
reveals form, is the secret for the overcoming of death. To the extent 
that one is unaware of space, one is unaware of one’s own eternity — 
it’s the same thing! 


People sometimes imagine that to be aware of the eternal 
dimension, the forms must disappear. This belief is held by many in 
India who believe that in nirvikalpa samadhi, which is the highest 
stateof consciousness (samadhi means the meditation state; 
concentration; absorption into ultimate reality beyond words; 
nirvikalpa means without concept), is without “content.” They will 
say that in the state of nirvikalpa the mind is completely devoid of 
any form or motion whatsoever. 


That sounds like a total “blank.” And in Zen it is said that a 
person whose mind is in that state is a “stone” Buddha, just like the 
Buddha made of stone sitting on the altar: there is no consciousness. 
There’s no point in that, and so in Zen they interpret all this in a very 
different way indeed. To have nirvikalpa samadhi, the highest state of 
consciousness, is not to have consciousness in which there are no 
forms, it is simply to reawaken to the reality of space. To see that 
forms come and go in space as the leaves come and go on the trees, as 
the stars come and go in the sky. 


The sky is in a way the mother of the stars, and of course no 
woman is a mother until she has a child. So in this sense space does 
not come into being as the matrix of the world until there is 


something there to nurture. That’s why the Chineseuse the term “to 
arise mutually” to indicate the relationship between all opposites: 
they come into being, they arise mutually. 


Space and form arise mutually — as do being and non-being. 
Then you can see what it means in practical life: To the degree that 
you are unaware of space, you are unaware of the fullness of your 
nature. 


As our population increases, and we become more crowded, space 
will become more valuable, and this will help us to be more aware of 
it. Perhaps that’s the reason why species multiply: as many-ness 
increases, the consciousness of one-ness increases. 


So in Zen, in answer to the question, “What is the ultimate 
reality?” the master says, “Three pounds of flax.” 


He chooses something very particular, extremely concrete and 
“everyday” — something quite worldly — to answer this 
metaphysical question. Why? Because space does not obliterate the 
particular, but rather it is precisely the particular, ordinary everyday 
event that proclaims and advertises the underlying unity of the world. 


The many advertise the one — the solid implies and indeed 
exhibits and brings out the fact that there is space. Were there no 
solids, there would be no space. If you try to imagine space with no 
solids, you have to get rid of yourself looking at it, because you’re a 
solid in the middle of the space! Space, space, space forever — with 
nothing in it — is absolutely meaningless, an unimaginable concept. 
You have to have space and solid — they always go together. 


This explains some of the many ways in which Zen life has 
feeling for space. Here’s another very different thing to consider: their 
idea of poverty. The poverty of the monk, for example, is not poverty 
as we have thought of it in the Western tradition. It is not poverty as a 
sort of oppression, where the poor are deprived and feel denuded by 
poverty. In Zen, poverty is voluntary, and considered not really as 
poverty so much as simplicity, freedom, unclutteredness. 


They have the same feeling for it as they do for purity. The “pure” 


mind — the “‘taintless” mind —means not that you are a “prude,” in 
any sense, because they don’t think of purity in that sense at all. It 
does not mean not having any appetites — not feeling hungry, never 
feeling sexual, or anything like that! In Zen, purity means “clarity.” A 
“pure” eye is a clear eye — without dust in it, just as a pure mirror is 
a mirror without dust. But the real prototype of purity in Buddhist 
literature is not so much the mirror as space itself. That is purity, 
clarity, transparency; it is also freedom. 


Purity and poverty are simply an absence of pain. 


The peculiarly noticeable thing about the personality of Zen 
people is the uncluttered mind. When you deal with Zen masters, you 
have a strange feeling that so long as you are with them and 
addressing them, they are absolutely with you. They have nothing else 
to do but to talk to you. They are just “right there.” 


They’re willing to have some “small talk.” They’re not like those 
terribly serious spiritual people who have no time for small talk at all 
andwho can’t just pass the time of day! But on the other hand they 
don’t waste time. They don’t dither around, and they’re never 
distracted. When something is finished, it’s finished; and they go right 
on to the next thing. 


You can see this in the way they walk. They have a characteristic 
walk that is quite different from other Japanese people’s walk. This 
may be partly due to dress, because Zen monks have a wide skirt on 
their robes, and they stride as they walk, with a kind of a rhythm that 
is completely characteristic. A Zen monk walking down the street is 
exactly like a cat crossing the road. When you see a cat crossing the 
road, the cat always looks as if it knows exactly where it’s going. 
Both cats and Zen monks move in a way that conveys a feeling of 
freedom. 


I stayed one time in an inn on the edge of Nanzengi in the 
northern corner of Kyoto. I got up early, as I usually do, and sat on 
the balcony. In the distance I heard this sound: “Hoa! Hoa! Hoa!" It 
came nearer and nearer; then I saw these monks with their big 


mushroom hats on and their beggingbowls held out in front of them. 
Hoa means “the dharma.” 


They came down the street with a swinging, rhythmic walk: 
boom-boom-boom-boom-boom! I thought I’d put something in their 
bowls, and I shot downstairs. But by the time I got there, they were 
gone. 


We had dinner in the monastery that night and I told the priest 
who was entertaining us about this incident, and said, “You know, I 
don’t think your monks are serious about begging! In the early 
morning the little cart comes with groceries, and it stays around long 
enough for the housewives to come out and buy their vegetables. At 
night, there comes a man who sells ramen (noodle soup) on a little 
cart, and he stays around long enough for people to come out. But 
your monks don’t stay around long enough for anybody to give them 
anything! I don’t think they’re really begging at all; they’re just fat 
and rich and their begging is a gesture!” 


The next morning I went down early, and stood on the lower 
level. The monks came by, but they weren’t begging at all. They 
carried their bigmushroom hats in their hands in front of them, 
pointing outwards — the way they hold them when they’re just 
walking, and not begging. There were about three of them walking 
single-file, Indian style, and the lead monk looked at me and bowed 
with a kind of evil grin! The priest must have told them what I had 
said, and their answer was wordless — and comical. 


It’s so interesting the way they have this “free” walk. You have a 
sense that, as D.T. Suzuki put it, “a Zen monk is a concentration of 
energy which is available immediately for anything.” In one Zen 
master’s writings, this is likened to water in a vessel. If you make a 
hole in the vessel, the water immediately comes out. It doesn’t stop to 
think about it. 


When you clap your hands, the sound is the clapping of the hands. 
It comes out at once. It doesn’t stop to think. When you strike a stone 
with steel, the sparks fly immediately! 


In the same way, as you can see so clearly in the walk of those 


who practice Zen, there is alwaysavailability, always readiness to act. 
Therefore they live a life which is empty and spacious — in the sense 
of being “unblocked.” To get rid of blocks is to have space in one’s 
life, the same space we’ ve been talking about all along. 


The heart doctrine of Buddhism, and the final feeling about the 
universe at the end of the line, when you really get down to it, is 
called in Japanese ji-ji-muge. Or in Chinese, cher cher mu-gai. 
Between all things and events in the universe — muge — there is no 
block. In other words, every thing, every event in the universe that 
ever happens, implies all the others. 


And the connection between them is: 
space. 


Which is no block. 


If you can see that space is an effective reality, then you can 
understand the life and death relationship, because you don’t need 
any more information about this relationship than you already have. 
When we watch sparrows, this year’s sparrows seem to be the same 
as last year’s sparrows coming back again, because we don’t pay 
much attention to the unique individuality of each particular sparrow. 


This is in a way like the story of the fisherman who was using 
worms for bait. Someone came up to him while he was fishing and 
said, “It’s a terribly cruel thing. How can you put those poor little 
worms on hooks?” And he replied, “Oh, they are used to it.” 


We look at our own lives from a perspective in which we are 
enormously preoccupied with the uniqueness of each life. Somebody 
else at another level of magnification might see human lives as a vast 
continuity of comings and goings, and they would be just as right 
from their vantage point as we are from ours — for after all, all these 
human beings are just different ways of repeating the same event. 
Whether you call someone Jane or Joan, or John or Peter, it is always 
the same person coming back with slight variations — there always 
have to be slight variations because no two things are quitethe same. 


As is said in Pali, the language of the Buddhist texts, “Each 
incarnation is not the same, yet not another.” 


Think about what happens when you die. What will it be like to 
go to sleep and never wake up? You can’t even think about what it 
would be like because you have nothing to compare it to. It isn’t like 
being shut in the dark forever or buried alive. It is like everything you 
remember before you were born — after all, what happened once can 
always happen again. 


You know very well that after you die, and after everyone else 
that you have ever known has died, babies of all kinds — human, 
animal, and vegetable — will be born. And each one of them will feel 
that it is “I” in the same way as you do, and each will experience 
itself to be the center of the universe, exactly as you do. And in this 
sense, then, each one of them is you, for this situation can only be 
experienced one at a time. 


So you will die, and then someone else will be born, but it will 
feel exactly as you do now. It will be, in other words, “I? — and there 
is only one “I,” although it is infinitely varied. So you don’t have to 
wo!ry; you are not going to sit and wait out eternity in a dark room. 


To put this another way, allow me to make two propositions. 
After I die I will be reborn as another baby, but I will have no 
memory of my past life. That is proposition number one. Proposition 
two is simply that after I die another baby will be born. I maintain 
that these propositions really are the same thing, because if there is no 
memory of having lived before then effectively that baby is someone 
else. But after a while you have accumulated so many experiences 
and collected so many memories that they are lined up like a shelf of 
mystery stories that you have already read, and it comes time to get 
rid of them. 


You want a surprise, a new situation. You do not want to know 
what the outcome will be. One of the rules of the game of chess is 
that if you know the outcome of a game for certain, you cancel it and 
begin a new one in which the outcome is not certain. This is also part 
of nature, and so we have tohave forgetfulness as well as a memory, 


just as we have to have a capacity to retain food — the stomach and 
so on — but also a capacity to reject it. We have to have a hole at 
each end, and so it is with memory. 


By being able to lose yourself utterly — everything you have 
clung to, everything you have built up, all of your accomplishments 
and your pride — the world may begin anew, and see itself again 
through your eyes. 


PART IV 


ZEN MIND 


ZEN MIND 


If we say that Zen is a certain kind of understanding of the world, 
or a certain kind of awareness of the world, we must ask, what kind of 
awareness is it? It is very often said that Zen lies beyond the intellect 
and beyond logic, and that this kind of understanding is not accessible 
to reasoning or any other intellectual processes. 


What exactly does this mean? From some points of view, this way 
of putting it is misleading, because when we say “intellectualizing” 
and the Japanese say “intellectualizing,’” we don’t necessarily 
meanthe same thing. When in India they say, “The knowledge of 
Vedanta is not to be obtained from books,” this statement has a very 
specific meaning. It means the books are only lecture notes, and they 
have to be explained by a teacher. 


In the Yoga Sutra of Patanjali, the first verse says, “Now yoga is 
explained.” Period. Then the second verse follows. The teachers using 
these texts know this is just to remind them what to say, in the same 
way that musical notation for the East Indians is not something you 
read while you play, it is just to remind you of the basic form of the 
melody. 


The word “now” indicates that something had to go before this; 
there had to be a preparation before you got to this point in your study 
of yoga. The word “now” gives the teachers a clue for their pitch. 


In the same way, the Upanishads in their compact style are simply 
the notes to accompany the teaching. This is especially true of the 
Brahma Sutras; if you come across Radhakrishna’s translation of the 
Brahma Sutras you will find these funny little laconic verses from the 
sutra, and then pages upon pages of Radhakrishna’s commentary. 
That’s one reasonwhy it is said that you can’t get it from books. 


Another reason is that books by their very nature are intellectual, 
and the understanding of Zen is intuitive. 


What is the difference between intellectual understanding and 
intuitive understanding? When you talk about these deep matters, 


people often say, “I understand what you’re saying intellectually, but 
I don’t really feel it.” And I often say, “Well, I don’t think you 
understand it intellectually, because the intellect and the feelings 
aren’t really two different compartments of the mind.” 


Carl Jung has a schema of the mind as having four functions — 
intellect, feeling, intuition, and sensation — but these are only colors 
in a spectrum, as it were. The spectrum of light is continuous, and red 
is not in a different compartment from blue. Light is all one spectrum, 
with many colors. 


In the same way, we have one mind, and it has various different 
ways of functioning. 


A psychologist was ribbing me a while ago, kidding that I was 
only proficient in words. “You puton a great talk, but you don’t 
understand it otherwise,” he said. 


“Don’t you put down words like that!” I said, “Words are noises 
in the air; they are patterns of thought, patterns of intellect, like a fern. 
Do you put down a fern because it has a complicated pattern?” 


“No,” he said. “But the fern is real — it’s a living, natural thing.” 


And I said, “So are words! V’ll make patterns in the air with 
words, and make all sorts of concepts and string them together, and 
they’re going to be great! So don’t put it down — it’s a form of life 
like any other form of life.” 


Zen indeed has an intellectual aspect. This aspect is known in 
Japanese as kegon, and in Chinese, hua-yen. Hua means the flower, so 
this is the school of the flower garland. 


In Sanskrit, it is what is called ganda-vyuha, the most 
sophisticated form of Mahayana philosophy. When we were talking 
earlier about ji-ji-muge, the mutual interpenetration of all things and 
events, this is the philosophy that evolved in this school. 


The study of yoga has an intellectual aspect, as well. There are 
various forms of yoga: bhakti yoga, which is devotional, emotional, 
related to feelings; karma yoga, which is practical and active; hatha 


yoga, which is physical; and jnana yoga, which is intellectual. 


But so many people have great difficulty in seeing the bridge 
between intellectual understanding and intuitive understanding. They 
know the words, but don’t get any real “sense” of the meaning in a 
way that their sense-experience has changed. When we say “an 
intuitive understanding,” the word “intuition” is subtle, even vague, 
but “Zen understanding” is sensuous. It is something that you feel not 
so much in an emotional way as in a direct way, just like when you 
feel that something is hard. As they say, “It is like tasting water and 
knowing for yourself that it’s cold.” It is sensation, an actual, physical 
sensation. 


But how is the intellect related to physical sensation? Or is it 
completely unrelated? What difference does it make to your sensation 
whether you think at dawn that the sun is rising or whether youknow 
that the earth is rotating on its axis and revolving around the sun? Is 
the sensation of a person who does not know that the earth is 
revolving on its own axis and going around the sun the same as the 
sensation of a person who does? 


Or let’s look at another example. There are certain indigenous 
people in the world whose number system consists of one, two, three, 
and many. They do not differentiate after “three.” For those people it 
can never be a “fact” that a table has “four” corners — it has “many” 
corners. So they wouldn’t differentiate between a five-cornered and a 
six-cornered table because they have no “concept system” to give 
them the cue. 


Take an illustration like this — it is very simple, but all depends 
on concept: 


If you have no concept, that drawing is simply a flat-surface 
pattern. But if it has been explained to you that it is a cube, then you 
can imagine and actually sense the three-dimensionality in it. Now 


then, let’s go further and ask which surface of the cube is in front? Is 
it the one with corners “A”? Or the one with corners “B’’? 


You can see it either way, and so you can make either of them the 
one in “front.” Once you’ve caught on to the idea, it becomes 
sensation to you — you can actually “feel” it. 


This points to the connection between intellect and physical 
sensation: Concepts lead to sensations — and therefore, false 
concepts lead to illusions. 


We have seen this principle demonstrated before with all kinds of 
optical illusions. In those illusions our concept influences our 
sensation. A central point in Zen is that we have a concept of our own 
existence and of the world which is fallacious, and Zen will help us 
get rid of that concept so that we will have a new sensation. People 
get worried when they hear this, and say, “Well, are we just going to 
exchange one hallucination for another?” 


Let me respond with a question or two: How do you know when 
you know that you know? What is the test of “truth” about something 
that you “feel”? 


You may say, “Well, I can feel that ’m Napoleon, or that ’m 
being persecuted by the government.” But this is hallucination — 
even though one might feel it very strongly. 


In our culture, we have a “test” of truth, which is science. We say, 
“If something can be demonstrated scientifically, then we’re inclined 
to believe that it’s not hallucination.” All right, let’s go along with 
that. I think this is rather relative, but I will always in any argument 
grant the premises of the person who wants to argue with me, and 
take it from there. Let’s assume that sciences like biology and physics 
are ways of discovering the “truth.” When we grant that, we find that 
the hallucination of being a separate ego will not stand up to 
biological tests! 


From the point of view of biology, the individual organism is in 
the same “behavior system” as the environment, and in fact the 
organism and the environment constitute a single system of behavior 
which is neither deterministic nor voluntary. The two are really one 
activity, and they call it the “field of the organism-environment.” 


Ecology is the study of these kinds of fields. 


When I am in academic circles, where people so often think that 
mystical matters are not at all respectable, I don’t talk to them about 
mystical experience. I talk instead about “ecological awareness.” It’s 
just a matter of observing current etiquette and nomenclature, because 
these are two ways of describing the same reality. From a biological 
point of view it is perfectly clear that every individual instance of life 
is a function of the whole universe. This becomes even clearer in 
quantum theory. 


Then you might ask this question: “Why do you scientists — 
biologists and physicists — who understand this to be so still go on 
behaving as if you were separate egos?” And they would answer that, 
in spite of the evidence to the contrary, they still feel that way. Their 
theory is only still at the point of being theory, in that it hasn’t 
convinced them so far as they themselves are concerned. They are 
still under the social hypnosis that we were all conditioned to in 
childhood that made us feel as if we are separate egos. 


So Zen is a process of “de-hypnotization,” if you like. Zen takes 
away the concepts that are much like optical “tricks,” concepts that 
give us the hallucination of separateness. 


Then, when we find out what things are like when the concepts 
have been taken away, we can say to the biologist, “Isn’t this just like 
you said it was?” And he has to agree. What we arrive at is a state of 
sensation or feeling that is far more in accord with the findings of 
science than the ordinary sensation we have of being separate 
individuals. 


So the way in which Zen is non-intellectual is not so much that it 
regards intellection as something always false and misleading; 
instead, Zen begins by taking away our concepts, and by showing us 
how to see what it is like to view the world without concepts. Once 
we have discovered this new view of the world, we can re-fabricate 
new concepts to try and explain now how it is that we see. 


For this reason, many Zen masters are also great intellectuals. In 
the history of Zen there have been scholars of all kinds, and physicists 
in modern times. Zen does not rule out the life of the intellect. It only 


says, “Do not be hoaxed by concepts.” 


Is Zen illogical? Illogical is not the right word, because what often 
appear in Zen to be paradoxes are statements that make perfect sense 
in another system of logic than that to which we’re accustomed. We 
in the West are accustomed to a kind of logical thinking that is based 
on exclusiveness — “either-or.” Chinese logic, on the other hand, is 
based on “both-and.” 


To us it is either “black” or “white,” it either “is” or it “is not,” it 
is either “‘so” or it is “not so.” This kind of logic is fundamental to our 
thinking, and so we emphasize the mutually exclusive character of 
logical categories: “Is you is or is you ain’t?” Is it in the box or 
outside the box? 


99 66. 


In so many of our tests we are asked “true” or “false,” “yes” or 
“no,” and we’re given only those choices. It’s amusing to think that 
when we toss a coin to decide whether we will do it or we won’t, we 
have only a two-sided coin. The Chinese are able to toss a sixty-four- 
sided coin by using the Book of Changes in the same situations where 
we would toss a coin. It’s a rather nice idea, when you think about it, 
and even though the Book of Changes is based on yin and yang, black 
or white, you can get everything out of black and white if you provide 
for all of the permutations that are possible — just as you can get all 
numbers out of zero and one in the binary system. But whereas we 
think something is either/or — either black or white — both Indian 
and Chinese logic recognize that black and white are inseparable, that 
in fact they need each other, and so it isn’t a matter of making a 
choice between them. 


“To be or not to be” is not the question — because you can’t have 
one without the other! Not-being implies being; just as being implies 
not-being. 

The existentialist in the West — who still trembles at the choice 
between being and not-being and therefore says that anxiety is 
ontological — hasn’t grasped this point yet. When the existentialist 
who trembles with anxiety before this choice realizes suddenly one 
day that not-being implies being, the trembling of anxiety turns into 


the shaking of laughter. 


Nothing has changed except one’s perception. And in the same 
way, you may have the same view of the world — just what you’re 
looking at now, seeing everything that you see now — but it can have 
a completely different feeling, and a completely different meaning to 
it. Because in one’s ordinary sensation of the world the 
differentiations — the solids — are stressed, and the space is ignored. 


But when you practice Zen meditation, you have a kind of a 
“conceptual alteration,’ and then suddenly you notice the physical 
world — everything you’re seeing now — in a completely different 
way. You see that it all goes together; it’s all-of-a-piece. You see that 
every inside implies its outside, and every outside implies its inside. 


You may think now, in the ordinary way we’re conditioned to 
think, that “I — me, myself — am only on the inside of my skin.” But 
when you experience this perceptive “flip,” you discover your outside 
is as much you as your inside. You can’t have an inside without an 
outside, so if the inside is yours, then the outside is yours! 


Finally you have to acknowledge that the world outside your skin 
is as much yours as the world inside the skin. And even though 
everybody’s outside appears different to us, in reality everybody’s 
outside is all the same! Do you see? 


It is in this way that we’re one. 


Your soul isn’t in your body; your body is in your soul! 


That’s why the ancients were partly correct with their astrology. 
When they drew a “map” of a person’s soul, they drew a crude map 
of the universe as it was at the moment of the person’s birth, seen 
from that place and time. That map, that horoscope, is considered to 
be a “picture” of that person’s mind — because your mind is not in 
your head, your head is in your mind. And your mind is the total 
system of cosmic interrelationships as they are focused at the point 
that you call “here and now.” 


The question is then: Can this become clear to us? Can it become 
clear in the way a sensation is clear, as when we taste water and know 


for ourselves that it is cold? The experience of this requires some 
meditation, and it also depends on an intellectual process. 


We get into trouble through an intellectual process and we’re 
going to get out of trouble through an intellectual process. From an 
intellectual standpoint, the process by which we get into trouble could 
be called “additive,” whereas the process by which we get out of 
trouble is “subtractive.” In the words of Lao-tzu, “The scholar gains 
every day; the man of Tao loses every day.” 


The scholar acquires ideas, and in Zen the intellectual operation is 
to get rid of ideas — to see that all ideas are projections that we make 
upon the cosmic Rorschach blot. 


The world is a Rorschach blot, full of movement and wiggles. 
Only when we see straight lines and grid-iron patterns do we know 
people have been around. People are always trying to straighten 
things out, and so we create straight lines! 


Look at how the stars are sprayed across the heavens. In order to 
“make sense” of the stars, we can get stellar maps and see straight 
lines joining the stars in various patterns to make up constellations. 
But all those joining lines are of course projections by which we try 
to make sense of the stars. 


In the same way we make projections upon the surface of nature 
for the purpose of discussing it with each other — and, inevitably, 
some person with a strong will and a powerful and compelling 
personality describes the world in one way, and everybody else 
agrees with him. That’s the way it is. And it’s passed down through 
the generations. 


So now, let’s go back to seeing that the world is a primordial 
Rorschach blot. Wiggles of the world unite; you have nothing to lose 
but your names! 


Once you see the movement and the wiggles to be what they are, 
once you realize that we have created the world from our own 
projections, you see then that the difference between your inside 
(your ego, your self) and the outside (the subject-perceiver and the 
object-perceived) is artificial. 


You can confirm this realization through neurology, because 


neurologists will tell you that the so-called “external world” that you 
see is experienced by you only as a state of your own nervous system. 
What you see out in front of you is an experience in the nerve ganglia 
in the back of your head, and you have no other awareness of an 
external world except in terms of your own body. 


You can infer that your body is, in turn, something “in” the 
external world, but you only know it by union with it. You are in the 
external world, and scientist and mystic alike will tell you that you 
are an inseparable part of it. 


Yet “part” isn’t even the right word, because the world doesn’t 
have “parts” like an automobile engine — it isn’t bolted or screwed 
together. The world is like a body: When your body was born, it grew 
not by the addition of “bits,” but by an organic process in which the 
whole thing constellated itself at once. It grew larger and larger, 
growing from the inside to the outside. 


It did it in a field called the womb. And the womb could only do it 
in a field called a female body. And a female body could only do it in 
a field called human society, in a field called the biosphere of the 
planet Earth. If you take the body out of its field, it cannot grow. 


Blood in a test tube cannot do what blood in the veins does, 
because all of the body’s conditions have to be replicated, and that’s 
impossible in a test tube, because it’s a different environment. 


Just as words change their meaning in accordance with the 
context of the sentence, so organisms change their nature in 
accordance with the context of their environment. Even from this 
strictly scientific point of view, our body-mind — contrary to what 
we usually feel — is not something separated from other minds and 
from the external world. /t is all one process. If we don’t feel that to 
be so, it is because we have been indoctrinated with concepts that 
contradict the facts. The concept of what we might call the “Christian 
ego” simply does not fit in with the facts of life; it has become a 
social institution that is obsolete. 


When we say “social institution,” people usually think of things 
like hospitals, parliaments, police forces, fire departments, and so 


forth. But marriage is a social institution, the family is a social 
institution, the clock and the calendar are social institutions, latitude 
and longitude are social institutions. And the ego is a social 
institution; it is, in other words, a “convention” (from the Latin 
convenire, “to come together’); it is a consensus, an agreement. With 
it we are agreeing to a set of rules for the purpose of playing a game. 


What happens, however, is that we are apt to confuse the rules of 
our social game with the laws of nature — with the way things are. 
Even the “laws of nature” are social conventions. Nature does not 
obey a lawgiver who says, first of all, this is the way things shall be, 
and then all beetles, all butterflies, all rocks, and so on follow it. The 
laws of nature are our way of describing what we believe to be 
“regular behavior” in nature. 


But what is regular? Interestingly, regulus in Latin means a 
“rule.” And what is a rule? It is a ruler — it is marked-out in inches, it 
is straight, and you measure things with it. But you don’t find rulers 
growing on trees! Nature is all of a piece, and everything in it goes 
with everything else in it, in an eternal dance. But we chop it so that 
we can discuss it and even try to rule it. 


Laws of nature are therefore tools, like axes, hammers, and saws; 
they are instruments we use to control what is going on. To keep in 
touch, then, with what is really going on in the present, always 
preserve this careful distinction between the game rules of the human 
game, and the behavior of the world in itself. It is true that the 
behavior of the world in itself includes the human games, and it’s all 
a part of nature. But don’t try to make the tail wag the dog. 


The whole point of Zen is to suspend the rules we have 
superimposed on things and to see the world as it is — as all of a 
piece. This has to be done in a special setting of some kind, because 
you can’t just gaily walk out into the street and suspend the rules. 
And if you do, you’ll create traffic confusion of every conceivable 
kind! 


But we can set up a certain environment in which we have an 
agreement to suspend the rules — that is to say to meditate, to stop 
thinking for a while, to stop making formulations. 


This means, essentially, to stop talking to yourself: That is the 
meaning of the word in Japanese — munen — that is ordinarily 
translated as “no thought.” To meditate is to stop talking to yourself! 


We say, “Talking to yourself is the first sign of madness,” but we 
don’t follow our own advice. We’re talking to ourselves most of the 
time — and if you talk all the time you’ve got nothing else to talk 
about but your own talking! You never listen to what anybody else 
has to say, without a running commentary of your own talking. And if 
all you ever listen to is talking — be it your own or other people’s — 
you have nothing to talk about but talk. 


You have to stop talking in order to have something to talk about! 


In the same way, you have to stop thinking in order to have 
something to think about, because otherwise all you’re thinking about 
is thoughts — and that’s scholarship, as we practice it in the 
universities today, where we study and write and talk about books 
about books about books! 


In order to be able to symbolize, to think effectively, one has to 
suspend thought occasionally and be in a state of what I will call 
“pure sensation.” Drink water, and know for yourself that it’s cold. 
Sit, just to sit. 


Sitting quietly doing nothing. 
Spring comes and the grass grows by itself. 


You can take that literally or you can take it symbolically. But 
that is the meaning of munen. 


Sometimes the word used is mushin — no mind. Mushin means 
being open to the way that the world is experienced sensuously, 
without the distortion of concepts, so as to find the original nature 
before any thought is made. 


It is the way you experienced it when you were first born, before 
you thought any thoughts about it! It is called your original mind, or 
the “root mind.” 


One of the koans that are studied in the Rinzai school of Zen is: 


“Who are you before your father and mother conceived you?” You 
could put it this way: “Who are you before your father and mother 
bamboozled you!” Conceived is used in the sense of “thought about” 
you, or taught you to conceive. 


What is your original mind? Before all this started, where were 
you really? 


To go back to that, you have to take a fresh look at the world. You 
have to come to it unprejudiced, with your mind wiped clean, like a 
mirror, of all conceptions about life and what it is. 


Even now, of course, I am giving you conceptions about the unity 
of the world and about the process of meditation. And those who 
understand these words still have difficulty if they’ve only got the 
conception. It may alter their feeling to some extent, and their 
sensation, but not nearly as vividly as their sensation will be altered if 
they look at the world without any conception at all. 


“Well,” you might say, “how can we stop? We think perpetually 
— we are always talking to ourselves. It’s a nervous habit!” 


To stop thinking, there are certain technical aids: 


Concentrate on breathing, and think of nothing but your 
breathing — in and out, in and out.... One, two, three, four, 
five.... One, two, three, four, five. 


Or look at a point of light and think of nothing else but the 
point of light — just concentrate, concentrate, on that light. 


Both of these help you to eliminate all concepts from the mind 
except that which you are concentrating on. The next thing is to get 
rid of the point you’re concentrating on. 


Most people think that means a “blank mind,” but it doesn’t. You 
concentrate on something in order to cause the thought process, the 
verbalizing, to stop. Then when you take away the point of 


concentration, you are simply perceiving the world as it is, without 
verbalizing. 


The trick of concentration stops our verbalizing. Concentration is 
only preliminary. It leads us deeper, beyond concentration, until we 
reach the state of samadhi. This is dhyana, in Sanskrit — which came 
to be called c’han in China and zen in Japan. It is not concentration in 
the ordinary sense, like staring at a point or thinking of one thing 
only. It comes after concentration has stopped, after the point on 
which you have concentrated has fallen away, after your body and 
mind have fallen away, and you’re open to the world with your naked 
senses. 


See that. 
That is the foundation experience. 


After you see that, and on the basis of seeing that, you can, of 
course, go back to concepts and construct this idea of the world, that 
idea, and the other idea. 


This is why Zen does not really involve any beliefs in any theory 
or doctrine. In this sense, it is not religion — if by religion you mean 
something that involves a system of beliefs. It is purely experimental 
and empirical in its approach, and it allows us to get rid of belief — to 
get rid of all dependence upon words and ideas. 


This is not because words and ideas are “evil,” nor because they 
are necessarily confusing; it is just because we do happen to be 
confused by them at this stage in our evolution. 


That is really the essential nature of the whole meditation process: 
the suspension of talking to yourself, either in words or in any other 
conceptual image. 


It is of interest that words are a form of notation — words are the 
notation of life. Just as musical notation is a way of writing down 
music so as to remember it, words are essential vehicles of memory: 
we repeat them, we write them down, and we remember. That gives 
us a wonderful sense of control, but to the extent that we are tied to 


our notations, we pay a price for it. 


In music, notation limits our ability to conceive of variations and 
other musical forms. The Hindu, however, is not tied to notes in 
music, and therefore values a kind of music in which a musical 
instrument — be it a drum, flute, or sitar — is immediately 
responsive to every subtle motion of the human organism. They 
therefore play things — odd quarter-tones and strange rhythms — 
which are impossible to reproduce with our notation. 


The Hindu rejoices in the extreme subtlety of a flute, so 
responsive to human breath, an organic phenomenon. When they 
listen to our music, it all sounds very structured and rigid to them, 
like a military march, because of the regular beat and the fixed 
harmonic intervals. 


In the same way, when you get free from certain fixed concepts of 
the way the world is, you find it is far more subtle, and far more 
miraculous, than you thought it was. You find that human 
relationships and situations are amazingly subtle. And you gain a 
facility for understanding them, not through conceptualizing, but 
through asking your brain how it would deal with them. 


Your brain is an organ like your heart, and it can deal with 
situations without having to think about them! The brain is not only 
an organ of thought — only one of its functions is thinking. The brain 
does a lot of things other than thinking, and enables your body and 
mind to perceive and act in new, unique, and wonderful ways. 


You have a fantastic computer in your skull — and what we call 
“thinking” is only fifteen percent or less of the brain’s activity. The 
brain is very active in controlling all our organic processes — our 
gland functions, our digestion, our circulation, and everything else. 
The brain is in control of the entire autonomic nervous system. 
Through the practice of Zen, you can learn to use your nervous 
system in a much more wonderful way than you would ever have 
thought it could be used! 


By practicing Zen, you find you can let your nervous system 
answer questions and pass through problems without any interference 


from your conscious thinking process. We cannot solve the puzzle of 
the Zen koans or of the situations we encounter in life through our 
conscious thinking process — but the brain will! And the practice of 
Zen shows us how. 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


Alan Watts was born in England in 1915. Beginning at age 
sixteen, when he wrote essays for the journal of the Buddhist Lodge 
in London, he developed a reputation over the next forty years as a 
foremost interpreter of Eastern philosophies for the West, eventually 
developing an audience of millions who were enriched through his 
books, tape recordings, radio and television appearances, and public 
lectures. He became widely recognized for his Zen writings and for 
The Book: On the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are. 


In all, Watts wrote more than twenty-five books and recorded 
hundreds of lectures and seminars, all building toward a personal 
philosophy he shared with honesty and joy with his readers and 
listeners throughout the world. His overall works have presented a 
model of individuality and self-expression that can be matched by 
few philosophers. 


Watts came to the United States in 1938, and earned a Master’s 
Degree in Theology from Seabury-Western Theological Seminary. 
He was Episcopal Chaplain at Northwestern University during World 
War II, and held fellowships from Harvard University and the 
Bollingen Foundation. He became professor and dean of the 
American Academy of Asian Studies in San Francisco and lectured 
and traveled widely. 


He died in 1973 at his home in northern California, survived by 
his second wife and seven children. A complete list of his books and 
tapes may be found at www.alanwatts.com. 


The book you have just read was created 
from the Alan Watts Electronic University 
audio tape archive, a vast library of recordings 
of his public lectures and seminars. 

The archive is the source of Alan Watts’ 
audio collections, new publications, 
and ongoing public radio programs. 


For information about ordering 
Alan Watts audio collections, 
go to www.alanwatts.com 
on the Internet, or write or call: 


Electronic University 
Post Office Box 2309 
San Anselmo, CA 94979 


Phone: (800) 969-2887 
Catalog request: Ext. 2 
Ordering: Ext. 3 
E-mail: watts@alanwatts.com 


New World Library is dedicated to 
publishing books, audiocassettes, and videotapes 
that inspire and challenge us to improve the 
quality of our lives and our world. 


Our books and tapes are available 
in bookstores everywhere. 
For a catalog of our complete library 
of fine books and cassettes, contact: 


New World Library 
14 Pamaron Way 
Novato, CA 94949 


Phone: (415) 884-2100 
Fax: (415) 884-2199 
Or call toll-free (800) 972-6657 
Catalog requests: Ext. 50 
Ordering: Ext. 52 


E-mail: escort@nwlib.com 
Website: www.newworldlibrary.com 


