"Perhaps the foremost Western interpreter 


of Eastern thought for the modern world.” 


DOES IT 
MATTE 


Essays on Man’s Relation to Materiality 


Alan Watts 


DOES IT 
MATTER 


Also by Alan Watts 


Behold the Spirit 
Beyond Theology 
The Book 
Cloud-hidden, Whereabouts Unknown 
The Joyous Cosmology 
Myth and Ritual in Christianity 
Nature, Man and Woman 
Psychotherapy East and West 
The Spirit of Zen 
The Supreme Identity 
Tao 
This Is It 
The Way of Zen 
The Wisdom of Insecurity 


Also by Alan Watts from New World Library 


Eastern Wisdom, Modern Life 
In My Own Way 
Still the Mind 
What Is Tao? 
What Is Zen? 


DOES IT 
MATTER 


Essays on Man’s Relation to Materiality 


Alan Watts 


wk New World Library 


Novato, California 
BRASS 


sit New World Library 
14 Pamaron Way 
“en” Novato, California 94949 


Copyright © 1971 by Alan Watts; copyright © 1998 by Joan Watts and 
Anne Watts 


Originally published by Pantheon Books, 1970; Vintage Books edition, 1971 


All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means 
— electronic, mechanical, or other — without written permission from 
the publisher, except by a reviewer, who may quote brief passages in a re- 
view. 


“Psychedelics and Religious Experience” is reprinted by permission of the 
California Law Review. Copyright © 1968 by California Law Review, Inc. 


Text design and typography by Tona Pearce Myers 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Watts, Alan, 1915-1973. 
Does it matter? : essays on man’s relation to materiality / Alan Watts. 
p- cm. 
Originally published: New York : Pantheon Books, 1970. 
ISBN 978-1-57731-585-8 (pbk. : alk. paper) 
1. Conduct of life. I. Title. 
BJ 1581.2.W36 2007 
170—dc22 2007028537 


First New World Library printing, November 2007 
ISBN 978-1-57731-585-8 


Printed in the United States on acid-free, partially recycled paper 


g | New World Library is a proud member of the Green Press Initiative. 


1o 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 


To Robert B. Shapiro 


CONTENTS 


Foreword 


Wealth versus Money 

Murder in the Kitchen 

Clothes—On and Off 

The Spirit of Violence and the Matter of Peace 
Psychedelics and Religious Experience 

Seven Short Essays 


The Basic Myth 

The Great Mandala 

On Selecting Vibrations 

Planting Seeds and Gathering Fruit 
Art with a Capital A 

The Buddhism of Aldous Huxley 

D. T. Suzuki: The “Mind-less” Scholar 


About the Author 


ix 


103 
106 


124 


129 


FOREWORD 


his book consists of a series of recent essays on man’s rela- 

tionship to the material world—to what we call nature, the 
physical environment, the body, and substantial matter. In using 
such words, I am at once aware that all of them are philosophi- 
cal and abstract concepts. Equally so are notions that “reality” 
is in fact mental or spiritual. For I am trying to talk about some- 
thing which is not talk, and which words and other symbols only 
represent. Alfred Korzybski called it the nonverbal or (with a 
delightful double-entendre) “unspeakable” world. 

Reality is, of course, neither matter nor spirit. It is a per- 
cept, not a concept, and everyone knows what it is in the sense 
that one knows how to breathe without the least knowledge of 
physiology. As Saint Augustine of Hippo put it when asked 
about the nature of time: “I know what it is, but when you ask 
me I don’t.” Let’s say (since in writing a book one has to say 
something) that reality or existence is a multidimensional and 
interwoven system of varying spectra of vibrations, and that 
man’s five senses are attuned only to very small bands of these 
spectra. That sounds very profound and may mean nothing at 
all, but in reading it one should attend to the sound of the words 
rather than their meaning. Then you will get my point. 


x DOES IT MATTER? 


The point is that I am trying to focus attention on what is 
happening as distinct from the various ways in which it is de- 
scribed by means of words, numbers, and other symbols. The 
disease of civilization, whether Occidental or Oriental, is that 
we have too much of a good thing: we confuse the marvelous fa- 
cility of description with what is actually going on, the world as 
labeled and classified with the world as it is. If I talk all the time 
I am not open to what anyone else has to say. Likewise, if I think 
(or talk to myself) all the time, I have nothing to think about 
except thoughts. I have less and less awareness of the world, the 
system of vibrations, which words and thoughts represent. 

I am not an anti-intellectual. After all, 1 make my living by 
various feats of verbalization. But there is no grist for the in- 
tellectual mill if we get into a situation where thought is all 
about thinking, and where books are about nothing except other 
books. 

It is for this reason that an enormous amount of current in- 
tellectual, philosophical, and even scientific discourse strikes 
me increasingly as absurd. It is an attempt to translate a non- 
linear and multidimensional system of vibrations into a linear 
(alphabetical or mathematical) system of symbols; and it just 
can’t be done. It is like trying to transport the Atlantic Ocean 
into the Pacific with a beer mug: however rapidly automated 
and cyberneticized the process may be, it is futile. 

Not so long ago a professor of Harvard University said 
—in connection with the scandal about Timothy Leary and 
consciousness-changing drugs—that no knowledge is intellec- 
tually and academically respectable which cannot be put into 
words. Alas for the departments of music, art, dancing, and 
physical education! The problem is that literate and civilized 
people do not understand that their brains are much smarter 


Foreword xi 


than their minds, considering “mind” as the total system of ver- 
bal, mathematical, and notational rules by which we commu- 
nicate and preserve information. Neurologists are the first to 
admit that their science does not by any means comprehend the 
nervous system, which is only to say that the brain is far more 
complexly organized than our coded, linear information about 
it. A trained organist, for example, can simultaneously keep in 
mind four different rhythms or melodies—one for each hand 
and one for each foot—but even very intelligent people can 
hardly cope with five, six, or seven variables at the same time. 
But the nervous system, in organizing all the functions of the 
body, is dealing with thousands of variables at once, for the 
brain operates intelligently without having to stop to think. 

Thus every genius, who cannot explain how he paints, 
dances, or pitches a ball, is using his brain rather than his mind. 
Consider, for instance, the differences between Hindu and clas- 
sical Western music. We start by learning to read a system of 
notation which limits us to a twelve-tone scale and to the rhyth- 
mic pulses of semibreve, minim, crotchet, quaver, semiquaver, 
and demisemiquaver, each of which, by being dotted, may be 
prolonged by a half of its value. The tradition of our music, be- 
cause passed down through notation, is essentially /iterate, and 
all of it—even the most sentimental songs of love—sounds to 
Orientals like a military march. The Hindus use notation sim- 
ply as an aide-mémoire for certain themes. One learns music by 
following the performance of a teacher, imitating the subtle in- 
terplay of his nerves and muscle with string, reed, or drum— 
as a result of which there are moments of ecstasy in Hindu 
music in which even God calls out for help. 

Thus the point I am making in all these essays is that civi- 
lized people, whether Western or Eastern, need to be liberated 


xii DOES IT MATTER? 


and dehypnotized from their systems of symbolism and, 
thereby, become more intensely aware of the living vibrations 
of the real world. For lack of such awareness our conscious- 
nesses and consciences have become calloused to the daily 
atrocities of burning children with napalm, of saturation bomb- 
ing of fertile earth with all its plants, wild animals, and insects 
(not to mention people), and of manufacturing nuclear and 
chemical weapons concerning which the real problem is not so 
much how to prevent their use as how to get them off the face 
of the earth. 

We need to become vividly aware of our ecology, of our 
interdependence and virtual identity with all other forms of life 
which the divisive and emboxing methods of our current way 
of thought prevent us from experiencing. The so-called phys- 
ical world and the so-called human body are a single process, 
differentiated only as the heart from the lungs or the head from 
the feet. In stodgy academic circles I refer to this kind of un- 
derstanding as “ecological awareness.” Elsewhere it would be 
called “cosmic consciousness” or “mystical experience.” How- 
ever, our intellectual and scientific “establishment” is, in gen- 
eral, still spellbound by the myth that human intelligence and 
feeling are a fluke of chance in an entirely mechanical and stu- 
pid universe—as if figs would grow on thistles or grapes on 
thorns. But wouldn’t it be more reasonable to see the entire 
scheme of things as continuous with our own consciousness 
and the marvelous neural organization which, shall we say, 
sponsors it? 

Metaphysical as such considerations may be, it seems to me 
that their issues are earthy and practical. For our radically mis- 


named “materialistic” civilization must above all cultivate the 


Foreword xiii 


love of material, of earth, air, and water, of mountains and 
forests, of excellent food and imaginative housing and clothing, 
and of cherishing our artfully erotic contacts between human 
bodies. Certainly, all these so-called “things” are as imperma- 
nent as ripples in water, but what life, what love, what energy 
is there in a perfectly pure abstraction or a totally solid and eter- 
nally indestructible rock? 

But I must add this afterthought. The very word “rock” 
comes to life in “rock-a-bye baby” and “rock-and-roll.” To 
cleave is to split and to hold together. To start is to begin a care- 
fully prepared course of action and to jump with surprise. 
“Evil” read backwards is “live.” Demon est deus inversus. 


Heaven above, heaven below; 
Stars above, stars below. 

All that is over, under shall show. 
Happy who the riddle reads. 


The essays which follow were written quite independently, 
and I trust, therefore, that the reader will forgive some repeti- 
tion of ideas, though I have tried to be sure that they are always 
expressed differently. “Wealth versus Money” and “Murder in 
the Kitchen,” with some new material added, were written for 
Playboy—that remarkable journal which, posing as a high-class 
girlie magazine, publishes some of the most exciting philo- 
sophical thinking in America, and thus at least exposes some 
six million readers to the intellectual life. “The Spirit of Vio- 
lence and the Matter of Peace” was written for Alternatives to 
Violence, a symposium edited by Dr. Larry Ng, neurologist, 
and published by Time-Life Books. “Psychedelics and Reli- 
gious Experience” was written at the request of the California 
Law Review for an issue (January 1968) devoted to the legal 


xiv DOES IT MATTER? 


problems of the use and abuse of drugs. It was also delivered as 
a lecture to the Illinois State Medical Society. 

All but one of the “Seven Short Essays” were first pub- 
lished in The Bulletin of the Society for Comparative Philosophy. 
“The Basic Myth” and “The Great Mandala” subsequently ap- 
peared in the late lamented San Francisco Oracle, the most re- 
markable effort as yet put forth by the Underground Press; and 
“D. T. Suzuki: The ‘Mind-less’ Scholar” appeared also in the 
memorial symposium published in his honor by the Eastern 
Buddhist Society of Kyoto. “Art with a Capital A” was written 
as the foreword to a catalogue for an exhibition of electronic 
art organized by Oliver Andrews, Professor of Sculpture at the 
University of California, Los Angeles. Permission to publish 
these essays in the present volume, from the various journals in- 
volved, is gratefully acknowledged. 

Alan Watts 
Sausalito, California 
May 1969 


WEALTH VERSUS MONEY 


nthe year of Our Lord Jesus Christ 2000, the United States of 

America will no longer exist. This is not an inspired prophecy 
based on supernatural authority but a reasonably certain guess. 
“The United States of America” can mean two quite different 
things. The first is a certain physical territory, largely on the 
North American continent, including all such geographical and 
biological features as lakes, mountains and rivers, skies and 
clouds, plants, animals, and people. The second is a sovereign 
political state, existing in competition with many other sover- 
eign states jostling one another around the surface of this 
planet. The first sense is concrete and material; the second, ab- 
stract and conceptual. 

If the United States continues for very much longer to exist 
in this second sense, it will cease to exist in the first. For the 
land and its life can now so easily be destroyed—hby the sudden 
and catastrophic methods of nuclear or biological warfare, or 
by any combination of such creeping and insidious means as 
overpopulation, pollution of the atmosphere, contamination 
of the water and erosion of our natural resources by maniacal 
misapplications of technology. For good measure, add the 
possibilities of civil and racial war, self-strangulation of the 
great cities and breakdown of all major transportation and 


2 DOES IT MATTER? 


communication networks. And that will be the end of the 
United States of America, in both senses. 

There is, perhaps, the slight possibility that we may con- 
tinue our political and abstract existence in heaven, there to 
enjoy being “better dead than Red” and, with the full author- 
ity of the Lord God, to be able to say to our enemies squirm- 
ing in hell, “We told you so!” On the grounds of such hopes 
and values, someone may well push the Big Red Button, 
to demonstrate that belief in spiritual immortality can be in- 
consistent with physical survival. Luckily for us, our Marxist 
enemies do not believe in any such hereafter. 

When I make predictions from a realistic and hard-boiled 
point of view, I tend to the gloomy view of things. The candi- 
dates of my choice have never yet won in any election in which 
I have voted. I am thus inclined to feel that practical politics 
must assume that most people are either contentious and malev- 
olent or stupid, that their decisions will usually be shortsighted 
and self-destructive and that, in all probability, the human race 
will fail as a biological experiment and take the easy downhill 
road to death, like the Gadarene swine. If I were betting on it— 
and had somewhere to place my bet—that’s where I would put 
my money. 

But there is nowhere to lay a bet on the fate of mankind. 
Likewise, there is no way of standing outside the situation and 
looking at it as an impartial, coldly calculating, objective ob- 
server. I’m involved in the situation and therefore concerned; 
and because I am concerned, I’ll be damned if I’ll let things 
come out as they would if I were just betting on them. 

There is, however, another possibility for the year aD 2000. 
This will require putting our minds on physical facts and being 
relatively unconcerned with the United States of America as 


Wealth versus Money 3 


an abstract political entity. By overlooking the nation, we can 
turn full attention to the territory, to the actual earth, with its 
waters and forests, flowers and crops, animals and human be- 
ings—and so create, with less cost and suffering than we are 
bearing in 1968, a viable and thoroughly enjoyable biological 
experiment. 

The chances may be slim. Not long ago Congress voted, 
with much patriotic rhetoric, for the imposition of severe penal- 
ties upon anyone presuming to burn the flag of the United 
States. Yet the very Congressmen who passed this law are re- 
sponsible, by acts of commission or omission, for burning, pol- 
luting, and plundering the territory that the flag is supposed to 
represent. Therein, they exemplified the peculiar and perhaps 
fatal fallacy of civilization: the confusion of symbol with reality. 

Civilization, comprising all the achievements of art and sci- 
ence, technology and industry, is the result of man’s invention 
and manipulation of symbols—of words, letters, numbers, for- 
mulas and concepts, and of such social institutions as universally 
accepted clocks and rulers, scales and timetables, schedules 
and laws. By these means, we measure, predict, and control the 
behavior of the human and natural worlds—and with such star- 
tling apparent success that the trick goes to our heads. All too 
easily, we confuse the world as we symbolize it with the world 
as it is. As semanticist Alfred Korzybski used to say, it is an ur- 
gent necessity to distinguish between the map and the territory 
and, he might have added, between the flag and the country. 

Let me illustrate this point and, at the same time, explain 
the major obstacle to sane technological progress, by dwelling 
on the fundamental confusion between money and wealth. Re- 
member the Great Depression of the Thirties? One day there 
was a flourishing consumer economy, with everyone on the 


4 DOES IT MATTER? 


up-and-up; and the next, unemployment, poverty, and bread 
lines. What happened? The physical resources of the coun- 
try—the brain, brawn, and raw materials—were in no way de- 
pleted, but there was a sudden absence of money, a so-called 
financial slump. Complex reasons for this kind of disaster can 
be elaborated at length by experts on banking and high finance 
who cannot see the forest for the trees. But it was just as if 
someone had come to work on building a house and, on the 
morning of the Depression, the boss had said, “Sorry, baby, but 


2 66 


we can’t build today. No inches.” “Whaddya mean, no inches? 
We got wood. We got metal. We even got tape measures.” 
“Yeah, but you don’t understand business. We been using too 
many inches and there’s just no more to go around.” 

A few years later, people were saying that Germany couldn’t 
possibly equip a vast army and wage a war, because it didn’t 
have enough gold. 

What wasn’t understood then, and still isn’t really under- 
stood today, is that the reality of money is of the same type as 
the reality of centimeters, grams, hours, or lines of longitude. 
Money is a way of measuring wealth but is not wealth in itself. 
A chest of gold coins or a fat wallet of bills is of no use what- 
soever to a wrecked sailor alone on a raft. He needs rea/ wealth, 
in the form of a fishing rod, a compass, an outboard motor with 
gas, and a female companion. 

But this ingrained and archaic confusion of money with 
wealth is now the main reason we are not going ahead full 
tilt with the development of our technological genius for the 
production of more than adequate food, clothing, housing, 
and utilities for every person on earth. It can be done, for elec- 
tronics, computers, automation techniques, and other mechan- 
ical methods of mass production have, potentially, lifted us 


Wealth versus Money 5 


into an age of abundance in which the political and economic 
ideologies of the past, whether left, middle, or right, are simply 
obsolete. There is no question anymore of the old socialist or 
communist schemes of robbing the rich to pay the poor, or of 
financing a proper distribution of wealth by the ritualistic and 
tiresome mumbo jumbo of taxation. If, 7f we get our heads 
straight about money, I predict that by aD 2000, or sooner, no 
one will pay taxes, no one will carry cash, utilities will be free, 
and everyone will carry a general credit card. This card will be 
valid up to each individual’s share in a guaranteed basic income 
or national dividend, issued free, beyond which he may still 
earn anything more that he desires by an art or craft, profession 
or trade that has not been displaced by automation. (For de- 
tailed information on the mechanics of such an economy, the 
reader should refer to Robert Theobald’s Challenge of Abun- 
dance and Free Men and Free Markets, and also to a series of es- 
says that he has edited, The Guaranteed Income. Theobald is an 
avant-garde economist on the faculty of Columbia University.) 

Naturally, such outrageous proposals will raise the old 
cries, “But where’s the money going to come from?” or “Who 
pays the bills?” But the point is that money doesn’t and never 
did come from anywhere, as if it were something like lumber or 
iron or hydroelectric power. Again: money is a measure of 
wealth, and we invent money as we invent the Fahrenheit scale 
of temperature or the avoirdupois measure of weight. When 
you discover and mine a load of iron ore, you don’t have to 
borrow or ask someone for “a thousand tons” before you can 
do anything with it. 

By contrast with money, true wealth is the sum of energy, 
technical intelligence, and raw materials. Gold itself is wealth 
only when used for such practical purposes as filling teeth. As 


6 DOES IT MATTER? 


soon as it is used for money, kept locked in vaults or fortresses, 
it becomes useless for anything else and thus goes out of circu- 
lation as a form of raw material; i.e., real wealth. If money must 
be gold or silver or nickel, the expansion and distribution of 
vast wealth in the form of wheat, poultry, cotton, vegetables, 
butter, wine, fish, or coffee must wait upon the discovery of 
new gold mines before it can proceed. This obviously ludicrous 
predicament has, heretofore, been circumvented by increasing 
the national debt—a roundabout piece of semantic obscuran- 
tism—by which a nation issues itself credit or purchasing 
power based, not on holdings in precious metals, but on real 
wealth in the form of products and materials and mechanical 
energy. Because national debts far exceed anyone’s reserves of 
gold or silver, it is generally supposed that a country with a 
large national debt is spending beyond its income and is well on 
the road to poverty and ruin—no matter how enormous its 
supplies of energy and material resources. This is the basic con- 
fusion between symbol and reality, here involving the bad 
magic of the word “debt,” which is understood as in the phrase 
“going into debt.” But national debt should properly be called 
national credit. By issuing national (or general) credit, a given 
population gives itself purchasing power, a method of distri- 
bution for its actual goods and services, which are far more 
valuable than any amount of precious metal. 

Mind you, I write of these things as a simple philosopher 
and not as a financial or economic expert bristling with facts 
and figures. But the role of the philosopher is to look at such 
matters from the standpoint of the child in Hans Andersen’s 
tale of The Emperor’s New Clothes. The philosopher tries to get 
down to the most basic, simple principles. He sees people wast- 
ing material wealth, or just letting it rot, or hoarding it uselessly 


Wealth versus Money 7 


for lack of purely abstract counters called dollars or pounds or 
francs. 

From this very basic or, if you will, childish point of view, 
I see that we have created a marvelous technology for the sup- 
ply of goods and services with a minimum of human drudgery. 
Isn’t it obvious that the whole purpose of machines is to get rid 
of work? When you get rid of the work required for producing 
basic necessities, you have leisure—time for fun or for new and 
creative explorations and adventures. But with the characteris- 
tic blindness of those who cannot distinguish symbol from 
reality, we allow our machinery to put people out of work—not 
in the sense of being at leisure but in the sense of having no 
money and of having shamefacedly to accept the miserable 
charity of public welfare. Thus—as the rationalization or 
automation of industry extends—we increasingly abolish 
human slavery; but in penalizing the displaced slaves, in de- 
priving them of purchasing power, the manufacturers in turn 
deprive themselves of outlets and markets for their products. 
The machines produce more and more, humans produce less 
and less, but the products pile up undistributed and uncon- 
sumed, because too few can earn enough money and because 
even the hungriest, greediest, and most ruthless capitalist cannot 
consume ten pounds of butter per day. 

Any child should understand that money is a convenience 
for eliminating barter, so that you don’t have to go to market 
with baskets of eggs or firkins of beer to swap them for meat 
and vegetables. But if all you had to barter with was your phys- 
ical or mental energy in work that is now done by machines, 
the problem would then be: What will you do for a living and 
how will the manufacturer find customers for his tons of butter 
and sausages? 


8 DOES IT MATTER? 


The sole rational solution would be for the community as 
a whole to issue itself credit—money—for the work done by 
the machines. This would enable their products to be fairly dis- 
tributed and their owners and managers to be fairly paid, so 
that they could invest in bigger and better machines. And all 
the while, the increasing wealth would be coming from the en- 
ergy of the machines and not from ritualistic manipulations 
with gold. 

In some ways, we are doing this already, but by the self- 
destructive expedient of issuing ourselves credit (now called 
debt) for engines of war. What the nations of the world have 
spent on war since 1914 could, with our technology, have sup- 
plied every person on earth with a comfortable independent in- 
come. But because we confuse wealth with money, we confuse 
issuing ourselves credit with going into debt. No one goes into 
debt except in emergency; and therefore, prosperity depends 
on maintaining the perpetual emergency of war. We are re- 
duced, then, to the suicidal expedient of inventing wars when, 
instead, we could simply have invented money—provided that 
the amount invented was always proportionate to the real 
wealth being produced. We should replace the gold standard 
by the wealth standard. 

The difficulty is that, with our present superstitions about 
money, the issue of a guaranteed basic income of, say, $10,000 
per annum per person would result in wild inflation. Prices 
would go sky-high to “catch” the vast amounts of new money 
in circulation and, in short order, everyone would be a pauper 
on $10,000 a year. The hapless, dollar-hypnotized sellers do 
not realize that whenever they raise prices, the money so gained 
has less and less purchasing power, which is the reason that as 


material wealth grows and grows, the value of the monetary 


Wealth versus Money 9 


unit (dollar or pound) goes down and down—-so that you have 
to run faster and faster to stay where you are, instead of letting 
the machines run for you. If we shift from the gold standard to 
the wealth standard, prices must stay more or less where they 
are at the time of the shift and—miraculously—everyone will 
discover that he has enough or more than enough to wear, eat, 
drink, and otherwise survive with affluence and merriment. 

It is not going to be at all easy to explain this to the world 
at large, because mankind has existed for perhaps one million 
years with relative material scarcity, and it is now roughly a 
mere one hundred years since the beginning of the industrial 
revolution. As it was once very difficult to persuade people that 
the earth is round and that it is in orbit around the sun, or to 
make it clear that the universe exists in a curved space-time con- 
tinuum, it may be just as hard to get it through to “common 
sense” that the virtues of making and saving money are obso- 
lete. It may have to be put across by the most skillfully prepared 
and simply presented TV programs, given by scientific-looking 
gentlemen in spectacles and white coats, and through millions 
of specially designed comic books. 

It will always be possible, of course, for anyone so inclined 
to earn more than the guaranteed basic income; but as it be- 
comes clearer and clearer that money is not wealth, people will 
realize that there are limits to the real wealth that any individ- 
ual can consume. We may have to adopt some form of German 
economist Silvio Gessell’s suggestion that money not in circu- 
lation be made progressively perishable, declining in value 
from the date of issue. But the temptation to hoard either 
money or wealth will dwindle as it becomes obvious that tech- 
nology will keep the supplies coming and that you cannot drive 
four cars at once, live simultaneously in six homes, take three 


10 DOES IT MATTER? 


tours at the same time, or devour twelve roasts of beef at one 
meal. 

All this will involve a curious reversal of the Protestant 
ethic, which, at least in the United States, is one of the big ob- 
stacles to a future of wealth and leisure for all. The Devil, it is 
said, finds work for idle hands to do, and human energy cannot 
be trusted unless most of it is absorbed in hard, productive 
work—-so that, on coming home, we are too tired to get into 
mischief. It is feared that affluence plus leisure will, as in times 
past, lead to routs and orgies and all the perversities that flow 
therefrom, and then on to satiation, debilitation, and decay— 
as in Hogarth’s depiction of A Rake’s Progress. 

Indeed, there are reasonable grounds for such fears, and it 
may well be that our New England consciences, our chronic 
self-disapproval, will have to be maintained by an altogether 
new kind of sermonizing designed to inculcate a fully up-to- 
date sense of guilt. Preachers of the late twentieth century will 
have to insist that enjoyment of total luxury is a sacred and 
solemn duty. Penitents will be required to confess such sins as 
failing to give adequate satisfaction to one’s third concubine or 
lack of attention to some fine detail in serving a banquet to 
friends—such as forgetting to put enough marijuana in the 
turkey stuffing. Sure, I am talking with about one half of my 
tongue in my cheek, but I am trying to make the deadly serious 
point that, as of today, an economic utopia is not wishful think- 
ing but, in some substantial degree, the necessary alternative 
to self-destruction. 

The moral challenge and the grim problem we face is that 
the life of affluence and pleasure requires exact discipline and 
high imagination. Somewhat as metals deteriorate from “fa- 


tigue,” every constant stimulation of consciousness, however 


Wealth versus Money 11 


pleasant, tends to become boring and thus to be ignored. When 
physical comfort is permanent, it ceases to be noticed. If you 
have worried for years about lack of money and then become 
rich, the new sense of ease and security is short-lived, for you 
soon begin to worry as much as ever—about cancer or heart 
disease. Nature abhors a vacuum. For this reason, the life of 
pleasure cannot be maintained without a certain asceticism, as 
in the time and effort required for a woman to keep her hair 
and face in fine condition, for the weaving of exquisite textiles 
or for the preparation of superior food. Thus, the French dis- 
tinguish between a gourmand and a gourmet, the former being 
a mere glutton, a trencherman who throws anything and every- 
thing down the hatch; and the latter, a fussy, subtle, and so- 
phisticated devotee of the culinary arts. 

Affluent people in the United States have seldom shown much 
imagination in cultivating the arts of pleasure. The business- 
suited executive looks more like a minister or an undertaker 
than a man of wealth and is, furthermore, wearing one of the 
most uncomfortable forms of clothing ever invented for the 
male, as compared, say, with the kimono or the kaftan. Did you 
ever try the food in a private restaurant for top brass in the of- 
fices of a big corporation? Strictly institutional. Even the most 
expensive nightclubs and country clubs pass off indifferent fare; 
and at $100-a-plate charity dinners, one gets the ubiquitous syn- 
thetic chicken, machine-raised in misery and tasting of just that. 

If the behavior of increasing numbers of young people is 
any real portent of what may happen by AD 2000, much of this 
will change. Quite aside from their cavalierish styles of long 
hair, men are beginning to wear jewelry and vivid colors, imi- 
tating the styles of medieval and Oriental affluence that began 
to disappear when power shifted from the landed gentry to 


12 DOES IT MATTER? 


miserly merchants of the cities—the burghers, or bourgeoisie. 
Beneath such outward appearances, there is a clear change of 
values: rich experiences are more to be desired than property 
and bank accounts, and plans for the future are of use only to 
those who can live fully in the present. 

This may sound feckless and undisciplined, as if young 
people (especially hippies) had become incapable of postpon- 
ing gratification. Thus, it might seem that the worldwide re- 
bellions of students are a sign that the adolescent is no longer 
willing to work through the period of training that it takes to 
become an adult. “Elders and betters” do not understand that 
today’s students do not want to become their kind of adult, 
which is what the available training is intended to produce. 

Artists have always been important prophets of social 
change, and the increasingly favored “psychedelic” style is any- 
thing but undisciplined. Using intense color and highly articu- 
late detail of line and form, the exponents of this style are 
restoring a sheer glory to Western art that has not been seen 
since the days of French and Celtic illuminated manuscripts, 
the stained glass of Chartres, and the luminous enamelwork of 
Limoges. It calls to mind the jeweled gardens of Persian minia- 
tures, the rhythmic intricacy of Moorish arabesques, and the 
golden filigree of Hindu textiles. Among the hippies, I know 
makes of musical instruments—lutes and guitars—that, for 
delicate ivory inlays and excellence of grain and texture, are as 
lovely as any works of the Italian Renaissance. Furthermore, 
musicians are beginning to realize that the Beatles (to take an 
obvious example) display a serious musical genius that puts 
them in line with the great Western masters, from Bach to 
Stravinsky, and that some of the songs of Dylan and Donovan 
are quite as interesting as the best lieder. 

At best, then, a leisure economy will provide opportunity 


Wealth versus Money 13 


to develop the frustrated craftsman, painter, sculptor, poet, 
composer, yachtsman, explorer, or potter that is in us all—if 
only we could earn a living that way. Certainly, there will be a 
plethora of bad and indifferent productions from so many un- 
leashed amateurs, but the general long-term effect should be a 
tremendous enrichment of the quality and variety of fine art, 
music, food, furniture, clothing, gardens, and even homes— 
created largely on a do-it-yourself basis. Mechanical mass pro- 
duction will provide utilities, raw materials, tools, and certain 
foodstuffs, yet will at the same time release us from the neces- 
sity for much of the mass-produced trash that we must now buy 
for lack of time to make anything better—clothes, dishes, and 
other articles of everyday use that were made so much more 
exquisitely by “primitives” that they now adorn our museums. 

Historically, luxuries of this kind could be afforded only 
by shameless aristocrats exploiting slave labor. Though still 
exploiters, the bourgeoisie were timid newcomers, often had 
Protestant guilty consciences and, therefore, hid their wealth 
in banks and did their very best to pretend that successful busi- 
ness is an ascetic and self-sacrificing way of life. But by ap 
2000, there need be no slaves but machines, and it will then be 
our urgent duty to live in that kind of luxurious splendor that 
depends upon leisurely devotion to every form of art, craft, and 
science. (Certainly, we have long forgotten that a schola, or 
school, is a place of leisure, where those who do not have to 
grub for a living can apply themselves to the disinterested pur- 
suit of knowledge and art.) Under such circumstances, what 
exuberant styles of life will be cultivated, for example, by af- 
fluent Negroes under no further pressure to imitate the white 
bourgeoisie? 

The style of life will be colorful and elegant, but it will not, 
I feel, exhibit the sheer gluttony and greed of certain notorious 


14 DOES IT MATTER? 


aristocracies of the past. Speaking perhaps only half seriously, 
by AD 2000, most of Asia will have followed the lead of Japan 
and be laced with superhighways and cluttered with hot-dog 
stands, neon signs, factories, high-rise apartment buildings, 
huge airports, and swarms of Toyotas, with every fellah and 
coolie running around in a Western business suit. On the other 
hand, America, having had all this and being fed up with it, 
will abound with lamaseries and ashrams (but coeducational), 
expert players of the sitar and koto, masters of Japanese tea cer- 
emony, schools for Chinese calligraphy and Zen-style garden- 
ing—while people stroll around in saris, dhotis, sarongs, 
kimonos, and other forms of comfortable and colorful cloth- 
ing. Just as now the French are buying sourdough bread flown 
by jet from San Francisco, spiritually starved Tibetans and 
Japanese will be studying Buddhism in Chicago. 

That this is not quite a joke might be inferred from the 
amazing increase of interest among American college students 
in Oriental mysticism and other “non-Western” studies, as 
courses in Afro-Asian cultures are now often classified. Obvi- 
ously, this interest is not unconnected with the widespread 
use of psychedelic drugs. This is not, as is often suggested, a 
substitute for alcohol: it is much more an adventure, an explo- 
ration of new dimensions of experience, all the more attractive 
for being esoteric and in defiance of authority. To repeat, stu- 
dents tend to be much more interested in experiences than in 
possessions, feeling that their parents’ way of experiencing both 
themselves and the world is in some way sick, impoverished, 
and even delusive. Certainly—and precisely because their par- 
ents have for generations confused symbol with reality, money 
with wealth, and personality (or ego) with the actual human 
organism. 


Wealth versus Money 15 


And here’s the nub of the problem. We cannot proceed 
with a fully productive technology if it must inevitably Los An- 
gelesize the whole earth, poison the elements, destroy all 
wildlife, and sicken the bloodstream with the promiscuous 
use of antibiotics and insecticides. Yet this will be the certain 
result of the technological enterprise conducted in the hostile 
spirit of a conquest of nature with the main object of making 
money. Despite the growing public alarm over the problems of 
soil erosion, pollution of the air and water, and the deteriora- 
tion of crops and livestock raised by certain methods of indus- 
trial farming, little is as yet being done to develop an ecological 
technology—that is, a technology in which man has as much 
respect for his environment as for himself. 

In this regard, many corporations—and even more so their 
shareholders—are unbelievably blind to their own material in- 
terests; for the ill effects of irresponsible technology are ap- 
pearing so rapidly that we can no longer simply pass the buck 
to our children. Recent investigations, both here and in En- 
gland, show that the actual operators of chicken factories avoid 
eating their own produce; it may be as well for the appetites for 
their absentee shareholders that they do not know too much 
about raising hens in batteries. Does anyone care what hap- 
pened to the taste of fruits and vegetables, or mind particularly 
if apples and tomatoes are often sprayed with wax to improve 
their looks? (I just scraped an apple, very gently, to prove it.) 
Is it either good business or good living to buy an $80,000 home 
in Beverly Hills and inhabit a miasma of exhaust fumes? (In 
Paris, last May, we didn’t mind the tear gas much; just used to 
L.A.) Is it even sane to own a Ferrari and, twice daily, jangle 
one’s nerves and risk one’s life by commuting from Norwalk, 
Connecticut, to Madison Avenue, New York? And what about 


16 DOES IT MATTER? 


the view from the plane between San Francisco and Seattle— 
acres and acres of brown Oregon hills dotted with nothing but 
tree stumps? 

It is an oversimplification to say that this is the result of 
business valuing profit rather than product, for no one should 
be expected to do business without the incentive of profit. The 
actual trouble is that profit is identified entirely with money, as 
distinct from the real profit of living with dignity and elegance 
in beautiful surroundings. But investors take no long-term re- 
sponsibility for the use of their capital: they clip coupons and 
watch market statistics with regard only for monetary results. 
They see little or nothing of the physical operations they have 
financed, and sometimes do not even know that their own funds 
are invested in the pithy potatoes they get for dinner. Their 
actual experience of business is restricted to an abstract, arith- 
metical translation of material fact—a translation that automat- 
ically ignores textures, tastes, sights, sounds, and smells. 

To try to correct this irresponsibility by passing laws (e.g., 
against absentee ownership) would be wide of the point, for 
most of the law has as little relation to life as money to wealth. 
On the contrary, problems of this kind are aggravated rather 
than solved by the paperwork of politics and law. What is nec- 
essary is at once simpler and more difficult: only that financiers, 
bankers, and stockholders must turn themselves into real peo- 
ple and ask themselves exactly what they want out of life—in 
the realization that this strictly practical and hard-nosed ques- 
tion might lead to far more delightful styles of living than those 
they now pursue. Quite simply and literally, they must come 
to their senses—for their own personal profit and pleasure. 

The difficulty is that most of our very high-ranking busi- 
ness executives live in a closed world. They are wafted from 


Wealth versus Money 17 


their expensive but unimaginative homes and clubs to offices 
of dreary luxury, wherein they are protected and encapsulated 
by secretarial staffs. They read only what is filtered through by 
underlings and consort only with others who are in the same 
Bigelow-lined traps. It is almost impossible for people outside 
their caste to communicate with them directly; for they are 
victims of a system (also a ritual) so habitual, so complex, and 
so geared in to the whole corporate operation that the idea of 
changing it seems as preposterous as rewiring the human brain. 
Actually, this life is a form of role playing with the reward 
of status; its material rewards are meager—for one reason, 
because it is tiring and time consuming. But to suggest that one 
should change an established role is to be understood by the 
player as suggesting that he become someone else, and this 
affront to his imaginary ego is such that he will cling passion- 
ately to a role of high status, however much it may be frustrat- 
ing his natural and material inclinations. This would, perhaps, 
be commendable, if the role being played fulfilled important 
responsibilities to society; and many businessmen do, indeed, 
feel themselves to be doing just that. But their closed world pre- 
vents the realization that in the vast, long-range world of mat- 
erial events, they are highly irresponsible—both to their children 
and to themselves. This is precisely why so many of their own 
children drift off to the dubious adventures of Haight-Ashbury 
or the East Village: they find the high life of Scarsdale or Ather- 
ton, Lake Forest or Beverly Hills inconceivably dull. 
Hopefully, there are signs that some of these very children 
are getting through to their parents, since it’s tough to put a 
secretary between yourself and your son. Is there any histori- 
cal precedent for the revolt of a younger generation against 
the older on the present scale? So widespread? So radical—in 


18 DOES IT MATTER? 


politics, morals, religion, dress, art, and music? So vocifer- 
ous—with such powerful techniques of communication as are 
now available? I do not believe that the elders will ultimately re- 
ject the children; it’s against nature. But to make peace, the eld- 
ers will have to move a long, long way from their present 
position. 

Less hopeful are the prospects of a change of attitude in the 
ranks of successful blue-collar workers, who, as now organized 
in the once very necessary but now highly reactionary labor 
unions, constitute the real and dangerous potential for Ameri- 
can fascism. For the unions operate under the same confusion 
of symbol and reality as the investors: the wage is more im- 
portant than the work and, because all must conform to union 
hours and (mediocre) union standards, any real enthusiasm for 
a craft is effectively discouraged. But a work force so robotized 
is all the more inviting its replacement by machinery, since a 
contrivance that won’t work must inevitably be replaced by one 
that will. The basic assumption of unionism was not the dignity 
but the drudgery of labor, and the strategy was, therefore, to do 
as little as possible for as much pay as possible. Thus, as au- 
tomation eliminates drudgery, it eliminates the necessity for the 
unions, a truth that is already extending up to such “high-class” 
unions as the musicians’. The piper who hates to play is re- 
placed by a tape, which does not object when the payer calls 
the tune. If, then, the unions are to have any further usefulness, 
they must use their political pressure, not for a greater share of 
profits (based on rising prices to pay for rising wages) but for 
total revision of the concept and function of money. 

The fear that adequate production and affluence will take 
away all restraint on the growth of population is simply against 
the facts, for overpopulation is a symptom of poverty, not 


Wealth versus Money 19 


wealth. Japan, thus far the one fully industrialized nation of 
Asia, is also the one Asian country with an effective program 
of population control. The birth rate is also falling in Sweden, 
West Germany, Switzerland, and the United States. On the 
other hand, the poorer nations of Asia and Africa resent and 
resist the advice that their populations be pruned, in the feeling 
that this is just another of the white man’s tricks for cutting 
down their political power. Thus, the one absolutely urgent and 
humane method of population control is to do everything pos- 
sible to increase the world’s food supply, and to divert to this 
end the wealth and energy now being squandered on military 
technology. 

For, from the most realistic, hardheaded, self-interested, 
and tactically expert point of view, the United States has put its 
Armed Forces in the control of utterly incompetent strate- 
gists—a bunch of essential “bad shots” who do not know the 
difference between military skill and mere firepower, who shoot 
at mosquitoes with machine guns, who liberate countries by de- 
stroying their territories, whose principal weapon is no weapon 
at all but an instrument of mutual suicide, and whose political 
motivations, based on the puerile division of the world into 
“good guys” and “bad guys,” cannot allow that enemies are 
also people, as distinct from demonic henchmen of a satanic 
ideology. If we were fighting in Vietnam with the honest and 
materialistic intention of capturing the wealth and the women 
of the land, we would be very careful to leave it intact. But in 
fighting for abstract principles, as distinct from material gain, 
we become the ruthless and implacable instruments of the delu- 
sion that things can be all white, without the contrast of black. 

Timothy Leary was not so wide of the mark when he said 
that we must go out of our minds (abstract values) to come to 


20 DOES IT MATTER? 


our senses (concrete values). For coming to our senses must, 
above all, be the experience of our own existence as living 
organisms rather than “personalities,” like characters in a play 
or a novel acting out some artificial plot in which the persons 
are simply masks for a conflict of abstract ideas or principles. 
Man as an organism is to the world outside like a whirlpool is 
to a river: man and world are a single natural process, but we 
are behaving as if we were invaders and plunderers in a foreign 
territory. For when the individual is defined and felt as the sep- 
arate personality or ego, he remains unaware that his actual 
body is a dancing pattern of energy that simply does not hap- 
pen by itself. It happens only in concert with myriads of other 
patterns—called animals, plants, insects, bacteria, minerals, 
liquids, and gases. The definition of a person and the normal 
feeling of “I” do not effectively include these relationships. You 
say, “I came into this world.” You didn’t; you came out of it, as 
a branch from a tree. 

So long as we do not effectively feel this to be so, there is 
no motivation for forms of politics that recognize the interde- 
pendence of all peoples, nor for forms of technology that real- 
ize man’s inseparability from the entire network of natural 
patterns. How, then, is the sense of self to be changed? By 
scientific education? It convinces the intellect but not the emo- 
tions. By religion? The record is not hopeful. By psychother- 
apy? Much too slow. If anything is to be done about it, and done 
in time, I must agree with Aldous Huxley (and with the sober 
and scholarly Arthur Koestler in his Ghost in the Machine) that 
our only resort may be psychopharmacology—a chemical, a 
pill, that brings the mind to its senses. 

Although I have experimented very sympathetically with 
such methods (LSD, etc.), I would be as reluctant to try to 


Wealth versus Money 21 


change the world with psychedelics as to dose everyone indis- 
criminately with antibiotics. We do not yet know what ecolog- 
ical damage the latter may have done, how profoundly they 
may have upset certain balances of nature. I have, therefore, 
another and perhaps equally unacceptable suggestion. 

This is simply that nothing be done about it. Shortly before 
his death, Robert Oppenheimer is said to have remarked that 
the whole world is, quite obviously, going to hell—adding, 
however, that the one slim chance of its not going to hell is that 
we do absolutely nothing to stop it. For the greatest illusion of 
the abstract ego is that it can do anything to bring about radi- 
cal improvement either in itself or in the world. This is as im- 
possible, physically, as trying to lift yourself off the floor by 
your own bootstraps. Furthermore, the ego is (like money) a 
concept, a symbol, even a delusion—not a biological process or 
physical reality. 

Practically, this means that we stop crusading—that is, act- 
ing for such abstract causes as the good, righteousness, peace, 
universal love, freedom, and social justice, and stop fighting 
against such equally abstract bogeys as communism, fascism, 
racism, and the imaginary powers of darkness and evil. For 
most of the hell now being raised in the world is well inten- 
tioned. We justify our wars and revolutions as unfortunate 
means for good ends, as a general recently explained that he 
had destroyed a village in Vietnam for its own safety. This is 
also why we can reach no genuine agreement—only the most 
transitory and unsatisfactory compromises—at the conference 
tables, for each side believes itself to be acting for the best mo- 
tives and for the ultimate benefit of the world. To be human, 
one must recognize and accept a certain element of irreducible 
rascality both in oneself and in one’s enemies. It is, therefore, 


22 DOES IT MATTER? 


an enormous relief to realize that these abstract ambitions are 
total nonsense and to see that we have been wasting untold psy- 
chic and physical energy in a fatuous enterprise. For when it is 
understood that trying to have good without evil is as absurd as 
trying to have white without black, all that energy is released 
for things that can be done. It can be diverted from abstract 
causes to specific, material undertakings—to farming and cook- 
ing, mining and engineering, making clothes and buildings, 
traveling and learning, art, music, dancing, and making love. 
Surely, these are excellent things to do for their own sake and 
not, please no, for one’s own or anyone else’s improvement. 


MURDER IN THE KITCHEN 


living body is not a fixed ching but a flowing event, like a 

flame or a whirlpool: the shape alone is stable, for the sub- 
stance is a stream of energy going in at one end and out at the 
other. We are particular and temporarily identifiable wiggles in 
a stream that enters us in the form of light, heat, air, water, milk, 
bread, fruit, beer, beef Stroganoff, caviar, and pazé de foie gras. 
It goes out as gas and excrement—and also as semen, babies, talk, 
politics, commerce, war, poetry, and music. And philosophy. 

A philosopher, which is what I am supposed to be, is a sort 
of intellectual yokel who gapes and stares at what sensible peo- 
ple take for granted, a person who cannot get rid of the feeling 
that the barest facts of everyday life are unbelievably odd. As 
Aristotle put it, the beginning of philosophy is wonder. I am 
simply amazed to find myself living on a ball of rock that 
swings around an immense spherical fire. I am more amazed 
that I am a maze—a complex wiggliness, an arabesque of tubes, 
filaments, cells, fibers, and films that are various kinds of palpi- 
tation in this stream of liquid energy. But what really gets me 
is that almost all the substance of this maze, aside from water, 
was once other living bodies—the bodies of animals and 
plants—and that I had to obtain it by murder. We are creatures 


23 


24 DOES IT MATTER? 


rearranged, for biological existence continues only through the 
mutual slaughter and ingestion of its various species. I exist 
solely through membership in this perfectly weird arrangement 
of beings that flourish by chewing each other up. 

Obviously, being chewed up is painful, and I myself do not 
want to be chewed up. Thus the whole scheme bothers my con- 
science. If the morticians don’t get me first, will my being eaten 
up by germs and worms be fair compensation for the countless 
cows, sheep, birds, and fish that I have consumed during my 
lifetime? I wonder: is this entire biological arrangement of mu- 
tual mayhem an insane and diabolical contraption that moves 
faster and faster to a dead end? I have seen plants infested with 
greenfly, one day swarming with plump and succulent little 
bodies, the next—grey dust on dry stalks. Life seems to be a 
system that eats itself to death, and in which victory equals 
defeat. 

Man can easily go the way of the greenfly, for as he becomes 
expert in technology, he is seen to be more predatory than lo- 
custs or piranha fish. He is devouring, destroying, and fouling 
the whole surface of the planet: minerals, forests, birds, insects, 
fresh water—all are being converted into suburbs and sewage, 
rust and smog. Meanwhile, the total conquest of his natural 
enemies from tigers to bacteria allows his own race to swarm 
itself out of space; and, through fear of his own rapacious kind, 
he wastes a huge proportion of his wealth in the manufacture of 
weapons, ever more deadly and ever more obsolete as techni- 
cal skill increases. Many prehistoric animals became extinct 
because of overdeveloped weaponry—the saber-toothed tiger 
through the unmanageability of its immense shearing teeth, and 
the titanothere through the unsupportable weight of its colos- 
sal nose-horn. 


Murder in the Kitchen 25 


One can, perhaps, accept the idea that as the individual dies, 
so must the species. Thereafter, the energy of the universe will 
appear in new patterns and guises, and dance to different 
rhythms. The show will always go on, but must the going on be 
so intense an agony? Must the price of life always be soft, sen- 
sitive flesh and nerve squirming under the crunch of sharp 
teeth? If so, then, as Camus said, the only serious philosophi- 
cal problem is whether or not to commit suicide. 

Again, therefore, the philosopher wonders: Short of sui- 
cide, is there any way out of this vicious circle of mutual killing, 
which, in any case, seems to be suicide in the long run? Is there 
any way of avoiding, mitigating, or generally cooling this sys- 
tem of murder and agony which is required for the existence of 
even the most saintly human being? 

Vegetarianism, for example, is no solution. Years ago the 
Indian botanist Sir Jagadis Bose measured the pain reactions of 
plants to cutting and pulling. To say that plants don’t really 
know that they are in pain is only to say that they can’t put it 
into words. When I pointed this out to a strictly vegetarian 
Buddhist, the famous Reginald H. Blyth, who wrote Zen in 
English Literature, he said, “Yes, 1 know that. But when we kill 
vegetables they don’t scream so loud.” In other words, he was 
just being easy on his own feelings. Buddhist and Hindu monks 
have carried the attitude of ahimsa, or harmlessness, to the ex- 
treme of keeping their eyes on the ground when walking—not 
to avoid the temptations of lovely women, but to avoid tram- 
pling on beetles, snails, or worms that might lie in the path. Yet 
this is at root an evasion, a ritual gesture of reverence for life 
which in no way alters the fact that we live by killing. 

Searching my own conscience as to how I should respond 
to this predicament, I find three answers. 


26 DOES IT MATTER? 


The first is to admit that deciding to live is deciding to kill, 
and make no bones about it. For if I have really made up my 
mind to kill I can do it expertly. Consider the agony of being 
halfway decapitated by a reluctant executioner. Death must be 
as swift as possible, and the hand that holds the rifle or wields 
the knife must be sure. (Incidentally, you wouldn’t want your 
surgeon to be so sorry and concerned for you that his hand 
trembled when he opened your abdomen.) 

The second is that every form of life killed for food must be 
husbanded and cherished on the principle of “I love you so 
much I could eat you,” from which it should follow that “I eat 
you so much that I love you.” This principle has been most se- 
riously neglected by hunters in the past, and by industrial farm- 
ers and fisherman today. To cite only two examples, modern 
techniques of whaling are in danger of abolishing whales, and 
industrial poultry-farming is flooding the market with non- 
chickens and pseudo-eggs. The wretched birds are raised in 
wire cell-blocks, fed on chemicals, are never allowed to scratch 
around in the sun, and taste just like that. Whatever is unlovable 
on the plate was unloved in the kitchen and on the farm. 

The third is expressed by Lin Yutang as follows: “If a 
chicken has been killed, and it is not cooked properly, that 
chicken has died in vain.” The very least I can do for a creature 
that has died for me is to honor it, not with an empty ritual, but 
by cooking it to perfection and relishing it to the full. Any an- 
imal that becomes me should enjoy itself as me. 

The proper love of animals and plants, and of other mate- 
rials upon which our life depends, is nurtured in the kitchen. 
Yet one look at the average American or British kitchen shows 
that it is not a place of love. Stuck off in a constricted corner of 
the house, it looks like a bathroom or surgery—white, cold, 


Murder in the Kitchen 27 


and dowdy, though sometimes glossy and militantly clean. Such 
kitchens are, like toilets, mere conveniences, where food is du- 
tifully rendered chewable and assimilable because it is good for 
you. And everything that comes from such kitchens tastes as if 
it were good for you—scrubbed with soap, wiped off with rub- 
bing alcohol, and thoroughly disinfected in boiling water. This 
is a rule of almost mathematical exactitude: colorless kitchen = 
tasteless food. 

These abominable kitchens are not the result of poverty. 
They reflect the fact that the richest and most powerful civi- 
lization on earth is so preoccupied with saving time and mak- 
ing money that it has neither taste for life nor capacity for 
pleasure. The commonly accepted notion that Americans are 
materialists is pure bunk. A materialist is one who loves mate- 
rial, a person devoted to the enjoyment of the physical and 
immediate present. By this definition, most Americans are 
abstractionists. They Aate material, and convert it as swiftly as 
possible into mountains of junk and clouds of poisonous gas. As 
a people, our ideal is to have a future, and so long as this is so 
we shall never have a present. But only those who have a pres- 
ent, and who can relate to it materially and immediately, have 
any use for making plans for the future, for when their plans 
mature they will enjoy the results. Others, with their eyes fixed 
on the tomorrow that never comes, will bolt down all times 
present—forever—along with a vitamin-enriched styrofoam 
called “bread.” 

Much may be learned about a civilization from its staple 
food, which, in our case, is supposed to be bread. Real bread is 
a solid and crusty substance with an aroma evoking visions of 
farm kitchens, flour mills, sacks of wheat, and rolling, waving 
fields of grain, gold and gentle in the lazy heat of a late summer 


28 DOES IT MATTER? 


afternoon. Few Americans have such associations and our 
bread does not suggest them, being a virtually weightless com- 
pound of squishy and porous pith injected with preservatives 
and allegedly nutritive chemicals. It is not so much white as ide- 
ally and perfectly colorless, and approximates—as nearly as 
human genius can manage it—to the taste of absolute noth- 
ingness. It is a compact of air bubbles, each contained in a film 
of edible plastic which has been synthesized from wheat or rye 
as one gets casein from milk. In contact with liquid, be it gravy 
or saliva, this plastic film disintegrates at once into a cloying 
and textureless paste exactly like the revolting white slime 
which is fed to babies, and which most babies, quite under- 
standably, spit back into the spoon. 

To begin with, the wheat is grown, unloved, by industrial 
farming over millions of featureless and treeless acres in such 
wastelands as Kansas and Nebraska, and is sprayed by airplane 
with Flit and Bugdeath. It is then shaved off the face of the earth 
with immense mechanical clippers, winnowed, and ground 
into a flour which, by washing with detergents and stewing in 
disinfectants, is converted into tons of pancake makeup. In vast 
automated baking factories these mountains of pure chalk-dust 
are mixed with pantothenic acid, pyridoxine, para-aminobenzoic 
acid, and artificial flavorings, whereafter the whole mass is 
bubbleized, stabilized by heating, sliced, wrapped in wax paper, 
and shipped out in the form of sleazy cushions which are 
unfortunately too small and too perishable for use as bolsters. 
You may think I am exaggerating, but according to a recent 
issue of Scientific American someone has patented a process for 
the manufacture of continuous “bread” which flows through 
electronic ovens like toothpaste from a tube. “A steady stream of 
ingredients is mixed, the dough is kneaded, and carbon dioxide 


Murder in the Kitchen 29 


is pumped into it to make it rise. (Yeast may be added, but only 
for flavor.)” The resultant product has no end-crusts. 

Several years ago a reader complained about this so-called 
bread to Consumer Reports, a generally admirable magazine de- 
signed to protect its subscribers from cheating in the market- 
place. But instead of submitting the product to the judgment of 
experienced chefs and gourmets, CR called in dieticians and 
chemical analysts who reported that this miserable substance 
was indeed “rich in vitamins and nutritious minerals.” 

Here is the nub of the problem: we confuse diet with med- 
icine and cooking with pharmacology, and thus it comes to pass 
that the classes of dietician and cook are mutually exclusive— 
the former judging by the test tube and the latter by nose and 
tongue. Labels on food packages read just like labels on pro- 
prietary medicines. I have just taken a package of ordinary gela- 
tine from the shelf, and it reads: 


ANALYSIS: Protein 85-87%. Moisture 12-14%. Ash 
1.0-1.2%. Fat o. Sodium 90 mg./100 Gm. or 1 mg. per 


serving. Carbohydrate o. Calories per envelope 28. 


You may not have the slightest idea what this means, but with all 
that small, scientific-looking print and decimal points it sure 
must be good for you. Our judgment of food is theoretical and 
mathematical rather than material, which is my reason for say- 
ing that Americans are not materialists but abstractionists. 

The mutually exclusive roles of dietician and cook are 
nowhere more apparent than in such institutions as hospitals 
and colleges. In my particular work it is frequently my fate to 
have to take lunch or dinner in the student-union cafeterias of 
universities all over the country. All are identical. Icebox let- 


tuce with a glob of cottage cheese and a wedge of canned 


30 DOES IT MATTER? 


pineapple. Slices of overdone and warmed-over beef that have 
suffered for hours in some electronic purgatory, coated with a 
gravy made of water, library paste, and bouillon cubes. Peas, 
corn, and carrots—boiled. The pie is a sickening slab of beige 
goo, flavored with artificial maple sugar, in a crust of reconsti- 
tuted cardboard, topped with sweetened shaving cream squirted 
from an aerosol bomb. The effect of this fare on the intellectual 
life of the nation must be catastrophic. Since university politics 
are mainly a matter of interdepartmental feuding, the home 
economics and dietetics people are clearly way out on top, hav- 
ing conspired to deprive historians and mathematicians, lin- 
guists and anthropologists, of all zest for life by habituating 
them to the notion that such supernaturally uninspired meals 
are the proper diet for scholars. 

The problem is that the dieticians who actually supervise 
such “cooking”—as well as the hapless agents of the FDA and 
the Department of Agriculture who inspect the forced and 
faked-up products that go into it—can indeed prove that it con- 
tains the proper amount of proteins, carbohydrates, minerals, 
and vitamins. But this is like judging the worth of music in 
terms of decibels and wave frequencies. “This record certified 
noninjurious to the human ear.” Certainly, it is all good for us— 
in the sense that it will enable us to put up with existence for a 
reasonably long time. Even sex is becoming acceptable for the 
same reason: it is good for you; it is a healthy, tension-reducing 
“outlet”—to use Kinsey’s statistical term for counting or- 
gasms—and some wretched hygienist will soon figure out the 
average person’s minimum daily requirement of outlets (0.428 
would be three times a week) so that we can screw with a high 
sense of duty and freedom from guilt. Watch your outlet count 
and keep a chart beside the bed. 


Murder in the Kitchen 31 


But just exactly what is the “good” to which we aspire 
through doing and eating things that are supposed to be good 
for us? This question is strictly taboo, for if it were seriously in- 
vestigated the whole economy and social order would fall apart 
and have to be reorganized. It would be like the donkey finding 
out that the carrot dangled before him, to make him run, is 
hitched by a stick to his own collar. For the good to which we 
aspire exists only and always in the future. Because we cannot 
relate to the sensuous and material present we are most happy 
when good things are expected to happen, not when they are 
happening. We get such a kick out of looking forward to plea- 
sures and rushing ahead to meet them that we can’t slow down 
enough to enjoy them when they come. We are therefore a civ- 
ilization which suffers from chronic disappointment—a for- 
midable swarm of spoiled children smashing their toys. 

To our ears, therefore, the assertion that time does not 
exist must sound insane. Time, we say, is money, and, boy, 
that’s for real! Yet it is impossible to be in the right state of mind 
for cooking, or eating or for any other art or pleasure without 
realizing that time is purely abstract. There is indeed such a 
thing as “timing”—the art of mastering rhythm—but timing 
and hurrying are as mutually exclusive as cooks and dieticians. 
Clock time is merely a method of measurement held in com- 
mon by all civilized societies, and has the same kind of reality 
(or unreality) as the imaginary lines of latitude and longitude. 
The equator is useless for stringing a rolled roast. To judge by 
the clock, the present moment is nothing but a hairline which, 
ideally, should have no width at all—except that it would then 
be invisible. If you are bewitched by the clock you will there- 
fore have no present. “Now” will be no more than the geomet- 
rical point at which the future becomes the past. But if you sense 


32 DOES IT MATTER? 


and feel the world materially, you will discover that there never 
is, or was, or will be anything except the present. 

For the perfect accomplishment of any art, you must get 
this feeling of the eternal present into your bones—for it is the 
secret of proper timing. No rush. No dawdle. Just the sense of 
flowing with the course of events in the same way that you 
dance to music, neither trying to outpace it nor lagging behind. 
Hurrying and delaying are alike ways of trying to resist the 
present, and in cooking they invariably show up in the form of 
spoiled food. To try to have time, that is, to move as quickly as 
possible into the future, gives you abstract food instead of real 
food. Instant coffee, for example, is a well-deserved punish- 
ment for being in a hurry to reach the future. So are TV din- 
ners. So are the warmed-over nastinesses usually served on 
airplanes, which taste like the plastic trays and dishes on which 
they are served. So is that meat which is not roasted but heated 
through in thirty-second electronic ovens. So are mixtures of 
grape juice and alcohol, prepared in concrete vats, pretending 
to be wine. 

Even our fruits and vegetables have been rushed, so that 
however magnificent an apple may seem to the superficial judg- 
ment of the eye, it is hard to find one that is not simply wet pith 
under the skin, and most potatoes taste of the same nothing- 
ness as bread. For a while I thought this might be because I had 
ruined my palate with too much tobacco, but when I recently 
returned to my father’s garden in England I found both apples 
and potatoes as real as they had been to the untainted palate of 
a child. 

Abstractionists would, if possible, save time by eating the 
menu instead of the dinner, which is almost what actually hap- 


pens in those restaurants where one reads: 


Murder in the Kitchen 33 


FILET OF COLORADO MOUNTAIN TROUT, gently sauteed 
in breadcrumbs to a delicate golden brown, with fresh 
garden peas simmered in butter, light and crisp French- 


fried potatoes, and lemon wedge. 


Sometimes there is even a colored photograph to whet the ap- 
petite for the dismal anticlimax of the reality. The last time I 
ran into this, in a restaurant where they had the nerve to keep 
an open kitchen, the “Filet of Colorado Mountain Trout” was 
a severe rectangle of some off-white substance which rattled 
when it hit the grill. 

Another way of eating the menu is preferring money to 
wealth—a psychic disorder directly related to the hallucination 
that time is a physical reality. To be fair, there are still some 
substantial and excellent products for sale in our supermarkets, 
but if you are bewitched by money, what happens? You take 
your loaded cart to the cashier, who clicks out a long strip of 
paper and says, “Thirty dollars and twenty-five cents, please!” 
You are suddenly depressed at having to part with so much 
“wealth”—not realizing that your wealth is now in the shop- 
ping bags and that you are going to walk out with it. For the 
money was a future, a “promise to pay,” an abstraction now 
converted into present and substantial reality—and you are un- 
happy because you have exchanged the expectation of good 
things to come for actual goods! Just as time is a way of mea- 
suring motion, money is a measurement of material wealth and 
power, a system of bookkeeping, and when this is not under- 
stood, a nation with vast material abundance can—as in the 
Depression—starve for lack of purely symbolic cash. 

In a civilization devoted to the strictly abstract and mathe- 


matical ideal of making the most money in the least time, the 


34 DOES IT MATTER? 


only sure method of success is to cheat the customer, to sell var- 
ious kinds of nothingness in pretentious packages. Spray your 
watery tomatoes with wax to make them look real. But then, 
having made the money, there is nothing real to buy with it be- 
cause everyone else is cheating in the same way. 

One would suppose that in this richest of all nations pros- 
perous stockbrokers and admen, plumbers and electricians, 
would knock off work and drive full pelt for routs, banquets, and 
orgies that would make the high life of ancient Rome look like 
potluck supper at a Methodist social. But as things are, the well- 
heeled blue-collar people go home to gurgle down cans of an al- 
coholic soft drink misnamed “beer,” and watch television over 
hamburgers and ketchup. The white-collars live it up by getting 
anaesthetized on martinis and then, perhaps, going to reasonably 
good French or Italian restaurants with neither taste nor appetite 
for the fare. In New York I often stay at a small hotel on a street 
of celebrated European restaurants. Every morning at six I am 
awakened by the banging and thumping of garbage trucks which 
carry away tons of an immense slosh of leftovers, in which I can 
just make out the forms of lobster thermidor, oysters Rockefeller, 
filet mignon aux champignons, poached salmon, moules mariniére, 
and cog au vin, slobbered over with almost all the vegetables 
served the previous evening—-since no one ever eats them. Ex- 
cellent as the cuisine may be, restaurants in America serve for the 
eye and not for the stomach, because abstractionists delight in 
the initial lift of fancy menus and vastly overloaded dishes— 
suited only to the appetites of growing boys, who cannot afford 
to eat in such places. The customer wants anticipation; he has no 
capacity for fulfillment. 

The heart of the matter is that we are living in a culture 
which has been hypnotized with symbols—words, numbers, 


Murder in the Kitchen 35 


measures, quantities, and images—and that we mistake them 
for, and prefer them to, physical reality. We believe that the 
proof of the pudding is in the chemical analysis, not in the eat- 
ing. This is largely the result of an educational system which is 
overwhelmingly literary and mathematical, which prepares 
everyone to be clerks and bureaucrats, and provides appren- 
ticeship in arts of material competence only reluctantly—for 
those considered too stupid for intellectual advancement. 

This is not sentimentalizing about the “dignity of labor.” It 
is saying that a culture is hardly a culture at all when it does not 
provide for the most sophisticated training in the fundamental 
arts of life: farming, cooking, dining, dressing, furnishing, and 
love-making. Where these arts are not cultivated with devo- 
tion and skill, time to spare and money to spend are useless. 
The shops are empty of all but trash, thrown together by slaves 
working joylessly for cash with one eye on the clock. Thus 
there are virtually no jobs to be had for those who delight in 
expert workmanship in producing the necessities of everyday 
life. The jet aircraft and scientific instruments are marvelous, 
but houses, cars, fabrics, bathtubs, carpeting, jewelry, suits, 
chinaware, beds, and lighting fixtures are simply phenomenal 
failures of human imagination. (Incidentally, if you want truly 
elegant glassware for the kitchen—Jars, funnels, decanters, bot- 
tles—buy it from a dealer in laboratory equipment.) 

In the world of symbols and abstractions—understood in 
terms of separate and disjointed words—the human person is 
an isolated thing among other things. Oneself is therefore ex- 
perienced as a lonely center of consciousness and action living 
inside an envelope of skin. This envelope is an abrupt bound- 
ary between oneself and an alien universe, and the main task 
of life is to join forces with other lonely ones for the “conquest 


36 DOES IT MATTER? 


of nature”—that is, for the violent subjugation of an enemy 
universe to our wills. Hence, also, our talk of “the conquest of 
space.” But as a result of this feeling we are destroying our en- 
vironment and fouling our own nest. Increasingly, the world 
around us looks as if we hated it. 

Yet this particular feeling of personal existence is a delu- 
sion. The special branch of science which studies the relation of 
living beings to their environments—ecology—shows beyond 
doubt that the individual organism and its environment are a 
continuous stream, or field, of energy. To draw a new moral 
from the bees and the flowers: the two organisms are very dif- 
ferent, for one is rooted in the ground and broadcasts perfume, 
while the other moves freely in the air and buzzes. But because 
they cannot exist without each other, it makes real sense to say 
that they are in fact two aspects of a single organism. Our heads 
are very different in appearance from our feet, but we recognize 
them as belonging to one individual because they are obviously 
connected by skin and bones. But less obvious connections are 
no less real. 

There are, for example, no strings connecting the widely 
separated molecules in your own hand. There is no visible ma- 
terial joining the individual stars into the formation which we 
recognize as a galaxy. But civilized human beings are alarm- 
ingly ignorant of the fact that they are continuous with their nat- 
ural surroundings. It is as necessary to have air, water, plants, 
insects, birds, fish, and mammals as it is to have brains, hearts, 
lungs, and stomachs. The former are our external organs in the 
same way that the latter are our internal organs. If then, we can 
no more live without the things outside than without those in- 
side, the plain inference is that the words “I” and “myself” 
must include doth sides. The sun, the earth, and the forests are 


Murder in the Kitchen 37 


just as much features of your own body as your brain. Erosion 
of the soil is as much a personal disease as leprosy, and many 
“growing communities” are as disastrous as cancer. 

That we do not feel this to be obvious is the result of cen- 
turies of habituation to the idea that oneself is only the envelope 
of skin and its contents, the inside but not the outside. The ex- 
treme folly of this notion becomes clear as soon as you try to 
imagine an inside with no outside, or an outside with no inside. 

To see this clearly is to acquire a new attitude to the phys- 
ical world which includes, first, a profound respect for the in- 
tricate interconnections between all creatures, upon which each 
of them depends, and second, a love for and delight in that 
world as an extension of your own body. True, this world main- 
tains itself by mutual killing and eating; but with this new atti- 
tude murder in the stockyards and on the farms will not be 
compounded with the murdering of food in the kitchen—or of 
the landscape by ill-conceived housing, or of the air and sun- 
light by industrial and automotive farting. 

Thus the one absolutely essential requirement for the art 
of cooking is a love for its raw materials: the shape and feel of 
eggs, the sniff of flour, or mint, or garlic, the marvelous form 
and shimmer of a mackerel, the marbled red texture of a cut of 
beef, the pale green translucence of fresh lettuce, the concentric 
ellipses of a sliced onion, and the weight, warmth, and resilience 
of flour-dusted dough under your fingers. The spiritual atti- 
tude of the cook will be all the more enriched if there is a fa- 
miliarity with barns and vineyards, fishing wharves and dairies, 
orchards and kitchen gardens. One of my most heart-lifting 
and persistent memories is of a row of oak-leaf lettuce seen at 
midnight under a full moon—jigsaw patterns of edible jade 
refreshed with minute drops of dew. I think also of hiding, as a 


38 DOES IT MATTER? 


child, between rows of scarlet runner beans upon sticks, open- 
ing the large pods that had gone to seed, and crunching the raw 
purple-mottled beans. After much searching, discovering a 
long, heavy pod concealing itself in the vines. 

With this attitude it is practically impossible to chuck food 
carelessly into boiling water or to roast, distractedly by the 
clock, without eager peeks into the oven to sniff and baste. A 
good cook broods over the range like a doting mother, or like 
an alchemist distilling the elixir of immortality from rare herbs. 
The preparation must be as delightful for its own sake as the 
feast, if the feast is to be worth eating. For the cook is, after all, 
a priest offering sacrifice, and the stove is an altar. There must 
be the same devotion and absorption as in performing a magi- 
cal rite, or, if you are not accustomed to such things, as in giv- 
ing the utmost pleasure to a gorgeous woman, in bringing the 
full sound out of an exquisite musical instrument, or in watch- 
ing the leisurely sail of your golf ball from the tee to the green. 

One can sense the style and attitude of ritual in almost any 
action that is done expertly, with full attention to the present— 
as when a surgeon handles his instruments at an operation, 
when a jeweler repairs a watch, or when pilots prepare for the 
takeoff of a plane. Such is the fascination (i.e., magic) of ritual 
that Americans, who pride themselves on being folksy, plain, 
and direct, will go abroad in droves to witness a coronation cer- 
emony, and be thrilled when a mditre d’ comes to a cart beside 
the table and prepares crépes suzette with flaming brandy. We 
are, indeed, so starved for ritual that thousands of staunch 
Protestant businessmen who would be horrified at solemn high 
mass in the Presbyterian church will nevertheless join the 
Freemasons and the Shriners to wear exotic robes and take part 


in archaic ceremonies. 


Murder in the Kitchen 39 


Happily, there is still in our souls a primitive and essential 
awe for that central god of the kitchen whose name is Fire. 
Americans, unlike the British and the French, have an abun- 
dance of spacious fireplaces in their homes, and, over the last 
twenty years, the paterfamilias has been increasingly drawn to 
the rites of the barbecue and its ceremonial appurtenances— 
the chef’s hat, the apron, and the long skewers, fork, and 
turner. A return to this timeless form of cooking is a clear sign 
that all is not yet lost, and that we are never going to have any 
real appetite for the kind of meals—now available in some 
drive-ins—where your order is dialed and delivered electri- 
cally in sixty seconds. My faith in human nature tells me that 
our very nerves will force us to realize that there can be no taste 
at the table without love in the kitchen. 

Now, the center of almost every civilized home in the 
Western world is a barren space called the living room, which 
is anything but lively. At one time it was more correctly known 
as the parlor, that is, the “talking place” where one received 
honored visitors, and as such it was firmly walled off, used 
only on special occasions, smelled vaguely musty, and con- 
tained little besides chairs and sofas, a cabinet of curios and 
pretty plates, and a few pictures. The family dived elsewhere: if 
one had no servants, in the kitchen; otherwise, in the library 
or the boudoir or the nursery. But with the virtual extinction of 
servants and the increasing cost of space, homes have suffered 
a weird transformation. Logically, we should have abandoned 
the pretentious luxury of the parlor and moved into roomy 
kitchens. Instead, we have moved into the parlor and reduced 
the kitchen to a bathroomlike appendage. This has enabled us 
to maintain the illusion that we could still afford servants, or at 
least a cook, preparing meals off-scene to be presented at the 


40 DOES IT MATTER? 


table as if, say, roast lamb were a “dish” created miraculously 
out of nothing. 

It is in such ways that civilization, as we have worked it out, 
is a system of screens which conceal the connections between 
events. Just as roast lamb is a presentation at the table without 
visible connection with kitchen, cooking, or sheepherding, so, 
also, children simply arrive amongst us without visible con- 
nection with sexual intercourse or parturition. Bacon, as found 
packaged in the supermarket, gives no intimation of pig, and 
steaks appear as if they were entities like apples, having no re- 
lation to the slicing of dead cattle. To remove such screens is 
held to be as offensive and vulgar as to relieve one’s bowels in 
the gutter of a public street. 

Similarly, the living room is the place where a family ap- 
pears, to itself and to others, “on stage” as ladies and gentle- 
men who do not farm, kill, cook, wash, shit, or fuck—all 
four-letter words! A home should indeed bear some relation to 
the human organism which it houses: as mouth and rectum are 
at opposite ends of the alimentary canal, kitchen and can should 
be kept well apart. (It should be noted in passing that one of 
the great pleasures of Japanese civilization is the communal 
bathtub, but that the bathroom is kept quite separate from the 
benjo, except in modern hotels, where each room has a private 
bath.) But when the segmentation of living goes too far, when 
our various organic functions are performed in separate and 
private boxes, we appear on stage in our homes only as people 
who eat (rather apologetically), drink, sit, and talk. The rest of 
the house is a sort of “unconscious”—and a cramped one at 
that—into which our more biological functions are repressed. 

This arrangement accords, however, with the illusion that 
one’s actual self is a distinct mental entity, a soul or ego, which 


Murder in the Kitchen 41 


inhabits and is supposed to control the body, but does not really 
belong to it. This nonbiological self is an abstraction, a complex 
of words, symbols, and ideas—a persona, or mask, instead of a 
living being—and this is why the parlor, the chatter box, is the 
principal room in the homes of a civilization positively dedi- 
cated to this illusion. 

The misnamed living room is indeed, then, a withdrawing 
room into which we withdraw not so much from the table, after 
dinner, as from biological existence. Such withdrawal would 
be honest and conscious if the room in question were a library, 
a place set apart for the intellectual life. But in a nation which 
supports not much more than one thousand legitimate book- 
shops, few living rooms are libraries. By and large the central 
and principal room of the house is a great wasted space, clut- 
tered with heavy, ungainly, and expensive furniture to support 
the inflexible and creaking frames of people who are ashamed 
of their bodies. 

Let us begin with chairs. A chair is properly an adjunct to 
a table, and a table is a clean, raised surface used for serving 
food so that we do not stumble over the dishes nor have our 
meals interrupted by unmannerly dogs, cats, and infants. But 
standing alone in a living room the chair is an absurd perch, a 
type of surgical support for bodies unadapted to the ground. 
As for the bulbous forms of overstuffed armchairs and couches, 
one would suppose that they had been designed as containers 
for the shipment of rocs’ eggs. Any rest and comfort that they 
afford is offset by the effort of heaving them around to vacuum 
the floor, by their initial expense, and by the cost of transport- 
ing their monstrous bulk when moving house. However be- 
chintzed and camouflaged, they have about the same aesthetic 
value as gun emplacements. 


42 DOES IT MATTER? 


The same strictures, incidentally, apply to most beds, with 
their ponderous head- and footboards, and the dense ara- 
besques of wires and springs which support their elephantine 
mattresses. They require an additional waste of space in the 
form of (usually dreary) bedrooms with an area large enough 
to squeeze around these prodigious pads in the daily chore of 
making them. For rest and privacy the ideal solution seems to 
me to bea large windowed closet where the whole floor is cov- 
ered with foam rubber and carpeted. On retiring, pillows and 
quilts, or electric blankets, are laid upon the floor, Japanese 
style, and returned to concealed shelves in the morning. 

The problem, then, is that our homes exhibit the same lack 
of material competence and biological intelligence as our cook- 
ing and clothing. They are made for posturing persons instead 
of living organisms. And it is not as if the posturing persons 
were putting on a really good show; they are witlessly and 
cheaply reproducing the lifestyle of lords and ladies who lived 
in an age of abundant space and plentiful slaves, of aristocrats 
who, under the influence of Christian puritanism, could pre- 
tend that they never had to stoop so low as to cook or to per- 
form those other biological activities expressed with four-letter 
words. And this lifestyle is as obsolete and vestigial as the but- 
tons on the sleeves of our coats. 

As a product of the ambitious petite bourgeoisie, 1 have for 
years been under the illusion that one should aspire to some- 
thing “better in life” than the material arts which maintain and 
beautify our human biology. This something “better” is always 
cerebral, abstract, and symbolic: to be a writer, clergyman, 
lawyer, politician, financier, professor, or philosopher—any- 
thing that would keep my Aands out of life. For myself, I am 
not bitter about it; some people have to be brahmins, and I think 


Murder in the Kitchen 43 


I have done a fair job of it, though I doubt if I could survive a 
month in the “state of nature” without brawny and skillful peas- 
ants to help me. The intellectual, literate, and theoretical life 
has its place as one of several differentiated vocations or—it 
must be admitted—castes. Rigid and anachronistic as it be- 
came, the Hindu principle of caste was based on the essentially 
sound idea that the community needs intellectuals (6rahmana), 
governors and soldiers (Ashatriya), merchants and businessmen 
(vaisya), and laborers, skilled and unskilled (sudra). But what if 
almost everyone aspires, or is taught that he should aspire, to the 
more cerebral styles of life? That will put everyone in the par- 
lor and no one in the kitchen. 

My answer is “Back to the kitchen!” It should supplant, and 
even abolish, the living room as the center of the home. The 
practical difficulty is that no one wants to go back to the kinds 
of kitchens that we have—to piles of filthy dishes, Formica 
tabletops, chromium-trimmed appliances, bathtub sinks, obese 
black-and-white ranges, and enormous streamlined refrigera- 
tors designed to go through the air at two hundred miles per 
hour, all cramped into the smallest space consistent with the 
unfortunate necessity of having to eat. Let us grant that, in re- 
cent years, at least the appearance of kitchen appliances has 
changed for the better (at considerable extra cost), but most 
British and American kitchens are still exemplary for their 
“practical ugliness,” not for lack of means but for lack of imag- 
ination. 

The first step, as many architects have rather halfheartedly 
shown us, is to take out the wall between kitchen and living 
room. (I am not writing for the few who can begin a new home 
from scratch, or for those who already have spacious kitchens. 
They will readily see how to apply my principles to their own 


44 DOES IT MATTER? 


circumstances.) The second is to partition off a small area for a 
scullery, consisting of a shelf or shelves for dirty dishes and an 
automatic dishwasher. If possible, the same area can contain 
washing machine, dryer, and deep-freeze units. Beyond this, 
the object is to merge the kitchen and living room into a single 
unit, functionally and aesthetically, as a place where cooking, 
eating, drinking, talking, singing, or listening to music are all in 
place. 

Halfhearted architects divide the “kitchen area” from the 
“living area” with a bar, which has much to be said for it if the 
bar is something more than a convenience for serving drinks 
or eating breakfast, though even this has the advantage of 
allowing the cook, whether wife or husband, to stay with the 
party or the family while preparing the meal. The important 
point is, however, that appetite is marvelously increased by 
watching and smelling the preparation of food. This is the at- 
traction of the American barbecue, and of Japanese bars for 
tempura (deep-fried shrimps and vegetables), yakitori (charcoal- 
broiled “kebabs” on bamboo skewers), and sushi (small slices 
of chilled and perfectly fresh raw fish on patties of marinated 
rice, sometimes wrapped in paper-thin seaweed). This, too, is 
the delight of such meals cooked at the table as swkiyaki and 
mizutake (the former by sauteeing and the latter by simmering 
meat or fish with vegetables), and of such comparable Swiss 
preparations as cheese fondue and fondue bourguignonne, where 
chunks of sourdough bread are dipped into a communal chafing 
dish of hot liquid cheese, or cubes of raw beefsteak into hot oil. 
If, then, the kitchen is to be divided from the dining area by a 
bar, let the bar run immediately alongside the range, barbecue 
pit, and a generous slab of chopping board—all with a hooded 
vent overhead. Here family and guests can sip their preprandial 


Murder in the Kitchen 45 


drinks and have their appetites whetted by the scents, sights, 
and rituals of preparing the meal. (Note in passing that the 
problematic “smell of cooking” is not given off by cooks who 
refrain from the merciless boiling of vegetables and from the 
reuse of old oil. Stocks for soups and gravy should be prepared 
early in the day, long before guests arrive.) 

The kitchen as a whole should resemble a delicatessen 
rather than a surgery. There should be an ample central table of 
plain well-scrubbed wood which may be used both for eating 
and preparation; and, at least in my ideal kitchen, strings of 
onions, sausages of hard salami, cheeses in wax or muslin, and 
basketed bottles of Spanish and Italian wine would hang from 
beams overhead. As no true lover of books keeps them hidden 
in cupboards, so the basic food supplies that need no refriger- 
ation should not have their comforting presence concealed. 
Flour, sugar, salt, rice, and other grains should be kept in stop- 
pered glass jars, preferably of the kind used in laboratories. 
Spices, canned goods, boxes, and bottles should adorn the walls 
on open shelves, covered only with sliding glass panels if 
protection from dust be necessary. Practically, this avoids the 
nuisances of hunting through cupboards and banging into 
the corners of their open doors, and allows one to locate and 
review supplies at a glance. Skillets and saucepans, together 
with such utensils as the pancake turner, cooking spoon and 
fork, strainers, skewers, and snail pans should dangle from 
well-ordered wall hooks and not be flung into drawers. 

Allow no utensil in the kitchen that is not in some sense a 
work of art—not prettified stuff but exquisitely functional, such 
as the best wooden spoons from Italy, made from lemonwood, 
enameled casseroles from Sweden, Solingen kitchen knives, 


terra cotta bowls from Mexico, Revere ware or heavy copper 


46 DOES IT MATTER? 


saucepans from England, or a fine Chinese wok (pan for stir- 
frying) with its turner and spoon. Tinny and plasticky utensils 
from Woolworth’s or the supermarket are as out of place as an 
electric harmonium in a cathedral. Beware, however, of a su- 
perfluity of gadgetry—especially of those appliances which 
take more time to clean than they save in operation, such as that 
electrified pea-pod opener for “the cook who has everything.” 

Although we move inexorably into an electronic age, Iam 
content with this magic for refrigeration and dishwashing, and 
for powering a blender. Technologically, it is not yet as satis- 
factory for cooking as gas and charcoal. Heat cannot be reduced 
instantly, as with gas, and saucepans must therefore be removed 
from the burner and set down elsewhere. Give me a table-top 
gas range of stainless steel, and a windowed oven-broiler about 
four feet from the floor so that I don’t have to grovel to baste the 
turkey, or prostrate myself to inspect a steak. Those electronic 
ovens which render a roast chewable in seconds, though per- 
haps allowable for vegetables, are the peculiar abominations 
which account for the food now served on airplanes and in 
hospitals. They have no place in civilized kitchens, and the 
warmed-overness of their products is simply a penalty for haste. 

To one side of the range I would install a charcoal pit or 
Japanese Aibachi (the double size measuring about 10 by 20 
inches), since with proper ventilation charcoal broiling need 
not be a purely outdoor affair. My friend Sumire Jacobs, a Japan- 
ese lady who is undoubtedly one of the best nonprofessional 
cooks in California, has a permanently installed wok adjoining 
her range, and I have been persuaded that this wide, round- 
bottomed frying pan should be in every kitchen, for no method 
of preparing vegetables is to be compared with the Chinese way 
of stir-frying them for from one to three minutes in a small 


Murder in the Kitchen 47 


quantity of very hot sesame or soybean oil. The wok, which in- 
cludes an inside-fitting lid or cover, rests over the flame in a 
metal ring upon which it can be turned to all angles, and the 
Chinese use it for an immense variety of dishes. It is the most 
versatile of all cooking pans. 

Most kitchens have utterly inadequate chopping boards— 
miserable little planks that pull out from above a top drawer or 
hang on the wall. Many lumber merchants can, however, sup- 
ply solid, heavy chopping board by the square foot, made of 
% inch strips of hardwood, cut across the grain, glued together 
and finely sanded. At least 2’4 by 3 feet of one’s working area 
should be made of this material, and, ideally, it should replace 
all working surfaces except the draining area by the sink, which 
should be tile or stainless steel. There is something about 
Formica tops with chrome edges which, if only by way of an 
imaginative brain, nullifies the taste of anything prepared upon 
such alien and unnatural surfaces. 

But what is it about plastics in general? It is rumored that 
beautiful plastic objects can be made, but the plastics which or- 
dinarily enter the kitchen are vile in color, obnoxious in shape, 
and repulsive in texture. I am contemplating, for example, a 
receptacle for washing dishes, about 18 inches square and 9 
inches deep. It is rounded at all corners and slobberingly rolled 
outwards along the edges as if it were just about to turn itself 
inside out. The material is vaguely soft, so that when filled with 
water and lifted it sags to one side and spills. It feels like thick, 
cold, greasy leather, except the grease doesn’t come off on your 
hands. You suspect, rather, that molecule-size particles are pen- 
etrating your skin through the pores. The color is a pale dusty 
green that tried to be fluorescent and failed. As an artist friend 
once said, “There are two kinds of green: green and damn 


48 DOES IT MATTER? 


green.” This is not the pale green of sunlight through spring 
leaves; it is mal-de-mer or corpse green, not unlike the color of 
people attempting to survive on a macrobiotic diet or to be veg- 
etarians on the basis of standard British or American cuisine. 

Objects of this kind also come in frozen-custard pink, hepa- 
titis yellow, and baby-soap blue. Plastic bowls of this last color are 
now to be found in bathrooms all over Japan, replacing the small 
wooden tubs which used to be used for washing and sploshing 
oneself before getting into the deep bath for a long soak. Japan 
is in fact in an epidemic state of plasticitis. Visit any public beach. 
The high-water mark, once a wavy line of seaweed, driftwood, 
and shells, is now a rubbish trail of torn plastic bags, squeeze bot- 
tles, bloated sandals, and abandoned toys—amiles and miles of it, 
all plastic, all virtually indissoluble by the normal elements. The 
Japanese love of nature! They even have plastic antimacassars, 
printed like white lace, to hang over the backs of overstuffed 
chairs. One can only hope that this is the swan song, the last gasp, 
the final reductio ad absurdum of the Japanese-Edwardian style of 
dress and furnishing which has been making official, genteel, and 
urban Japan look silly for fifty years. 

Alchemically, plastic is related to the salve with which 
witches were supposed to rub their bodies before their diaboli- 
cal Sabbath, whereon they were alleged to insult the divine order 
of nature by transforming themselves into dogs with human 
torsos and all manner of Brueghelesque monsters—fish-bats, 
spider-rats, porcupine-snakes, and pigeon-frogs. Human sub- 
stance became an infinitely malleable goo, obedient to every 
whim of perverse imagination. Plastic is the same negative spir- 
itualization of matter: it can mock any shape and be trans- 
formed into textureless everything. Plastic glasses can flatten 
the taste of beer and wine, and make even water feel as if it had 


Murder in the Kitchen 49 


been distilled. Plastic plates will cause the juicy essences of a 
steak to evaporate instantly and transform all fish into boiled 
cod. For lack of weight and substance they slide about on the 
table, and they cannot be preheated without wilting. 

Plastic typifies the whole mock-materialism of industrial 
civilization, and now that it is being used by surgeons to make 
spare parts for the human body, we may anticipate the day when 
people survive interminably as plastic reproductions of them- 
selves. On the principles of wax casting or embalming with 
formaldehyde, we may some time be able to inject the body 
with a liquid plastic that will flow through the veins and capil- 
laries, the alimentary tract and intestines, and finally along the 
nerves into the brain, following the forms of every neuron and 
cell. The treated individual will then be dropped into an acid 
bath in which all natural flesh will be dissolved and the liquid 
plastic firmed up by a fixative mixed in the acid, while the new 
heart is fed with synthetic, acid-resistant blood—and in those 
days Disneyland will inherit the earth.’ 

For Disneyland exists “as a mystery and a sign,” the land of 
the fake and the home of the bogus, prototype of the world to 
come. Even the birds in the trees are plastic, and sing through 
their hinged beaks with tiny loudspeakers. Plastic deer, bears, 
elephants, and bunny rabbits stand along the banks of artificial 
lakes and rivers, monotonously wagging their mechanical 
heads. Tourists, traveling by river boat through simulated 
jungle, have the thrill of seeing a plastic hippopotamus shot 
with a blank cartridge, and a varnished papier-mdaché replica of 


1 Stanford Research Institute has already predicted that Orange County, the home 
of Disneyland, will become the vital center of the whole Los Angeles—Southern 
California subtopia. 


50 DOES IT MATTER? 


the Swiss Family Robinson’s tree house which vibrates perpet- 
ually to the recorded music of an oom-pah-pah band (on a loop 
tape) going “Pom-pitty bom-pitty pom-pitty bom-pitty” for 
ever and ever. Though it takes hours to go through all the 
“shows,” a decent restaurant—let alone a bar—is nowhere to 
be found, since this is strictly sodapop-culture, where one must 
subsist upon hamburgers, hot dogs, ice cream, popcorn, or Fred 
Harvey—type meals. 

For the true significance of Disneyland is that it reflects our 
notions of children—what they are, what is good for them, and 
what will please them. Children are a special class of human 
beings which came into existence with the industrial revolu- 
tion, at which time we began to invent a closed world for them, 
a nursery society, wherein their participation in adult life could 
be delayed increasingly—to keep them off the labor market. 
Children are, in fact, small adults who want to take part in the 
adult world as quickly as possible, and to learn by doing. But in 
the closed nursery society they are supposed to learn by pre- 
tending, for which insult to their feelings and intelligence they 
are propitiated with toys and hypnotized with baby talk. They 
are thus beguiled into the fantasy of that happy, carefree child- 
hood with its long sunny days through which one may go on 
“playing”—in the peculiar sense of not working—for always 
and always. This neurotic suppression of growth is outwardly 
and visibly manifested in the child’s toy world of plastic and 
tin, of miniaturized won’t-work guns, airplanes, cars, kitchen 
ranges, dinner sets, medical kits, and space rockets, designed 
so to entrance them that they will keep out of the way of adults. 
Yet every suburban mother must, at 5 pM, ruin her disposition 
for cooking by engaging in a knock-down drag-out battle with 
her brood, which has, by that time of day, strewn the entire 


Murder in the Kitchen 51 


house with the wreckage of these baubles, compelling them to 
gather up the remains and fling them into closets and drawers 
bemixed with half-sucked lollipops and bubble gum. 

In truth, children resent their nursery world but are given 
no opportunity to go beyond it. They cannot participate in their 
father’s work because he goes away to an office or factory. Most 
mothers shoo their children out of the kitchen: it is too small to 
contain them, and she is rushed and harried by the fray of the 
clean-up battle or by getting home late from a bridge game or 
half-time job. A common solution is to get the children fed be- 
fore their father gets home for dinner or guests arrive, pollut- 
ing their palates with hot dogs and ice cream washed down with 
Coca-Cola, while they sit mesmerized in front of the TV ab- 
sorbing cutie-pie cartoons or mayhem. 

My father, too, went to the office, except for a brief period 
during the Depression when he was farming rabbits at home 
and allowed me to work with him. But, miserably small though 
it was, my mother never kept me out of the kitchen. Whenever 
possible she let me help a little, but otherwise I acquired a 
basic understanding of cooking just by being able to watch.’ I 
never had to do any serious cooking until I was thirty-four, 
living alone for a year, and then discovered that the art was 
somehow in my bones. A year or two later, wintering in a 
New England farmhouse where the kitchen was the only warm 
room in the place, I really got down to it and have never been 
able to give up. When writing, I like to work from about 6:30 aM 
until 4 pM, and then switch from the abstract to the concrete by 
going to see what the market has to offer for dinner. Work in 


2 She goes down to history as author, under her maiden name Emily Mary 
Buchan, of Easy Dishes for Small Income (London, Routledge, 1910). 


52 DOES IT MATTER? 


the kitchen brings me down from intellectual clouds to re- 
establish contact with things of the earth, and my wife, though 
an excellent cook in her own right, humors me by letting me 
have the run of the kitchen, usually cleaning up as I go along. 

Because our home is an ex-ferryboat, the kitchen is still 
something of a galley. Nevertheless, dinner guests have a way 
of drifting in with their cocktails to chatter and watch the pro- 
ceedings, and, as an innate show-off, I have no objection. How- 
ever, the basic reason is that an attractive kitchen is a primordial 
center of human gravity. Everyone wants to know “what’s 
cooking.” The kitchen is no mere utility room. It is as much a 
place for sculpture, paintings, and plants as anywhere else in 
the house, and I have abandoned the usual white or brown color 
schemes for royal purple, cobalt blue, and emerald green with 
a nine-faced mask of Vishnu—“resplendent Indweller, seed of 
all that is’—on the wall above the range. 

Being a place of transformation, of alchemy, the kitchen 
should have some atmosphere of magic—perhaps a shrine for 
one’s tutelary kitchen god, or exotic objects and utensils from 
far-off lands. I like a kitchen to put me in mind of the descrip- 
tion of an alchemist’s shop in the Arabian Mights— 


Chinese and Indian drugs, medicines in leaf and pow- 
der, salves, pomades, collyriums, unguents and precious 
balms;...choice spices and every kind of aromatic 
thing, musk, amber, incense, transparent tears of mas- 
tic, unrefined benzoin, and essence of every flower, 
camphor, coriander, cardamoms, clovers, cinnamon 
from Serendibis, Indian tamarind and ginger, and a 
quantity of bird olives, those with the thin skins and 
sweet flesh filled with juice and coloured like blond oil. 


Murder in the Kitchen 53 


Everyone knows, of course, that the natives of Serendibis 
(Ceylon) and Kashmir, Sikkhim and Samarkand, Tahiti and 
Tashkent, find their own lives as matter-of-fact as ours, though 
for them there is magic in the names of London and Paris, New 
York and San Francisco—and for many of us, too. Yet if the 
magic of exotic things and places is only a projection of the 
imagination, it shows at least that one has imagination—or shall 
I say imagicination, the power to radiate magic. As a romanti- 
cist and lover of the exotic without qualms of conscience I still 


hanker for 


Quinquereme of Nineveh from distant Ophir 
Rowing home to haven in sunny Palestine, 
With a cargo of ivory, 

And apes, and peacocks, 

Sandalwood, cedarwood, and sweet white wine. 


Thus I have promised myself that if and when I reach the 
age of seventy, I shall retire to a mountain slope near the ocean 
and raise a small garden of herbs—culinary, medicinal, and 
psychedelic. Beside the garden I shall build a redwood barn 
where bunches of drying plants will hang from the beams, and 
where long shelves will be lined with jars and bottles of dulca- 
mara and spikenard, ginseng and aloeswood, lobelia, mandra- 
gora, and cannabis, pennyroyal, horehound, and meadowsweet. 
There also I shall maintain an alchemist’s laboratory-cum- 
kitchen with a library, and if the world presses too much in on 
me, my wife will respond to unwanted visitors in the words of 
Chia Tao’s poem “Searching for the Hermit in Vain”— 


The master’s gone alone 
Herb-picking, somewhere on the mount, 
Cloud-hidden, whereabouts unknown. 


CLOTHES—ON AND OFF 


Fe most of my life I have been in rebellion against the var- 
ious riggings of cloth which authority or fashion have 
constrained me to wear. It is largely the fault of the British, 
who, as arbiters of style in men’s clothing, have foisted upon 
mankind the most ridiculous and uncomfortable forms of dress 
ever invented. From Beau Brummel to the tailors of Saville 
Row and Bond Street, the British stylists have sold their absurd 
uniforms of tweed and worsted to the whole world. They have 
stripped the Japanese of their kimonos, the Ceylonese of their 
sarongs, the Hindus of their dhotis, and the Levantines of 
their kaftans—so that today a Japanese businessman goes about 
looking like a bag too large for its contents, and, on formal oc- 
casions, appears in the black Edwardian cutaway or morning 
coat with striped pants. Since the Japanese are relatively short, 
especially in the legs, the coattails reach well below their knees 
and one expects them at any moment to hop around and caw. 

I know all about it, for I was born and educated in En- 
gland. When I was sent off to boarding school they trussed me 
in an Eton suit. This sartorial disaster consists of tight dark 
grey pants, a black waistcoat or vest with lapels and cloth- 
covered buttons, and a black monkey-jacket known as a bum- 
freezer, obviously designed for the purpose of making the 


55 


56 DOES IT MATTER? 


bottoms of small boys more readily presentable for flogging. 
The pants were held up by suspenders (which we called braces) 
and the socks by garters (which we called suspenders). The 
shirt was usually of an off-white striped flannel to which was at- 
tached, with collar-buttons or studs, an immense starched white 
collar worn outside the jacket. With this went either a black top 
hat or a “boater” straw hat, ribboned with the school colors. 
Ours were salmon-pink with a white fleur-de-lis at the front. 
The outfit had nothing to recommend it, either practically or 
aesthetically. It was too hot in summer and too cold in winter. 
The starched collars became both grubby and dented after even 
an hour’s wear. The straw hat blew away in the wind, and 
sometimes had to be secured with the foppery of a hat guard— 
a thin black cord dangling between the brim of the hat and the 
lapel of the jacket. 

On our attaining the height of 5 feet 7 inches, the uniform 
was changed to black striped pants with the black Marlborough 
jacket (i.e., the normal jacket of the adult male), and the Eton 
collar was replaced by a starched wing collar of the type that 
used to be worn with formal evening dress, plus a black silk 
necktie. On the street we carried gloves with silver-topped 
canes or neatly rolled umbrellas. But it was still absurd. 

Let me catalogue the follies of Western man’s British- 
inspired dress: 

Item: pants or trousers are entirely unsuited to male anatomy, 
insulting by ignoring the membrum virile. (Into which leg do 
you put it?) They are appropriate for very shapely women. 

Item: jackets are clumsily shaped for folding and packing, 
and invariably emerge creased and crumpled from the suitcase. 
There is no conceivable use for lapels or for buttons on the 
sleeves, the latter being a survival from the days when fancy 


Clothes—On and Off 57 


uniforms had rows of buttons on the sleeves to discourage their 
use for wiping the nose. 

Item: the male suit violates the nature of cloth by forcing it 
to fit the shape of the body. Woven materials are essentially rec- 
tangular and resent being molded into cylindrical, conical, or 
hourglass forms. They like to be allowed to hang freely, and 
show their appreciation by conferring dignity and ease upon 
the wearer. 

Item: the standard white shirt can hardly be folded except 
by an expert laundress, and has an insufferable tendency to 
creep up from beneath the belt and spill over the edge of the 
pants. Furthermore, no man should look ridiculous in any part 
of his clothing, and a man “caught with his pants down” in 
nothing but a shirt is a sight unpleasing to the eye. Especially 
when he is wearing black socks with garters. 

Item: the necktie, even when colorful, is a sacred cow. It is 
a noose facilitating instant strangulation and a symbol of servi- 
tude. Restaurants which refuse admission to persons unorna- 
mented by this meaningless strip of cloth will simply lose the 
patronage of the increasing number of well-heeled men who 
wear more unconventional or colorful clothing. 

Item: strong leather shoes, and especially those of the hard, 
shiny, and unflexible British type, are just extra weight to carry 
when walking, deny freedom of movement to the complex bone 
structure of the foot, and by airless enclosure promote sweat, 
stink, athlete’s foot, and a black crud between the toes com- 
posed of fall-out from the skin mixed with lint from the socks. 
We used to call it toe-jam. 

Item: starch on collars or cuffs is anathema. It scratches the 
skin and rots the fabric. Fortunately, we are no longer compelled 
to wear the starched shirt-front with formal dress, but one is 


58 DOES IT MATTER? 


amazed that men could ever have tolerated such crustacean 
apparel. 

In sum, conventional male dress is trussing. It is tight, stiff, 
and constricting, and we are so habituated to it that many peo- 
ple feel vaguely guilty when, several hours after arising, they 
are still clad in some loose-fitting robe. The collar, the tie, the 
belt, the pants, the shoes, the tightly fitted jacket squeeze in on 
you with the information that you are indeed really and truly 
there. As if you didn’t know. Some people get it by lying on 
beds of nails, by walking to the Basilica of Guadalupe on their 
knees, by enduring Swedish massage, or by the curious sexual 
kick known as “bondage,” which involves being tied up with 
ropes in awkward positions and tickled with feathers. I am not 
contesting anyone’s freedom to use all these devices to enhance 
their sense of reality or “existential authenticity,” but I resent 
their authority over the rest of us—which compels me to go to 
fine restaurants, attend formal parties, and conduct business 
outside my home in grotesque garments which deprive me of 
ease and freedom and display little or no aesthetic imagination. 

What about our clothes for women? Superficially, they 
seem to be looser and easier, and also more colorful—unless 
one insists upon smart black with a string of pearls. But let us 
take a close look at them from the feet up. 

Item: high-heeled shoes, especially the patent-leather ones 
with long, sharp points, have obviously been designed by foot 
fetishists who cannot be sexually aroused unless their women 
grind them in the rectum or trample their bellies with this sin- 
ister footwear which calls to mind, what? A Cadillac upended 
on an enormous jack. A sitz bath with one leg from a grand 
piano. A stag beetle with an immense erection. Such shoes, es- 
pecially when combined with tight skirts, compel women to 


Clothes—On and Off 59 


walk “step-step-step-step” like inhibited mechanisms, clacking 
along the pavements and jarring their nerves. No natural or lib- 
erated person makes a noise when walking. 

Item: nylon stockings are the most impractical legwear ever 
invented. They run at the slightest scratch; they are a flimsy and 
expensive form of frou-frou which have to be supported by 

Item: a garter belt or elastic girdle arrangement with pulleys 
and block-and-tackle contraptions to hold said stockings in 
position. Although we have largely abandoned the feminine 
armor of laced corsets with whalebone ribbing, many women 
still feel flabby and undressed without the “snuggy” clutch of 
the girdle about their hips and buttocks. They should realize, 
however, that when they undress for their husbands or lovers 
their skins bear the herringbone imprints and sundry other 
dents and welts inlaid by these weird devices. Furthermore, 
women should not be ashamed of ample development in the 
jaghana (the Hindu word for this whole region of the body); it 
is particularly attractive beneath a thin waist. 

Item: the brassiere is a surgical appliance which may be 
necessary for ladies with excessively pendulous bosoms, but 
otherwise it is without value except that of deception, as when 
falsies are used as compensation for unduly small breasts. 

(Looking over my shoulder, my wife says that women, es- 
pecially of the younger generation, no longer wear these mon- 
strosities. This goes to show, however, that I am not fighting a 
losing battle and that in this, as in many other matters, the 
young are beginning to show unexpected good sense.) 

Item: there is a common species of women’s outer dress 
most aptly termed a frock. It is usually made of flimsy, flower- 
printed rayon with skirt descending a little below the knees. 
Upon elderly ladies with bulging stomachs (by whom this 


60 DOES IT MATTER? 


garment is chiefly worn) it is an undignified abomination sup- 
posed to be reminiscent of frilly girlishness, and often goes with 
a hat resembling a flattened-out hydrangea. Please, ladies, just 
don’t do it. 

Item: women’s gowns are, in general, held together by tiny, 
irritating devices such as zippers in unreachable places, minute 
snappers, and hook-and-eye myopicisms where the eye is often 
nothing more than an infinitely small loop of invisible thread. 
How do single women, without husbands or maids, get them- 
selves zip-snap-hooked together? 

Final item: hats, applying to both women and men. There 
are two basically sensible hats, one made of fur for protection 
against the cold as found in Canada, Alaska, and Russia; the other 
for protection against rain, the large flat cone- or mushroom- 
shaped hats made of rice straw, worn by coolies and monks in 
the Far East, obviating the necessity for carrying umbrellas. 
Otherwise, hats are absurd and pretentious superstructures 
without practical value or aesthetic charm. Upon entering 
restaurants and other places where they must be ritually doffed 
(and one might discuss at great length the etiquette and sym- 
bolism of donning and doffing the hat), these useless lids must, 
at least by men, be parked in a cloakroom for from twenty-five 
to fifty cents, thus costing an urbane owner who frequently 
dines out for business or pleasure at least $65.00 per annum. 

Consider such hats as the topper, the derby or bowler, the 
Homburg, or the stiff visored cap affected by the military and 
the police. Even when well fitted they afflict slight welts on the 
brow, promote baldness, and express a pompous attitude to life. 
Philosophers and theologians have given all too little attention 
to the vice of pomposity, which is, at root, the folly of taking 
oneself seriously. As a liberated person walks soundlessly, like a 


Clothes—On and Off 61 


cat, he also takes himself lightly. Pomp, which comes from 
the Greek word pompos, meaning the leader of a procession, 
also suggests by onomatopoeia the ridiculous “oom-pah-pah” 
noises made by the enormous saxhorns used in military bands 
and thus, by further association, the booted stomping, rattling, 
and slapping of military drills. Effective soldiers, such as gueril- 
las and commandos, move without the slightest sound and thus 
never announce their coming. The affectation of military pomp 
by the German armies is one reason why they lost two world 
wars, and why the Americans are failing in Vietnam. Pomp is 
probably a compensation for sexual inadequacy, but must not 
be confused with the easy swagger of the male who enjoys his 
own body. Americans win wars only to the extent that they em- 


ploy the tactics of Indians. Tact is, after all, silence. 


Stoop not, dear men, to demean your souls 

By going round in black inverted bowls 
Whereunder, crawling cooped, you live and die. 
Take for your hat the wide dome of the sky; 

Far nobler headpiece than a bulbous lid 

Beneath whose firmament no stars are hid, 

Nor any winds of heaven find entrance there 

To blow the dust of dandruff from your hair. 


So much, then, for hats. 

Now—unless some zoologist can dig up a weird excep- 
tion—humans are the only living beings who wear clothes. 
They are also the only beings who laugh, for humor is the prop- 
erty of humanity and consists, essentially, in not taking oneself 
seriously. (Consider the situation of someone chasing a hat 
blown off by the wind.) People can laugh at themselves because 
they know, deep down, that their lives are a big act, a put-on. 


62 DOES IT MATTER? 


This may get us into the depths of mysticism, but every person 
knows, tacitly, that he is God in disguise. Not, perhaps, the uni- 
versal monarch of Jewish and Christian imagery, but at least the 
inmost and ultimate Self of Hinduism, the Actor who plays all 
the roles, and thus the Joker in the deck of cards. Stated more 
philosophically, each one of us is a manifestation of the total 
energy of the universe. Wearing clothes is therefore a gesture 
which implies the unadmitted knowledge that our personalities 
are put on. Think of such phrases as “cover yourself,” “pull your- 
self together,” “tighten your belts,” “keep your hair on,” “don’t 
lose your shirt,” “caught with your pants down,” “shiftless,” 


> 66 


“sound investment,” “redressment of injustice,” “defrocked,” 


“uncloaked,” “dismantled,” “name and address,” “wearing an 


9 66 


expression,” “clothed and in one’s right mind,” “vested inter- 
est,” “stuffed shirt,” “good (or bad) habits,” “the bare facts,” and 
“the naked truth.” Such a list of sartorial symbols and millinery 
metaphors for mental and moral states, of depletions and com- 
pletions of personality, might be expanded indefinitely. But they 
express a basic and intuitive recognition of the connection 
between who we are, as persons, and what we wear. 

Thus, may it not be significant that men who are supposed 
to play brahminical or “holy” roles in life wear loose-fitting 
robes—saddhus, swamis, monks, priests, professors in formal 
dress, and even judges? Very far-out holy men, such as the 
Shaiva yogis of India, go stark naked, to symbolize the suppo- 
sition that they aren’t playing any role at all, that they have 
entirely transcended the ego and reidentified with the divine. 
On the other hand, the aggressive, rough-and-tough military 
and business people are invariably trussed in armor, boots, put- 
tees, Sam Brown belts, tight leather jackets, helmets, and other 


Clothes—On and Off 63 


crustacean, squeeze-play contraptions for letting yourself know 
that you really exist. Yet again, the true athlete, like the far-out 
holy man, goes almost naked. The Greek word gymnos means 
“nude,” and thus a gymnasium originally was a place where 
everyone took off their clothes for exercise. 

These remarks must not suggest that I approve of nudism 
as a way of life. “Familiarity breeds contempt”—which is why 
something has to be done to reform the institution of the fam- 
ily—and “variety is the spice of life.” The naked body is lust- 
fully arousing, as it should be, just to the extent that it is usually 
veiled. Nudity must always be a revelation and a surprise for the 
simple reason that the universe itself is an energy system which 
vibrates: constantly it goes on and off. Now you see it; now you 
don’t. It creeps up on itself and shouts “Boo!”——and then 
laughs at itself for jumping, being a constant conversion of anx- 
iety into laughter, dread into delight, and hatred into love. 
Human consciousness is the realization that this is the case, is 
the nature of reality, which is why it is said throughout Asia 
that it is only from the human state that one can become a Bud- 
dha—a fully liberated being. (There are said to be five other 
states: happy angels, raging angels, animals, beings in hot and 
cold purgatories, and frustrated spirits with immense hungry 
bellies and mouths only as wide as needles. These are, of course, 
metaphors for our own changing states of mind.) 

Energy going on and off may be represented, mythologi- 
cally, as God playing hide-and-seek with himself, remembering 
himself and then dismembering himself into the myriad roles 
played by all sentient beings. That these roles are clothes is sug- 
gested in the Bhagavad-Gita, the summary of Hindu philoso- 
phy, versified by Sir Edwin Arnold in The Song Celestial: 


64 DOES IT MATTER? 


It is as when one layeth 
His worn-out robes away, 
And, taking new ones, sayeth, 
“These will I wear today.” 


So, according to Vedanta, the central doctrine of Hinduism, all 
bodies are the clothes of the one and only Self in its innumer- 
able disguises, and the whole universe is a masquerade ball pre- 
tending to be a tragedy and then realizing that it’s a ball. 

Let’s give away the secret that before God said, “Let there 
be light,” he said, first, “You must draw the line somewhere,” 


4? 


and, second, “Have a ball!”—which is why almost all heavenly 
bodies (including the earth) are spherical or cyclic. Energy not 
only goes on and off: it also balls. “It’s love that makes the 
world go round.” 

It follows, then, that tight-fitting clothes are the opposite 
of masquerade. They represent the illusion that life is truly 
tragic and serious—that, in short, it is your sacred duty to sur- 
vive. (And sacer, in Latin, means both “holy” and “accursed.”) 
Life, like getting an erection, is a spontaneous process which 
collapses when one tries to force it to happen. The virile mem- 
ber wilts when commanded to be stiff. Uptight, militaristic 
clothing, and all the attitudes that go with it, are therefore com- 
parable to a wimpus, or penile splint, such as employed by aged 
and impotent gentlemen who appreciate the joke that the four 
saddest words in the world are “Is it in yet?” This is natural 
enough in old gentlemen, and I do not wish to make fun of 
them, but it is destructive and deadly in those young and un- 
realized homosexuals who affect machismo (ultramasculinity) 
and who constitute the hard core of our military-industrial- 


police-mafia combine. If they would go and fuck each other 


Clothes—On and Off 65 


(and I use that word in its most positive and appreciative sense), 
the world would be vastly improved. They make it with women 
only to brag about it, but are actually far happier in barracks 
than in boudoirs. This is, perhaps, the real meaning of the slo- 
gan “Make love, not war.” We may be destroying ourselves 
through the repression of homosexuality. 

Clothes, then, like our roles and personalities, should be 
worn easily and lightly in the realization that, because the whole 
universe is a masquerade, we may as well do it with the utmost 
flair and elegance. It is, I think, no secret that many women are 
sensually aroused by men in robes, because the robe—he it ki- 
mono, sarong, kaftan, or soutane—suggests that the man may 
really have something to conceal, whereas tight pants suggest 
that he does not. Furthermore, why not be comfortable—and 
even colorful? Why the self-humiliation and cryptomasochism 
of being ashamed to dress up? Because one must not be con- 
spicuous in a democracy? Because one must go along with the 
modest mediocrity of one’s academic, professional, or business 
colleagues? Because it implies that you have been so scurrilous 
as to make more money than the others? As fashion, among 
women, is the game of conforming faster than anyone else, so, 
among men, it is the game of “I am more modest and mature 
than you.” 

But, obviously, such games involve taking the ego and per- 
sonality as a serious reality. They are very definitely uptight 
and stodgy. But if you know you are a fraud from the begin- 
ning, you can afford to be exuberant and flamboyant, and in 
any case, colorful and comfortable dress is a function of imag- 
ination rather than money. 

When I am at home in California I usually wear a Japanese 
kimono around the house, or its more colorful version, the light 


66 DOES IT MATTER? 


cotton ywkata. But, in the United States, I don’t yet have quite 
the nerve to wear this attire on the streets. In San Francisco or 
Los Angeles I can get away with Mexican Indian or Guate- 
malan outfits, including those exquisite and cuddly woolen 
jackets from Toluca, but in Chicago or New York I feel con- 
strained to wear the conventional business suit on the principle 
that “when in Rome, do as Rome does.” Even so, I insist upon 
sandals rather than shoes, for reasons already stated. 

Some years ago a Japanese friend told me that he would no 
longer even dream of wearing a kimono on the streets of Kyoto 
because “You can’t run for a bus in a kimono.” True, but no 
self-respecting person should ever run for a bus. However, you 
certainly can run for a bus in a Philippine sarong, which is the 
most comfortable male garment ever conceived—an ample di- 
vided skirt made of cotton batik, which could just as well be 
silk or worsted, or even vicufia, plus, say, a vicufia poncho. 

This sarong is a cylinder of cloth which, when laid out flat, 
is about three feet wide and four feet long and, at the lower end, 
is divided into two “legs” with a split of about two feet. You 
step into it, adjust it to your waist-ankle length, and fold the 
excess material (from the waist) inside. You then tighten it 
around your waist, tuck in the overplus to the right, and secure 
it with a safety pin. All in all you need two yards of material 
some fifty inches wide. No belt, no zippers, no buttons, no 
weirdities of tailoring. Above, you wear some attractive shirt 
and a poncho for cold weather or rain. You are both comfort- 
able and dignified. As for the nuisance of pockets, you take a 
lesson from the Buddhist monks of South Asia, and wear a rec- 
tangular bag over your shoulder or around your neck, which is 
secured by a short stole some three inches wide. If your belly 
is of such proportions that you have no waist, you secure the 


Clothes—On and Off 67 


sarong with two strips of cloth going over the shoulders and 
crossing at the back so as not to slide off. 

As for women, the incomparably comfortable and gracious 
garment is the sari. It suits all figures and comes in innumerable 
colors and designs. It makes you look like a queen, and you can 
pack twenty of them into a small suitcase, thus being able to 
change disguises three or four times a day. It is a simple rec- 
tangle of material six yards long and four feet wide, pleated 
around the waist, with a more highly ornamented end which is 
thrown over the left shoulder and secured with a brooch. It is 
worn with a skin-fitting blouse of complementary coloring. 
Furthermore, the manufacture of millions of saris for Western 
ladies would do wonders for the economies of India and Cey- 
lon. And, since we are becoming accustomed to toplessness, 
suitably endowed girls might well be getting up the nerve to 
wear sarongs in the style of the Balinese, who go naked or elab- 
orately necklaced from the waist up. Our homes are sufficiently 
heated that we can wear such garments even in winter, and one 
would merely have to don a fur or sheepskin coat to go out of 
doors. 

Iam commending Oriental and “primitive” styles of cloth- 
ing not only because this would fulfill our obligation to boost 
the industry of the Third World, but also because it is all too 
true that “clothes make the man,” and that our essentially mil- 
itary style of vesture may not be unconnected with our impe- 
rious and discourteous attitude toward other cultures, and our 
competitive and uptight relations among ourselves. Human be- 
ings the whole world over need to relax, become gentlemen, 
take themselves lightly, and “come off it.” Easy, gracious, and 
colorful clothing might well be a beginning. 


THE SPIRIT OF VIOLENCE 
AND THE MATTER OF PEACE 


he idea that man has an instinct for violence must be ques- 

tioned. Instincts, whether for violence, survival, repro- 
duction, or food, would seem to be causes or explanations of the 
same type as humors, demons, or “acts of God”—that is to say, 
mythical agents or starters for processes that we do not fully 
understand, like the mysterious “it” in “it is raining.” It is of 
great interest that many behavioral scientists now prefer 
to speak of drives rather than instincts, implying that when 
people feel angry, hungry, or lusty they feel like puppets, driven 
by forces beyond themselves. But this implies that “myself ” is 
something less than my whole body and all its processes—a 
notion which I find absurd, however much it may correspond 
to our normal, but socially conditioned, ways of thinking and 
feeling. 

Almost all civilized peoples have been brought up to think 
of themselves as ghosts in machines, as Koestler put it: as souls 
or spirits in alien bodies, as skin-encapsulated egos, or as psy- 
chic chauffeurs in mechanical vehicles of flesh and bone. We 
have learned to identify ourselves exclusively with that part of 
the brain which functions as a sort of radar or scanning appa- 
ratus and which is the apparent center of conscious attention 


69 


70 DOES IT MATTER? 


and voluntary action. Although this center feels responsible for 
deliberate thinking, walking, talking, and handling, it knows 
next to nothing of how it manages to accomplish these actions. 
Furthermore, it experiences all the so-called involuntary func- 
tions of the body as events which simply happen to it. Thus it 
feels driven and passive with respect to strong emotions, to the 
circulation of the blood, and to the secretion of adrenalin. 

There are those who feel that this separation of ego from 
body is the distinctively human achievement. They feel that 
it enables us, within certain limits, to subject nature to reason 
and to control what “merely happens” by the disciplines of 
art and science; and that it enables us to stand aside from our- 
selves and be critical of our own behavior, in short, to be self- 
conscious. Above all, it is supposed to be that unique function 
which “raises us above the animals,” a boast which is begin- 
ning to sound increasingly hollow, since no mere animal seems 
to be preparing to destroy the planet as a by-product of war 
against its own species. 

My home is at present a large boat in a quiet harbor where 
we are surrounded with birds—wild duck, grebes, pelicans, 
terns, and gulls galore. The latter are so ravenously hungry that 
they sometimes appear to me to be winged tubes with internal 
organs like a vacuum cleaner. Why do I feel that this world of 
birds is in some way more sane than the world of people? It 
must be hard work to be a bird, having to process enormous 
quantities of food through those short intestines. From the way 
gulls scramble and jostle each other for bits of bread, you would 
imagine that a single gull would be most happy to eat alone. 
But if you throw a crust to a lonely gull, it calls in a way that 
brings every other gull within hearing to the spot. Perhaps it 
doesn’t know how to calculate, or just doesn’t know how to 


The Spirit of Violence and the Matter of Peace 71 


restrain its squawks of delight. Maybe it isn’t really an individ- 
ual, but simply the subordinate organ of a gull-group some- 
thing like a communist. Men have an envy of animals so deep 
that they will use any and every reason (the contradictions be 
damned) for proving their inferiority. 

The root of this envy is the belief that animals, and espe- 
cially free-flying birds, have no sense of responsibility. They 
hunt, nest, and breed without calculation, just as we breathe, 
hear, and grow hair. They “take no thought for the morrow,” 
whereas self-conscious and self-critical man, with his sense of 
being in at least partial control of his actions, lies awake at night 
trying to make up his mind about important decisions or chid- 
ing himself for past mistakes. The individual human being is 
perpetually at odds with himself for not being sufficiently 
thoughtful, decisive, and self-controlled, regarding himself as 
civilized to the degree in which he manages to press this inner 
conflict to victory for the rational ego. Civilization is therefore 
attained through man’s violence against himself—treflected in 
the flogging of his children, dogs, and horses, and in the brutal 
or subtle tortures inflicted upon those less successful and less 
cunning groups of bandits known as criminals. More and more, 
the scientists are saying that man must now take his future evo- 
lution into his own (i.e., the ego’s) hands, and rely no longer 
upon the caprices of “natural selection.” Yet those who speak 
thus do not seem to realize that this is going to require increas- 
ing violence against “deviant” forces within the individual and 
within society. The aspiration to direct evolution is also the 
aspiration to be “as God,” and thus—as God is generally 
conceived in the West—to be dictator of the world. 

But, as the psalm says, “Behold, He that keepeth Israel shall 
neither slumber nor sleep.” This is really the same as the saying 


72 DOES IT MATTER? 


that “There is no peace for the wicked,” for those who, like the 
tyrant-image of God, take the law into their own hands. For 


our traditional model of the universe is basically military. 


God, the all-terrible King, 
Who ordainest 

Great winds Thy clarion 
And lightnings Thy sword. 


This notion of the imperious violence of intelligent spirit 
against intractable and mindless matter is man’s projection upon 
the universe of his own internal split, which is what keeps him 
awake at night worrying about his decisions—along with “He 
who keepeth Israel.” 

The basic problem is, of course, that law and reason are lin- 
ear systems expressed in verbal, mathematical, or other forms 
of notation, of symbols strung out in a line to represent “bits” 
of information selected by the narrow spotlight of conscious 
attention. The physical world, by contrast, is at any moment a 
manifestation of innumerable and simultaneous energy patterns 
which, when we try to translate them into our clumsy linear 
symbols, seem impossibly complex. Actually, the world is not 
complex. It is the task of trying to figure it out with words or 
numbers which is complex; it is like trying to keep count of all 
the leaves in a constantly changing forest, or measuring the At- 
lantic with a hypodermic needle. 

Nature can be “figured out” up to a certain indeterminate 
point, if we proceed patiently and humbly. But if at any time 
we decide that we actually know “the Truth,” what the law of 
nature is, and therefore what is the right course of action, we 
shall find ourselves in the paradoxical situation of having to 


compel nature to submit to what we conceive to be its own laws! 


The Spirit of Violence and the Matter of Peace 73 


As we say, “Dammit, why can’t you be natural!” In other 
words, it is only by violence that the actual course of human 
and other physical events can be made to fit the oversimplified 
patterns in terms of which we attempt to describe it. We are 
like Procrustes, who stretched or amputated visitors to fit his 
guest-room bed. 

We are working, then, on the (often tacit) assumption that 
the rational ego is a stranger and invader in the physical world, 
representing a conceptual and ideational order in necessary 
conflict with the chaotic complexity of nature. But when this 
supernaturalist assumption is brought out into the open it is 
hardly credible, since we also believe, at least in theory, that 
consciousness and intelligence arise through spontaneous evo- 
lution and are manifested through neural organizations which, 
as yet, we hardly understand. 

This may be a “leap of faith,” but I feel that if I am to trust 
myself I must bet on my entire nervous system (and the envi- 
ronment which, inseparably, goes with it) as distinct from a logic 
of words and numbers considered as something superior to its 
own neural matrix. For my brain is immeasurably more omni- 
scient than my mind: it coordinates simultaneously more vari- 
ables, more rhythms and patterns of bodily behavior, than I (as 
ego) could possibly comprehend in a hundred years of study. I 
can see no sense in restricting the definition of “myself” to the 
process of conscious attention, volition, and symbolization. I 
must admit my whole body to the definition of “myself,” and 
so, in a certain way, assume responsibility for all that it is and 
does. After all, if I do not trust the matrix of my conscious in- 
telligence, I have no assurance that this very mistrust is either 
well founded or well informed. 


When Westerners contemplate their own bodies they are 


74 DOES IT MATTER? 


apt to feel, with the psalmist, that they are “fearfully and won- 
derfully made”—that some agency and intelligence quite apart 
from themselves manufactured this intricate machine, which, 
in the same breath, they will “put down” as natural chaos or 
merely animal functioning. Thus to identify oneself with one’s 
whole body is seen, ambivalently, both as blasphemy and as 
surrender to the blind forces of the unconscious. Whatever our 
metaphysics, we insist that inner conflict between ego and body, 
reason and instinct, is the essential condition of civilized life. 
But this attitude is penny-wise pound-foolish, for when we look 
at the trend of civilization as a whole we see a monstrous plague 
of human locusts devouring and fouling the planet, more preda- 
tory than sharks and more suicidal than lemmings. Civilization 
“works,” temporarily, for the privileged individual, but in the 
not-so-long run it could easily be a speeding up of consumption 
which dissolves all life on the planet. 

There is no question or possibility of abandoning technol- 
ogy and retreating into simple and sentimental anarchy. What 
we really need is a technology managed by people who no 
longer experience “self” as something foreign to the body and 
its physical environment. For it is precisely this interior con- 
flict between ego and organism which underlies organized 
warfare and violent revolution, most especially when such vi- 
olence is rationalized as being in the cause of justice and human 
betterment. No wars have been more ruthless and ravaging 
than “just” wars, fought in “defense” of religion, honor, or 
principle. If war must be, give me rather a war to capture an 
enemy’s wealth and territory, based on honest greed, in which 
I shall be careful not to destroy what I want to possess. But 
as civilized wars are fought for principle, so the technologi- 
cal “conquest of nature” is in fact being waged for the purely 


The Spirit of Violence and the Matter of Peace 75 


abstract satisfaction of making money, as distinct from the ma- 
terial and sensuous enjoyment of good food, beautiful women, 
and elegant surroundings. Our greatest money makers are 
largely puritans and nose-to-the-grindstone people who have 
neither taste nor time for material pleasures. We need a tech- 
nology aimed, not at abstract and inedible dollars, but at caviar 
and excellent wines the whole world round. 

Only a supernaturalist would deliberately press the button 
to set off nuclear warfare, in the belief that his spiritual values 
are more important than material existence. And this involves 
the open or tacit supposition that the spiritual dimension is 
immortal, that in heaven or on some higher level of vibration 
unaffected by bodily death he will continue his existence, con- 
gratulating himself on his fidelity to principle and wagging the 
finger of reproof at the surprisedly immortal souls of dialecti- 
cal materialists, eating crow in the sky instead of pie. This sim- 
ply goes to show that belief in the superiority and final authority 
of the rational, intellectual, conceptual, and symbolic domain as 
the ultimate reality may be inconsistent with the survival of 
mankind. 

Unexpectedly, naturalism is more consistent with the mys- 
tical vision of the world than supernaturalism, as should be 
clear from the suspicion in which mystics have always been held 
by the official establishments of Judaism, Christianity, and 
Islam. Supernaturalism splits the cosmos into the unequal du- 
ality of creator and creature, spirit and matter, ruler and subject, 
ego and organism, and many an atheist is in fact a supernatu- 
ralist insofar as he is trying to regulate the physical order of 
nature by the logical order of language or mathematics. But 
a naturalist cannot consistently subscribe to the belief that 
he himself is in any way separate from his whole physical 


76 DOES IT MATTER? 


organism. He cannot, therefore, consider himself driven or vic- 
timized by his own organic processes, for his emotions and ap- 
petites, and, indeed, the entire functioning of his body are his 
own doing, however spontaneous and undeliberate. 

Once this is admitted, a further and essentially mystical in- 
sight comes into view. If Iam my organism, I am also my en- 
vironment. From the ecological and biophysical standpoints 
every organism goes with its environment transactionally: the 
one implies the other as buying implies selling and front im- 
plies back and the positive pole implies the negative. Thus 
every living organism implies, not only the conditions of the 
immediate solar system, but also the entire constellation 
of galaxies. If a human body could be transported to another 
universe, careful study by the local scientists would eventually 
reveal that it came from an environment which included sun, 
moon, planets, Milky Way, and the nebula in Andromeda. For 
as the fruit implies the tree, the human organism implies a 
cosmic energy system which “peoples” in the same way as a 
plant flowers. 

Basically, then, “self” is not only the body but the whole 
energy system which embodies itself in all bodies. The con- 
ceptual ego does not control this system any more than it 
controls the heart, but whereas the ego is your idea of yourself, 
the total energy system of the universe is what you are. People 
who realize this could be trusted with technological power, for 
they would respect the external world, with all its subtle eco- 
logical balances, as they respect their own bodies. They would 
work with it and not against it, as a sailor works with the wind 
even when moving in a contrary direction. 

The basic point to be understood, then, is that it is simply 
impossible to improve either oneself or the world by force. 


The Spirit of Violence and the Matter of Peace 77 


Because you yourself are both the organism and its environ- 
ment, this is as futile as trying to lift yourself off the floor by 
your own bootstraps. Untold psychic and physical energy is 
wasted in this ludicrous enterprise, which, when seen to be ab- 
surd, is abandoned, releasing that energy for tasks which can 
indeed be accomplished. Trying to force a lock bends the key, 
for which reason a truly intelligent man never forces an issue. 
He resorts instead to judo, the “gentle way” of trimming one’s 
sails to the wind, of rolling with the punch, and of splitting 
wood along the grain. Such intelligence is therefore the alter- 
native to violence. 


PSYCHEDELICS AND 
RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE 


he experiences resulting from the use of psychedelic drugs 

are often described in religious terms. They are therefore 
of interest to those like myself who, in the tradition of William 
James, are concerned with the psychology of religion. For more 
than thirty years I have been studying the causes, consequences, 
and conditions of those peculiar states of consciousness in 
which the individual discovers himself to be one continuous 
process with God, with the Universe, with the Ground of 
Being, or whatever name he may use by cultural conditioning 
or personal preference for the ultimate and eternal reality. We 
have no satisfactory and definitive name for experiences of this 


29 66 


kind. The terms “religious experience,” “mystical experience,” 
and “cosmic consciousness” are all too vague and comprehen- 
sive to denote that specific mode of consciousness which, to 
those who have known it, is as real and overwhelming as falling 
in love. This article describes such states of consciousness as 
and when induced by psychedelic drugs, although they are vir- 
tually indistinguishable from genuine mystical experience. It 
then discusses objections to the use of psychedelic drugs which 
arise mainly from the opposition between mystical values and 


the traditional religious and secular values of Western society. 


79 


80 DOES IT MATTER? 


I. THE PSYCHEDELIC EXPERIENCE 

The idea of mystical experiences resulting from drug use is 
not readily accepted in Western societies. Western culture has, 
historically, a particular fascination with the value and virtue 
of man as an individual, self-determining, responsible ego, 
controlling himself and his world by the power of conscious ef- 
fort and will. Nothing, then, could be more repugnant to this 
cultural tradition than the notion of spiritual or psychological 
growth through the use of drugs. A “drugged” person is by def- 
inition dimmed in consciousness, fogged in judgment, and de- 
prived of will. But not all psychotropic (consciousness-changing) 
chemicals are narcotic and soporific, as are alcohol, opiates, and 
barbiturates. The effects of what are now called psychedelic 
(mind-manifesting) chemicals differ from those of alcohol as 
laughter differs from rage or delight from depression. There is 
really no analogy between being “high” on LSD and “drunk” 
on bourbon. True, no one in either state should drive a car, but 
neither should one drive while reading a book, playing a violin, 
or making love. Certain creative activities and states of mind 
demand a concentration and devotion which are simply incom- 
patible with piloting a death-dealing engine along a highway. 

I myself have experimented with five of the principal psy- 
chedelics: LSD-25, mescaline, psilocybin, dimethyltryptamine 
(DMT), and cannabis. I have done so, as William James tried 
nitrous oxide, to see if they could help me in identifying what 
might be called the “essential” or “active” ingredients of the 
mystical experience. For almost all the classical literature on 
mysticism is vague, not only in describing the experience, but 
also in showing rational connections between the experience 
itself and the various traditional methods recommended to in- 
duce it—fasting, concentration, breathing exercises, prayers, 


Psychedelics and Religious Experience 81 


incantations, and dances. A traditional master of Zen or Yoga, 
when asked why such-and-such practices lead or predispose 
one to the mystical experience, always responds, “This is the 
way my teacher gave it to me. This is the way I found out. If 
you're seriously interested, try it for yourself.” This answer 
hardly satisfies an impertinent, scientific-minded, and intellec- 
tually curious Westerner. It reminds him of archaic medical 
prescriptions compounding five salamanders, powdered gal- 
lowsrope, three boiled bats, a scruple of phosphorus, three 
pinches of henbane, and a dollop of dragon dung dropped when 
the moon was in Pisces. Maybe it worked, but what was the es- 
sential ingredient? 

It struck me, therefore, that if any of the psychedelic chem- 
icals would in fact predispose my consciousness to the mysti- 
cal experience, I could use them as instruments for studying 
and describing that experience as one uses a microscope for bac- 
teriology, even though the microscope is an “artificial” and 
“unnatural” contrivance which might be said to “distort” the 
vision of the naked eye. However, when I was first invited to 
test the mystical qualities of LSD-25 by Dr. Keith Ditman of 
the Neuropsychiatric Clinic at UCLA Medical School, I was 
unwilling to believe that any mere chemical could induce a 
genuine mystical experience. I though it might at most bring 
about a state of spiritual insight analogous to swimming with 
water wings. Indeed, my first experiment with LSD-25 was not 
mystical. It was an intensely interesting aesthetic and intellec- 
tual experience which challenged my powers of analysis and 
careful description to the utmost. 

Some months later, in 1959, I tried LSD-25 again with Drs. 
Sterling Bunnell and Michael Agron, who were then associated 
with the Langley-Porter Clinic in San Francisco. In the course 


82 DOES IT MATTER? 


of two experiments I was amazed and somewhat embarrassed 
to find myself going through states of consciousness which cor- 
responded precisely with every description of major mystical 
experiences I had ever read.’ Furthermore, they exceeded both 
in depth and in a peculiar quality of unexpectedness the three 
“natural and spontaneous” experiences of this kind which I had 
had in previous years. 

Through subsequent experimentation with LSD-25 and the 
other chemicals named above (with the exception of DMT, 
which I find amusing but relatively uninteresting) I found I 
could move with ease into the state of “cosmic consciousness,” 
and in due course became less and less dependent on the chem- 
icals themselves for “tuning in” to this particular wave-length 
of experience. Of the five psychedelics tried, I found that LSD- 
25 and cannabis suited my purposes best. Of these two, the lat- 
ter, which I had to use abroad in countries where it is not 
outlawed, proved to be the better. It does not induce bizarre al- 
terations of sensory perception, and medical studies indicate 
that it may not, save in great excess, have the dangerous side 
effects of LSD, such as psychotic episodes. 

For the purposes of this study, in describing my experiences 
with psychedelic drugs, I avoid the occasional and incidental 
bizarre alterations of sense perception which psychedelic chem- 
icals may induce. I am concerned, rather, with the fundamen- 
tal alterations of the normal, socially induced consciousness of 
one’s own existence and relation to the external world. I am 
trying to delineate the basic principles of psychedelic aware- 
ness. But I must add that I can speak only for myself. The qual- 
ity of these experiences depends considerably upon one’s prior 


1 An excellent anthology of such experiences is Raynor C. Johnson, Watcher on 
the Hills (New York, Harper & Bros., 1959). 


Psychedelics and Religious Experience 83 


orientation and attitude to life, although the now voluminous 
descriptive literature of these experiences accords quite re- 
markably with my own. 

Almost invariably, my experiments with psychedelics have 
had four dominant characteristics. I shall try to explain them— 
in the expectation that the reader will say, at least of the second 
and third, “Why, that’s obvious! No one needs a drug to see 
that.” Quite so, but every insight has degrees of intensity. There 
can be obvious, and obvious,—and the latter comes on with 
shattering clarity, manifesting its implications in every sphere 
and dimension of our existence. 

The first characteristic is a slowing down of time, a concen- 
tration in the present. One’s normally compulsive concern for 
the future decreases, and one becomes aware of the enormous 
importance and interest of what is happening at the moment. 
Other people, going about their business on the streets, seem to 
be slightly crazy, failing to realize that the whole point of life is 
to be fully aware of it as it happens. One therefore relaxes, al- 
most luxuriously, in studying the colors in a glass of water, or 
in listening to the now highly articulate vibration of every note 
played on an oboe or sung by voice. 

From the pragmatic standpoint of our culture, such an at- 
titude is very bad for business. It might lead to improvidence, 
lack of foresight, diminished sales of insurance policies, and 
abandoned savings accounts. Yet this is just the corrective that 
our culture needs. No one is more fatuously impractical than 
the “successful” executive who spends his whole life absorbed 
in frantic paperwork with the objective of retiring in comfort at 
sixty-five, when it will be all too late. Only those who have cul- 
tivated the art of living completely in the present have any use 
for making plans for the future, for when the plans mature they 
will be able to enjoy the results. “Tomorrow never comes.” I 


84 DOES IT MATTER? 


have never yet heard a preacher urging his congregation to 
practice that section of the Sermon on the Mount which begins, 
“Be not anxious for the morrow. ...” The truth is that people 
who live for the future are, as we say of the insane, “not quite 
all there”——or here: by overeagerness they are perpetually 
missing the point. Foresight is bought at the price of anxiety, 
and, when overused, it destroys all its own advantages. 

The second characteristic I will call awareness of polarity. 
This is the vivid realization that states, things, and events which 
we ordinarily call opposite are interdependent, like back and 
front or the poles of a magnet. By polar awareness one sees that 
things which are explicitly different are implicitly one: self and 
other, subject and object, left and right, male and female—and 
then, a little more surprisingly, solid and space, figure and back- 
ground, pulse and interval, saints and sinners, and police and 
criminals, ingroups and outgroups. Each is definable only in 
terms of the other, and they go together transactionally, like buy- 
ing and selling, for there is no sale without a purchase, and no 
purchase without a sale. As this awareness becomes increasingly 
intense, you feel that you yourself are polarized with the exter- 
nal universe in such a way that you imply each other. Your push 
is its pull, and its push is your pull—as when you move the steer- 
ing wheel of a car. Are you pushing it or pulling it? 

At first, this is a very odd sensation, not unlike hearing your 
own voice played back to you on an electronic system immedi- 
ately after you have spoken. You become confused, and wait 
for it to go on! Similarly, you feel that you are something being 
done by the universe, yet that the universe is equally something 
being done by you—which is true, at least in the neurological 
sense that the peculiar structure of our brains translates the sun 
into light and air vibrations into sound. Our normal sensation 


Psychedelics and Religious Experience 85 


of relationship to the outside world is that sometimes we push 
it, and sometimes it pushes us. But if the two are actually one, 
where does action begin and responsibility rest? If the universe 
is doing me, how can I be sure that, two seconds hence, I will 
still remember the English language? If I am doing it, how can 
I be sure that, two seconds hence, my brain will know how to 
turn the sun into light? From such unfamiliar sensations as 
these the psychedelic experience can generate confusion, para- 
noia, and terror—even though the individual is feeling his re- 
lationship to the world exactly as it would be described by a 
biologist, ecologist, or physicist, for he is feeling himself as the 
unified field of organism and environment. 

The third characteristic, arising from the second, is aware- 
ness of relativity. | see that I am a link in an infinite hierarchy of 
processes and beings, ranging from molecules through bacte- 
ria and insects to human beings, and, maybe, to angels and 
gods—a hierarchy in which every level is in effect the same 
situation. For example, the poor man worries about money 
while the rich man worries about his health: the worry is the 
same, but the difference is in its substance or dimension. I re- 
alize that fruit flies must think of themselves as people, because, 
like ourselves, they find themselves in the middle of their own 
world—with immeasurably greater things above and smaller 
things below. To us, they all look alike and seem to have no 
personality—as do the Chinese when we have not lived among 
them. Yet fruit flies must see just as many subtle distinctions 
among themselves as we among ourselves. 

From this it is but a short step to the realization that all 
forms of life and being are simply variations on a single theme: 
we are all in fact one being doing the same thing in as many 
different ways as possible. As the French proverb goes, plus ¢a 


86 DOES IT MATTER? 


change, plus c’est la méme chose—*the more it varies, the more 
it is one.” I see, further, that feeling threatened by the in- 
evitability of death is really the same experience as feeling alive, 
and that as all beings are feeling this everywhere, they are all 
just as much “I” as myself. Yet the “I” feeling, to be felt at 
all, must always be a sensation relative to the “other,” to some- 
thing beyond its control and experience. To be at all, it must 
begin and end. But the intellectual jump which mystical and 
psychedelic experience make here is in enabling you to see that 
all these myriad I-centers are yourself—not, indeed, your per- 
sonal and superficial conscious ego, but what Hindus call the 
paramatman, the Self of all selves.* As the retina enables us to 
see countless pulses of energy as a single light, so the mystical 
experience shows us innumerable individuals as a single Self. 
The fourth characteristic is awareness of eternal energy, often 
in the form of intense white light, which seems to be both the 
current in your nerves and that mysterious e which equals mc’. 
This may sound like megalomania or delusion of grandeur— 
but one sees quite clearly that all existence is a single energy, 
and that this energy is one’s own being. Of course there is death 
as well as life, because energy is a pulsation, and just as waves 


must have both crests and troughs, the experience of existing 


2 Thus Hinduism regards the universe, not as an artifact, but as an immense drama 
in which the One Actor (the paramatman or brahman) plays all the parts, which 
are his (or “its”) masks, or personae. The sensation of being only this one par- 
ticular self, John Doe, is due to the Actor’s total absorption in playing this and 
every other part. For fuller exposition, see Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, The Hindu 
View of Life (New York, The Macmillan Company, 1927); Heinrich Zimmer, 
Philosophies of India (New York, Pantheon Books, 1951), pp. 355-463. A popu- 
lar version is in Alan Watts, The Book: On the Taboo Against Knowing Who You 
Are (New York, Pantheon Books, 1966). 


Psychedelics and Religious Experience 87 


must go on and off. Basically, therefore, there is simply noth- 
ing to worry about, because you yourself are the eternal en- 
ergy of the universe playing hide-and-seek (off-and-on) with 
itself. At root, you are the Godhead, for God is all that there is. 
Quoting Isaiah just a little out of context: “I am the Lord, and 
there is none else. I form the light and create the darkness: I 
make peace, and create evil. I, the Lord, do all these things.”? 
This is the sense of the fundamental tenet of Hinduism, Tar 
tvam asi—“THAT (i.e., ‘that subtle Being of which this whole 
universe is composed’) art thou.”* A classical case of this ex- 


perience, from the West, is described by Tennyson: 


A kind of waking trance I have frequently had, quite 
up from boyhood, when I have been all alone. This has 
generally come upon me thro’ repeating my own name 
two or three times to myself silently, till all at once, as 
it were out of the intensity of the consciousness of in- 
dividuality, the individuality itself seemed to dissolve 
and fade away into boundless being, and this is not a 
confused state, but the clearest of the clearest, the surest 
of the surest, the weirdest of the weirdest, utterly be- 
yond words, where death was an almost laughable im- 
possibility, the loss of personality (if so it were) 
seeming no extinction but the only true life.’ 


Obviously, these characteristics of the psychedelic ex- 
perience, as I have known it, are aspects of a single state of 


consciousness—for I have been describing the same thing from 


3 Isaiah, 45: 6, 7. 
4 Chandogya Upanishad 6.15.3. 
5 Alfred Lord Tennyson, A Memoir by His Son (1898), Vol. 1, p. 320. 


88 DOES IT MATTER? 


different angles. The descriptions attempt to convey the reality 
of the experience, but in doing so they also suggest some of the 
inconsistencies between such experience and the current val- 
ues of society. 


II. OPPOSITION TO PSYCHEDELIC DRUGS 
Resistance to allowing use of psychedelic drugs originates in 
both religious and secular values. The difficulty in describing 
psychedelic experiences in traditional religious terms suggests 
one ground of opposition. The Westerner must borrow such 
words as samadhi or moksha from the Hindus, or satori or ken- 
sho from the Japanese, to describe the experience of oneness 
with the universe. We have no appropriate word because our 
own Jewish and Christian theologies will not accept the idea 
that man’s inmost self can be identical with the Godhead, even 
though Christians may insist that this was true in the unique 
instance of Jesus Christ. Jews and Christians think of God in 
political and monarchical terms, as the supreme governor of 
the universe, the ultimate boss. Obviously, it is both socially 
unacceptable and logically preposterous for a particular indi- 
vidual to claim that he, in person, is the omnipotent and om- 
niscient ruler of the world—to be accorded suitable recognition 
and honor. 

Such an imperial and kingly concept of the ultimate reality, 
however, is neither necessary nor universal. The Hindus and 
the Chinese have no difficulty in conceiving of an identity of the 
self and the Godhead. For most Asians, other than Moslems, 
the Godhead moves and manifests the world in much the same 
way that a centipede manipulates a hundred legs: sponta- 
neously, without deliberation or calculation. In other words, 
they conceive the universe by analogy with an organism as 


Psychedelics and Religious Experience 89 


distinct from a mechanism. They do not see it as an artifact or 
construct under the conscious direction of some supreme tech- 
nician, engineer, or architect. 

If, however, in the context of Christian or Jewish tradition an 
individual declares himself to be one with God, he must be 
dubbed blasphemous (subversive) or insane. Such a mystical ex- 
perience is a clear threat to traditional religious concepts. The 
Judaeo-Christian tradition has a monarchical image of God, and 
monarchs, who rule by force, fear nothing more than insubordi- 
nation. The Church has therefore always been highly suspicious 
of mystics because they seem to be insubordinate and to claim 
equality or, worse, identity with God. For this reason John 
Scotus Erigena and Meister Eckhart were condemned as heretics. 
This was also why the Quakers faced opposition for their 
doctrine of the Inward Light, and for their refusal to remove hats 
in church and in court. A few occasional mystics may be all right 
so long as they watch their language, like Saint Teresa of Avila 
and Saint John of the Cross, who maintained, shall we say, a 
metaphysical distance of respect between themselves and their 
heavenly King. Nothing, however, could be more alarming to 
the ecclesiastical hierarchy than a popular outbreak of mysticism, 
for this might well amount to setting up a democracy in the king- 
dom of heaven—and such alarm would be shared equally by 
Catholics, Jews, and fundamentalist Protestants. 

The monarchical image of God with its implicit distaste for 
religious insubordination has a more pervasive impact than 
many Christians might admit. The thrones of kings have walls 
immediately behind them, and all who present themselves at 
court must prostrate themselves or kneel because this is an awk- 
ward position from which to make a sudden attack. It has per- 
haps never occurred to Christians that when they design a 


90 DOES IT MATTER? 


church on the model of a royal court (basilica) and prescribe 
church ritual, they are implying that God, like a human 
monarch, is afraid. This is also implied by flattery in prayers: 


O Lord our heavenly Father, high and mighty, King of 
kings, Lord of lords, the only Ruler of princes, who 
dost from thy throne behold all the dwellers upon 
earth: most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to 


behold... 


The Western man who claims consciousness of oneness 
with God or the universe thus clashes with his society’s con- 
cept of religion. In most Asian cultures, however, such a man 
will be congratulated as having penetrated the true secret of 
life. He has arrived, by chance or by some such discipline as 
Yoga or Zen meditation, at a state of consciousness in which he 
experiences directly and vividly what our own scientists know 
to be true in theory. For the ecologist, the biologist, and the 
physicist know (but seldom feel) that every organism consti- 
tutes a single field of behavior, or process, with its environment. 
There is no way of separating what any given organism is 
doing from what its environment is doing, for which reason 
ecologists speak not of organisms in environments but of 
organism-environments. Thus the words “I” or “self” should 
properly mean what the whole universe is doing at this partic- 
ular “here-and-now” called John Doe. 

The kingly concept of God makes identity of self and God, 
or self and universe, inconceivable in Western religious terms. 
The difference between Eastern and Western concepts of man 
and his universe, however, extends beyond strictly religious 
concepts. The Western scientist may rationally perceive the 


idea of organism-environment, but he does not ordinarily fee/ 


Psychedelics and Religious Experience 91 


this to be true. By cultural and social conditioning, he has been 
hypnotized into experiencing himself as an ego—as an isolated 
center of consciousness and will inside a bag of skin, con- 
fronting an external and alien world. We say, “I came into this 
world.” But we did nothing of the kind. We came out of it in just 
the same way that fruit comes out of trees. Our galaxy, our cos- 
mos “peoples” in the same way that an apple tree “apples.” 
Such a vision of the universe clashes with the idea of a 
monarchical God, with the concept of the separate ego, and 
even with the secular, atheist-agnostic mentality, which derives 
its common sense from the mythology of nineteenth-century 
scientism. According to this view, the universe is a mindless 
mechanism and man a sort of accidental microorganism infest- 
ing a minute globular rock which revolves about an unimpor- 
tant star on the outer fringe of one of the minor galaxies. This 
“putdown” theory of man is extremely common among such 
quasi-scientists as sociologists, psychologists, and psychiatrists, 
most of whom are still thinking of the world in terms of New- 
tonian mechanics, and have never really caught up with the 
ideas of Einstein and Bohr, Oppenheimer and Schrédinger. 
Thus to the ordinary institutional-type psychiatrist, any patient 
who gives the least hint of mystical or religious experience is 
automatically diagnosed as deranged. From the standpoint of 
the mechanistic religion he is a heretic and is given electro- 
shock therapy as an up-to-date form of thumbscrew and rack. 
And, incidentally, it is just this kind of quasi-scientist who, 
as consultant to government and law-enforcement agencies, 
dictates official policies on the use of psychedelic chemicals. 
Inability to accept the mystic experience is more than 
an intellectual handicap. Lack of awareness of the basic unity 
of organism and environment is a serious and dangerous 


92 DOES IT MATTER? 


hallucination. For ina civilization equipped with immense tech- 
nological power, the sense of alienation between man and 
nature leads to the use of technology in a hostile spirit—to the 
“conquest” of nature instead of intelligent cooperation with 
nature. The result is that we are eroding and destroying our 
environment, spreading Los Angelization instead of civiliza- 
tion. This is the major threat overhanging Western technolog- 
ical culture, and no amount of reasoning or doom-preaching 
seems to help. We simply do not respond to the prophetic and 
moralizing techniques of conversion upon which Jews and 
Christians have always relied. But people have an obscure sense 
of what is good for them—call it “unconscious self-healing,” 
“survival instinct,” “positive growth potential,” or what you 
will. Among the educated young there is therefore a startling 
and unprecedented interest in the transformation of human 
consciousness. All over the Western world publishers are sell- 
ing millions of books dealing with Yoga, Vedanta, Zen Bud- 
dhism, and the chemical mysticism of psychedelic drugs, and I 
have come to believe that the whole “hip” subculture, however 
misguided in some of its manifestations, is the earnest and re- 
sponsible effort of young people to correct the self-destroying 
course of industrial civilization. 

The content of the mystical experience is thus inconsistent 
with both the religious and secular concepts of traditional West- 
ern thought. Moreover, mystical experiences often result in 
attitudes which threaten the authority not only of established 
churches but also of secular society. Unafraid of death and 
deficient in worldly ambition, those who have undergone mys- 
tical experiences are impervious to threats and promises. More- 
over, their sense of the relativity of good and evil arouses 
the suspicion that they lack both conscience and respect for 


Psychedelics and Religious Experience 93 


law. Use of psychedelics in the United States by a literate 
bourgeoisie means that an important segment of the popula- 
tion is indifferent to society’s traditional rewards and sanctions. 

In theory, the existence within our secular society of a 
group which does not accept conventional values is consistent 
with our political vision. But one of the great problems of the 
United States, legally and politically, is that we have never quite 
had the courage of our convictions. The republic is founded on 
the marvelously sane principle that a human community can 
exist and prosper only on a basis of mutual trust. Metaphysi- 
cally, the American Revolution was a rejection of the dogma 
of Original Sin, which is the notion that because you cannot 
trust yourself or other people, there must be some Superior Au- 
thority to keep us all in order. The dogma was rejected because 
if it is true that we cannot trust ourselves and others, it follows 
that we cannot trust the Superior Authority which we ourselves 
conceive and obey, and that the very idea of our own untrust- 
worthiness is unreliable! 

Citizens of the United States believe, or are supposed to 
believe, that a republic is the best form of government. Yet, vast 
confusion arises from trying to be republican in politics and 
monarchist in religion. How can a republic be the best form of 
government if the universe, heaven, and hell are a monarchy?® 
Thus, despite the theory of government by consent, based upon 
mutual trust, the peoples of the United States retain, from the 


6 Thus, until quite recently, belief in a Supreme Being was a legal test of valid con- 
scientious objection to military service. The implication was that the individual 
objector found himself bound to obey a higher echelon of command than the 
President and Congress. The analogy is military and monarchical, and there- 
fore objectors who, as Buddhists or naturalists, held an organic theory of the 
universe often had difficulty in obtaining recognition. 


94 DOES IT MATTER? 


authoritarian backgrounds of their religions or national origins, 
an utterly naive faith in law as some sort of supernatural and 
paternalistic power. “There ought to be a law against it!” Our 
law-enforcement officers are therefore confused, hindered, and 
bewildered—not to mention corrupted—hby being asked to en- 
force sumptuary laws, often of ecclesiastical origin, which vast 
numbers of people have no intention of obeying and which, in 
any case, are immensely difficult or simply impossible to en- 
force—for example, the barring of anything so undetectable as 
LSD-25 from international and interstate commerce. 

There are two specific objections to use of psychedelic 
drugs. First, use of these drugs may be dangerous. However, 
every worthwhile exploration is dangerous—climbing moun- 
tains, testing aircraft, rocketing into outer space, skin diving, 
or collecting botanical specimens in jungles. But if you value 
knowledge and the actual delight of exploration more than 
mere duration of uneventful life, you are willing to take the 
risks. It is not really healthy for monks to practice fasting, and 
it was hardly hygienic for Jesus to get himself crucified, but 
these are risks taken in the course of spiritual adventures. Today 
the adventurous young are taking risks in exploring the psy- 
che, testing their mettle at the task just as, in times past, they 
have tested it—more violently—in hunting, dueling, hot-rod 
racing, and playing football. What they need is not prohibi- 
tions and policemen but the most intelligent encouragement 
and advice that can be found. 

Second, drug use may be criticized as an escape from reality. 
However, this criticism assumes unjustly that the mystical expe- 


riences themselves are escapist or unreal. LSD, in particular, is 


Psychedelics and Religious Experience 95 


by no means a soft and cushy escape from reality. It can very 
easily be an experience in which you have to test your soul 
against all the devils in hell. For me, it has been at times an ex- 
perience in which I was at once completely lost in the corridors 
of the mind and yet relating that very lostness to the exact order 
of logic and language, simultaneously very mad and very sane. 
But beyond these occasional lost and insane episodes, there are 
the experiences of the world as a system of total harmony and 
glory, and the discipline of relating these to the order of logic 
and language must somehow explain how what William Blake 
called that “energy which is eternal delight” can coexist with 
the misery and suffering of everyday life.” 

The undoubted mystical and religious intent of most users 
of the psychedelics, even if some of these substances should be 
proved injurious to physical health, requires that their free and 
responsible use be exempt from legal restraint in any republic 
which maintains a constitutional separation of Church and 
State. I mean “responsible” in the sense that such substances be 
taken by or administered to consenting adults only. The user 
of cannabis, in particular, is apt to have peculiar difficulties in 
establishing his “undoubtedly mystical and religious intent” in 
court. Having committed so loathsome and serious a felony, 
his chances of clemency are better if he assumes a repentant 
demeanor, which is quite inconsistent with the sincere belief 
that his use of cannabis was religious. On the other hand, if he 


insists unrepentantly that he looks upon such use as a religious 


7 This is discussed at length in A. Watts, The Joyous Cosmology: Adventures in the 
Chemistry of Consciousness (New York: Pantheon Books, 1962). 


96 DOES IT MATTER? 


sacrament, many judges will declare that they “dislike his atti- 
tude,” finding it truculent and lacking in appreciation of the 
gravity of the crime, and the sentence will be that much harsher. 
The accused is therefore put in a “double-bind” situation in 
which he is “damned if he does, and damned if he doesn’t.” 
furthermore, religious integrity—as in conscientious objec- 
tion—is generally tested and established by membership in 
some church or religious organization with a substantial fol- 
lowing. But the felonious status of cannabis is such that grave 
suspicion would be cast upon all individuals forming such an 
organization, and the test cannot therefore be fulfilled. It is 
generally forgotten that our guarantees of religious freedom 
were designed to protect precisely those who were not mem- 
bers of established denominations, but rather such screwball 
and (then) subversive individuals as Quakers, Shakers, Lev- 
ellers, and Ana-baptists. There is little question that those who 
use cannabis, or other psychedelics, with religious intent are 
now members of a persecuted religion which appears to the rest 
of society as a grave menace to “mental health,” as distinct from 
the old-fashioned “immortal soul.” But it’s the same old story. 

To the extent that mystical experience conforms with the 
tradition of genuine religious involvement, and to the extent 
that psychedelics induce that experience, users are entitled to 
some constitutional protection. Also, to the extent that research 
in the psychology of religion can utilize such drugs, students 
of the human mind must be free to use them. Under present 
laws, I, as an experienced student of the psychology of religion, 
can no longer pursue research in the field. This is a barbarous 
restriction of spiritual and intellectual freedom, suggesting 
that the legal system of the United States, is, after all, in tacit 


Psychedelics and Religious Experience 97 


alliance with the monarchical theory of the universe and will, 
therefore, prohibit and persecute religious ideas and practices 
based on an organic and unitary vision of the universe.* 


8 Amerindians belonging to the Native American Church, who employ the psy- 
chedelic peyote cactus in their rituals, are firmly opposed to any government 
control of this plant, even if they should be guaranteed the right to its use. They 
feel that peyote is a natural gift of God to mankind, and especially to natives of 
the land where it grows, and that no government has a right to interfere with its 
use. The same argument might be made on behalf of cannabis, or the mushroom 
Psilocybe mexicana Heim. All these things are natural plants, not processed or 
synthesized drugs, and by what authority can individuals be prevented from eat- 
ing them? There is no law against eating or growing the mushroom Amanita 
pantherina, even though it is fatally poisonous and only experts can distinguish 
it from a common edible mushroom. This case can be made even from the stand- 
point of believers in the monarchical universe of Judaism and Christianity, for 
it is a basic principle of both religions, derived from Genesis, that all natural sub- 
stances created by God are inherently good, and that evil can arise only in their 
misuse. Thus laws against mere possession, or even cultivation, of these plants 
are in basic conflict with Biblical principles. Criminal conviction of those who 
employ these plants should be based on proven misuse. “And God said, ‘Behold, 
I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, 
and every tree, in which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for 
meat.’... And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very 
good.” (Genesis 1:29, 31.) 


SEVEN SHORT ESSAYS 


THE BASIC MYTH 


According to the Tradition of Ancient India 


n the beginning—which was not long ago but now-ever—is 

the Self. Everyone knows the Self, but no one can describe it, 
just as the eye sees but does not see itself. Moreover, the Self is 
what there is and all that there is, so that no name can be given 
to it. It is neither old nor new, great nor small, shaped nor 
shapeless. Having no opposite, it is what all opposites have in 
common: it is the reason why there is no white without black 
and no form apart from emptiness. However, the Self has two 
sides, the inside and the outside. The inside is called nirguna, 
which is to say that it has no qualities and nothing can be said 
or thought about it. The outside is saguna, which is to say that 
it may be considered as eternal reality, consciousness, and de- 
light. Thus the story which follows will be told of the saguna 
side. 

Because of delight the Self is always at play, and its play, 
called /i/a, is like singing or dancing, which are made of sound 
and silence, motion and rest. Thus the play of the Self is to lose 
itself and to find itself in a game of hide-and-seek without be- 
ginning or end. In losing itself it is dismembered: it forgets that 
it is the one and only reality, and plays that it is the vast multi- 
tude of beings and things which make up this world. In finding 


itself it is remembered: it discovers again that it is forever the 


99 


100 DOES IT MATTER? 


one behind the many, the trunk within the branches, that its 
seeming to be many is always maya, which is to say illusion, 
art, and magical power. 

The playing of the Self is therefore like a drama in which 
the Self is both the actor and the audience. On entering the the- 
ater the audience knows that what it is about to see is only a 
play, but the skillful actor creates a maya, an illusion of reality 
which gives the audience delight or terror, laughter or tears. It 
is thus that in the joy and the sorrow of all beings the Self as au- 
dience is carried away by itself as actor. 

One of the many images of the Self is the hamsa, the Divine 
Bird which lays the world in the form of an egg. It is said also 
that with the syllable ham the Self breathes out, scattering all 
galaxies into the sky, and that with the syllable sa it breathes in, 
withdrawing all things to their original unity. Yet if one repeats 
the syllables Aam-sa they may also be heard as sa-ham or sa- 
aham, which is to say “I am that,” or THAT (the Self) is what 
each and every being is. As breathing out, the Self is called 
Brahma, the creator. As holding the breath out, the Self is called 
Vishnu, the preserver of all these worlds. And as breathing in, 
the Self is called Shiva, the destroyer of illusion. 

This is, then, a story without beginning or end since the 
Self breathes out and in, loses itself and finds itself, for always 
and always, and these periods are sometimes known as its days 
and nights—each day and each night lasting for a kal/pa, which 
is 4,320,000 of our years. The day, or manvanzara, is further di- 
vided into four yuga, or epochs, which are named after the throws 
in a game of dice: first krita, the perfect throw with a score of 
four; second treta, with a score of three; third dvapara, with a 
score of two; and fourth fa/z, the worst throw witha score of one. 

Krita yuga is the Golden Age, the era of total delight in 


Seven Short Essays 101 


multiplicity and form and every beauty of the sensuous world, 
enduring for 1,728,000 years. Treta yuga is somewhat shorter, 
lasting for 1,296,000 years, and is like an apple with a single 
maggot in the core: things have just started to go amiss and 
every pleasure contains a slight shadow of anxiety. Dvapara 
yuga is shorter still. Its time is 864,000 years, and now the forces 
of light and darkness, good and evil, pleasure and pain, are 
evenly balanced. In the temporary end there come the 432,000 
years of the kali yuga when the world is overwhelmed by 
darkness and decay, and when the Self is so lost to itself that 
all its delight appears in the disguise of horror. Finally, the 
Self is manifested in the form of Shiva, ten-armed and blue- 
bodied and wreathed in fire, to dance the terrible tandava-dance 
whereby the universe, incandescent with his heat, turns to ash 
and nothingness. But as the illusion vanishes the Self finds itself 
in its original unity and bliss, and remains for another kalpa of 
4,320,000 years in the pralaya of total peace before losing itself 
again. 

The worlds that are manifested when the Self breathes out 
are not just this one here and those that we see in the sky, for be- 
sides these there are worlds so small that ten thousand of them 
may be hidden in the tip of a butterfly’s tongue, and so large 
that all our stars may be contained in the eye of a shrimp. There 
are also worlds within and around us that do not reverberate 
upon our five organs of sense, and all these worlds, great and 
small, visible and invisible, are in number as many as grains of 
sand in the Ganges. 

Throughout these manifested worlds all sentient beings 
pass through the six paths or divisions of the Wheel of Be- 
coming. These, counting clockwise from the top of the Wheel, 
are, first, the realm of the deva, that is, of gods and angels at the 


102 DOES IT MATTER? 


summit of happiness and spiritual success. Second is the realm 
of the ashura, of dark angels who manifest the Self in the bliss 
of rage. Third is the realm of animals, of beasts, fish, birds, and 
insects. Fourth is the naraka realm, which is the depth of mis- 
ery and spiritual failure, lying at the bottom of the Wheel and 
comprising the purgatories of ice and fire, manifesting the Self 
in the ecstasy of pain. Fifth is the realm of the prea, that is, of 
frustrated ghosts having immense bellies and tiny mouths. 
Sixth, and last, is the realm of mankind. All beings in the six 
paths are bound to the Wheel of Becoming by their karma, 
which is to say action motivated by desire for results—whether 
good or evil. Every being is desirous for the fruits of action so 
long as it remains ignorant of its true nature, thinking “I have 
come to be, and I shall cease to be,” not realizing that there is 
no “I,” no Self, except that which is one and original and be- 
yond all time and space. 

It is thus that anyone who, setting aside all ideas and theo- 
ries, and looking earnestly and intently at the feeling of “I am,” 
will—all of a sudden—awaken to the knowledge that there is 
no self but the Self. Such a one is called jivanmukta, that is, lib- 
erated while still in his individual form, before the death of the 
body, and before the dissolution of all worlds at the end of the 
kalpa. For him there is no longer self and other, mine and yours, 
success and failure. On all sides, within and without, he sees all 
beings, all things, all events, only as the playing of the Self in 
its myriad forms. 


THE GREAT MANDALA 


Per: have always been fascinated by circles of glory, 
known in India as mandala: the rose windows of gothic 
cathedrals, Byzantine mosaic upon the inner surface of a dome, 
the radiant and radiating petals of certain flowers, the design 
of snow crystals, precious stones set in coronas of varicolored 
gems, and mandala proper as they are found in Tibetan paint- 
ing—circular paradise gardens with their jeweled plants and 
trees surrounding an inner circle of Dhyani Buddhas and their 
attendant Bodhisattvas. It is in this form, too, that Dante de- 
scribed his vision of God, ringed by the saints and angels, at 
the end of the Paradiso. 

C.G. Jung suggested that this fascination might be ex- 
plained by some correspondence between the mandala form 
and the basic formative energy of the psyche. For there is in- 
deed an almost universal tendency to express the divine in 
terms of radiating light. Sometimes I wish I had the time and 
skill to project such an image in motion and in highly articulate 
form and color upon the dome of a planetarium, as in the Vor- 
tex demonstrations of Jacobs and Belsen. 

I think of a sunburst of electric blue-white light lasting only 
long enough to avoid blinding the eyes, and then softening to 


103 


104 DOES IT MATTER? 


white gold. With the light goes sound, the high, exulting blast 
of Gabriel’s trumpet that shatters the sleep of the dead. The 
sunburst recedes (or ascends) to its own center, and as it does 
so gives out a concentric aureole of fluorescent red, and then, 
ring upon ring, the whole visual spectrum—orange, yellow, 
green, blue, indigo, purple—and beyond a transparent, mir- 
rorlike blackness, about which a ring of lightning sets off an- 
other rainbow circle encompassing the first. And as the colored 
rings emerge, the sound descends at various harmonic inter- 
vals until, with the lacquer black, it reaches a bass so deep as to 
shake the walls and become tangible, thus generating a spec- 
trum of vibrations that are felt only by the skin, converting the 
sonic into the solid, and all its textures. 

In turn, these vibrations affect the mucous membrane of 
the nose, evoking a procession of scents which begins with 
jinko, or burning aloes wood, the perfume most pleasing to 
Buddha, and descending through roses, carnations, and the salt 
wind of the sea, to freshly ground coffee, mint, thyme, and 
warm brandy, and then on to excellent cheese, to ammonia, ex- 
crement, and burning blood. 

The ordered rings and sequences of vibration touch every 
sense and emotion, and, as the lacquer black generates light- 
ning, it becomes clear that feeling is a cycle in which the high- 
est intensities of pleasure and pain are the same extreme. 

But thus far the image has been only of rings and sequences. 
Within the rings we now distinguish rays, innumerable, but 
shooting straight as spokes from the central light. A moment 
later, the rays ripple, and with them the descending tones of 
sound begin to oscillate. Likewise the vibrations of scent, tex- 
ture, and taste start to mix and combine according to an arith- 
metic that becomes increasingly complex. And the ripples are 


Seven Short Essays 105 


now something more than simple undulations: they are curves 
turning back upon themselves, spirals winding and unwinding, 
begetting patterns that resemble sunlit smoke, or foam in bro- 
ken waves. 

Soon this immense arabesque of curling forms develops 
sharp corners. The rays bend instantly and jump into angles, 
squares, diamonds, and frets. Simultaneously the other spec- 
tra—of sound, texture, taste, and smell—are moving in rhythms 
and patterns equivalently varied. But just as the dance of vi- 
brations is about to blast the brain, there emerge the forms of 
ferns and fronds, of watercourses and trees, of ocean waves and 
mountains, of flowers and shells, of insects, fish, and human 
faces—all writhing and squirming within the total configura- 
tion of concentric rings. 

Just then, one is aware that the whole scene has become 
three-dimensional: the flat circle is a globe, the sound is from 
every direction, and one is simply engulfed in the vibrations of 
texture and smell. In some way, the viewer is now inside the 
spectacle, and his sense of the total form diminishes because of 
the increasing interest of the detail—the articulation of partic- 
ular features, of flowers and faces, gardens and cities, rivers and 
roads. As vision concentrates, the vibrations of sound, touch, 
smell, and taste become consistent with such details as fasci- 
nate the eye. And just then, before we know it, the spectacle as 
a whole is forgotten. Quite suddenly, we discover ourselves and 
our surroundings just as they are, here and now. 


ON SELECTING VIBRATIONS 


A you yet ready to admit that what you will and what you 
won't are one and the same process? . .. That as the recog- 
nition of a figure requires a background, the sense of being 
“oneself” requires the apprehension that there is something 
“other” and external, and that the achievement of any kind of 
power, success, or control cannot be experienced apart from 
a perpetual contract of failure, surprise, and unpredictabil- 
ity? ... That, therefore, all our pretentious projects for power 
over circumstance are a sort of joke or game which, if taken se- 
riously, lead to mayhem and violence—expressing sheer rage 
at being unable to solve a problem which was absurd from the 
beginning? 

If there is any meaning to the doctrine of Original Sin, 
transmitted from generation to generation from Adam and Eve, 
it is simply that all infants are brainwashed or hypnotized by 
their parents and teachers, elders and betters, into the notion 
that survival is a frantic necessity. They are taught, by adult re- 
actions and attitudes, that certain experiences of high tension 
or vibration are to be regarded as “painful” and “bad” because 
they may be precursors of the monstrous event of death, which 


absolutely should not happen. Let me cite only two examples of 


106 


Seven Short Essays 107 


this basic brainwashing to illustrate its fundamental principle— 
both of them down to what we are now calling the “nitty- 
gritty” level of things. 

We now know that a woman giving birth to a baby does 
not have to go through “labor pains.” She can be mentally re- 
oriented to experience what was formerly called pain as or- 
giastic tension, and therefore find the sensation of birth as 
erotically arousing as was the sensation of conception. Adults 
are wont to impress all infants with the vast importance of hav- 
ing regular bowel movements, but when the infant, with un- 
derstandable pride, complies and does his production, the adults 
turn up their noses and complain of the stink. What on earth, 
he wonders, do these mysterious grownups really want? 

They do not know. They have never thought it consistently 
through. The point, however, is that the cosmos is a complex, 
multidimensional system of vibrations arranged in crisscross- 
ing spectra, as in weaving, and from these—as in playing a 
harp—we pluck and choose those that are to be considered 
valuable, important, or pleasant, ignoring or repressing those 
which (under the rules of our not always well-considered 
games) we deem unimportant or offensive. “Negative” experi- 
ences—which may include physical pain, death, vomiting, 
dizziness, or even sexual lust (according to taste)—are to be 
avoided, in the same way and sense that the rules of classical 
Western music excluded the augmented fourth (e.g., C to F 
sharp) as a permissible interval. 

Liberation, in the Buddhist sense of nirvana or the Hindu of 
moksha, is the realization that ultimately, it doesn’t really matter 
what strings are plucked or what vibrations occur. Thus a great 
yogi can face torture with equanimity for the very reason that 
he can allow himself to writhe and scream, and to dislike the 


108 DOES IT MATTER? 


experience immensely. He trusts his nature—that is, Nature it- 
self—to do whatever is appropriate under the circumstances. 
He knows that energy always takes the line of least resistance, 
and that all motion is essentially gravity or falling. His basic 
commitment is therefore to what Ananda Coomaraswamy called 
“the perpetual uncalculated life in the present.” 

This, however, does not deny the value of culture, art, and 
morality. On the contrary, it is their essential basis in somewhat 
the same way that a clean, blank page is the essential basis 
for writing poetry. Every writer, every poet, loves white paper. 
As nature abhors a vacuum it sucks out one’s creative energy, 
and this is why the Heart Sutra of Mahayana Buddhism asserts 
that emptiness (or void or space) is form, and that form is 
emptiness. 

Now then, to see that we live in a universe where, basically, 
“anything goes” is what the Mahayana calls prajna or intuitive 
wisdom. But the inseparable handmaid of prajna is karuna, com- 
passion, which is asking the question: “Given a universe in 
which anything goes, what are the most lovely, generous, and 
exuberant things we can do?” Why not ask the opposite ques- 
tion: “What are the most horrible and hateful deeds we can per- 
petrate?” The answer is irrational or perhaps supra-rational. It 
is that the whole system of vibration spectra, although com- 
prising intensities of experience that we now call pure agony, is 
a celebration of love and delight which, were it otherwise, 
would simply not go on happening. The so-called instinct for 
survival, for going on and on because one must, is a parody of 
this celebration—undertaken by beings who doggedly believe 
themselves to be strangers in the cosmos and victims of its 
machinations. The beautiful task of a bodhisattva is precisely to 
deliver them from this belief. 


Seven Short Essays 109 


If you get with yourself, get with gravity, get with energy 
(following its line of least resistance), you will discover that all 
the vibrations of nature are ecstatic, erotic, or blissful. Exis- 
tence is orgasm. This is why the Vedanta philosophy terms the 
vibration-system sat-chit-ananda—reality-awareness-ecstasy. 
The naturally falling, simply and effortlessly given you, is Na- 
ture itself; it is not something trapped in the energy system of 
the world: it is that very system. Death does not abolish you; it 
is one term or end of the spectrum that zs you. Energy cannot 
be stopped because energy is vibration, and vibration is exactly 
starting /stopping or on-and-off. Existence includes both being 
and nonbeing, solid and space, form and void. 

Following the line of least resistance is, of course, easy; but 
it requires intelligence. It is not followed by imitating some pre- 
conceived notion of spontaneous behavior. Such imitations 
have been covering the walls of Western art galleries for thirty 
years, and many have affected spontaneity by copying forms 
of conduct supposed to be characteristic of animals. (Real ani- 
mals, incidentally, have far higher standards of behavior than 
human beings. Consider the dolphins. And the sharks don’t fly 
out of the water to eat us.) 

Indeed, the flow patterns of water are a basic model for the 
conduct of life, for which reason Lao-tzu repeatedly uses water 
as a symbol of the Tao—which “loves and nourishes all things, 
but does not lord it over them,” and which “flows always to 
that lowest level which men abhor.” Read Theodore Schwenk’s 
marvelous book Sensitive Chaos (London, Rudolph Steiner 
Press, 1965), which shows how the flow patterns of gases and 
liquids are basic to every form of life, how shells and bones are 
sculptures commemorating the forms of liquid lilt. This is the 
far-in meaning of Shakespeare’s saying that “there is a tide in 


110 DOES IT MATTER? 


the affairs of men which, taken at its flood, leads on to fortune.” 
For tune, for harmony, one follows the lead, the weight, of the 


river. 


Loco é laggit da Belzebu remoto 

tanto, quanto la tomba si distende, 

che non per vista, ma per suono é noto 
Dun ruscelletto che quivi discende 

per la buca d’un sasso, chegli ha roso 

col corso ch’egli avvolge, e poco pende. 
Lo Duca ed io per quel cammino ascoso 


entrammo a ritornar nel chiaro mondo. 


Inferno, 34. 127-34 


PLANTING SEEDS AND GATHERING FRUIT 


FY project for self-transformation is a vicious circle. 
Dogen, a Zen master of the thirteenth century, said that 
spring does not become summer and, in the same way, firewood 
does not become ashes: there is spring, and then there is sum- 
mer; there is firewood, and then there are ashes. By the same ar- 
gument, a living being does not become a corpse, and an 
unenlightened person does not become a Buddha. Monday does 
not become Tuesday; one o’clock does not become four 
o’clock. Thus to try to become a Buddha, to attain enlighten- 
ment or liberation or supreme unselfishness, is like trying to 
wash off blood with blood, or polishing a brick to make a mir- 
ror. As Chuang-tzu said, “You see your egg and expect it to 
crow.” 

The selfishness of a selfish person is precisely that he is try- 
ing to become happier, stronger, wiser, braver, kindlier, and, 
in short, unselfish. “Is not your elimination of self,” said 
Chuang-tzu, “a positive manifestation of self?” And again, 
“Those who say that they would have right without its corre- 
late, wrong, or good government without its correlate, misrule, 
do not apprehend the great principles of the universe, nor the 


nature of all creation. One might as well talk of the existence of 


111 


112 DOES IT MATTER? 


heaven without that of earth, or of the negative principle (yin) 
without the positive (yang), which is clearly impossible. Yet 
people keep on discussing it incessantly.” The comment applies 
equally to all projects for self-improvement through gurus, 
meditations, yoga practice, self-acceptance, psychotherapy, and 
even total living-in-the-present. From such disciplines one can 
learn only that they are self-contradictory, like lifting both feet 
off the floor by pulling the ankles. And in this there is, perhaps, 
some value, for it releases our psychic and physical energy from 
impossible tasks for the possible: we can indeed plant seeds, 
gather fruit, build houses, sing songs, make love, and go on liv- 
ing until we stop. 

Am I pointing this out to improve the state of mankind, and 
so contradicting myself? No, I am saying it so that we can be 
free to plant seeds and gather fruit. This has nothing to do with 
better or worse, progress or regress. These are judgments, and 
it is well said, “Judge not, that you be not judged; for with what 
judgment you judge, you shall be judged, and with what mea- 
sure you measure, you shall be measured.” And if you say, “But 


4? 


that is itself a judgment!” you are still judging. Is it dezer not to 
judge? No, it is simply living and dying, day and night, coming 
and going, a state of affairs in which there is neither the good 


by itself nor the bad by itself. 


The perfect Way is without difficulty, 
Save that it avoids picking and choosing. 
Only when you stop liking and disliking 
Will all be clearly understood. ... 

Be not concerned with right and wrong. 
The conflict between right and wrong 

Is the sickness of the mind. 


Seven Short Essays 113 


True, while we remain in the sickness of the mind, the 
“sickness” is “wrong,” and the (wrong) conflict persists. But 
this is still judging the judgment, and judging the judgment of 
the judgment—the vicious circle and the infinite regression 
which Buddhists call samsara, the squirrel-cage situation of try- 
ing to have life without death and right without wrong. Such vi- 
cious circles cannot be stopped by preparations or methods or 
spiritual disciplines. These are all postponements. The only 
way to stop is to stop—instantly, now—by action, not thought. 
This stopping can happen, just as we can plant seeds and gather 
fruit—though no real action is something “done” by a con- 
ceptual “me.” The division between doer and deed, knower 


and known, is a division of words, not of nature. 


Suffering alone exists, none who suffer; 
The deed there is, but no doer thereof; 
Nirvana is, but no one seeking it; 


The path there is, but none who travel it. 


In short, the point is that every project for righting the 
world or oneself is a conceptual fantasy, because, while we re- 
main in the world of concepts, we cannot identify right without 
the contrast of left or wrong. This is as true politically as it is 
psychologically, for the following of right-wing or left-wing 
ideologies diverts our attention from specific problems, just as 
projects for world improvement divert us from planting seeds 
and gathering fruit. In the name of such projects we obliterate 
whole populations for their own liberation, crowd criminals to- 
gether in prisons for their rehabilitation, and isolate crazy peo- 
ple in asylums in the desperate hope that this will somehow 
make them sane. 


Thus so-called black people have a thing against so-called 


114 DOES IT MATTER? 


white people (I prefer the contrast of colored and discolored) 
because the Judaeo-Christian whites equate black with evil and 
crusade for a preposterous cosmos in which there will be right 
without left. Unhappily, the colored people have been infected 
with this religion, and are crusading (understandably enough) 
for something more than equal rights. But the more we become 
involved in possible debates between the rights and wrongs of 
these problems, the more we shall destroy each other for our 
own good, and neglect the planting of seeds and the gathering 
of fruit. 

The “sickness of the mind” is the confusion of what can be 
said, or thought, with what can be done and with what actually 
happens. Release from this confusion comes with awareness, 
not thinking, but is frustrated by projects to be aware and not 
to think or, rather, to suspend thought. The idea that is it bet- 
ter, or “the goal,” to be rid of this confusion is still confusion, 
and is called the stink of Zen. The concepts of health and sick- 
ness, good and evil, better and worse, have the same use and 
relation to life as those of long and short, high and low to car- 
pentry: even a short piece of wood can be three inches long. 
Even cancer is called a growth, and when Ramana Maharshi 
was dying of cancer he resisted the doctors, saying, “It wants 
to grow, too. Let it.” This is, perhaps, an extreme example of re- 
nunciation—not of love or energy—but of willing right as 
against wrong, and thus of renouncing one’s own separateness 
from everything that happens, which is what Tillich called “the 
courage to be.” 

This attitude might be called a fatalism in which, however, 
there is no one fated: one’s own subjective reactions are all of 
a piece with what, objectively, goes on—and therefore you do 
not intrude yourself upon the world. This is the Taoist attitude 


Seven Short Essays 115 


of wu-wei, of noninterference with the Tao, the Course of Na- 
ture. However, wu-wei is not a precept or a method to be fol- 
lowed or not followed: it is the realization that you yourself are 
not something apart from the Tao which can, or cannot, inter- 
fere with it. Experience your own decision as an event which 
happens like the opening of a bud. 

Such a sudden flip of consciousness is rather like looking 
at nonobjective or abstract paintings as if they were colored 
photographs—it might be of markings in marble or of micro- 
scopic plants. Instantly, the whole quality of the painting 
changes: it becomes three-dimensional and vividly articulate. 
Even more remarkable is the change when subjective experi- 
ence is taken as something happening of itself, like the wind, 
or—what comes to the same thing—when objective experi- 
ence is taken as something which you are doing, like breathing. 


ART WITH A CAPITAL A 


A” with a capital A, is a strictly modern and Western phe- 
nomenon. Not so long ago, say, about five hundred years, 
there were no museums, no galleries, no concert halls, and no 
special class of people to be known as Artists. What our muse- 
ums now exhibit as the “art” of other cultures and ancient times 
are religious, magical, and household utensils exquisitely and 
lovingly made. These are by no means confined to objects of 
luxury made for the wealthy: they include the pottery, weaving, 
weapons, jewelry, and ritual tools of peasants. If there was any 
art in such times and cultures, it was simply the masterly pro- 
duction of things needed for everyday life. No one ever made 
anything for the express purpose of adorning a museum, of 
being shown ina gallery, or for being commended in newspa- 
pers. Scholars may manage to dig up a few exceptions to this 
observation, but the self-conscious practice of Art hardly 
existed before the advent of modern technology. 

Today, many young painters, sculptors, and musicians are 
aware—sometimes clearly, sometimes obscurely—of the ab- 
surdity of “art for art’s sake.” We have, therefore, not only the 
theater of the absurd, but also the concert hall and gallery of 


the absurd. The formal scene of going to the concert came to a 


116 


Seven Short Essays 117 


final crash when John Cage performed an entirely silent piano 
recital with the full ritual apparatus of evening dress, a Stein- 
way, a score consisting wholly of rests, and an assistant to turn 
the pages. Be it said at the same time that John Cage is a musi- 
cal genius, a man with divinely sensitive ears, who used this de- 
vice in an attempt to persuade people to listen to the magical 
sounds that go on around us all the time. He was trying to clean 
our ears of melodic and harmonic prejudices. 

Painters and sculptors are now catching up with him, 
though perhaps it all really began with Dada. With Pop Art and 
Minimal Art we have the gallery of the absurd, going beyond 
even the greatest excesses of abstract expressionism and action 
painting, with what (I hope) is the object of washing the eyes 
as Cage was cleaning ears. For Cage simply roars with laugh- 
ter about his own projects (at himself, and not because he is 
hoaxing the public), and I wonder, sometimes, if Minimal Art 
sculptors are doing the same, or whether they conceive their 
productions to be “serious” in the same sense as a concert at 
which Bernstein is conducting Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony 
is serious. 

To clean out the prejudices of ears and eyes goes, indeed, 
beyond the domains of music, painting, sculpture, and drama to 
our basic orientation to life. Existence itself is a highly com- 
plex system of interwoven vibrations, and, from infancy, we 
have inherited the strongest prejudices as to which vibrations 
are permissible and acceptable and which are not. We are still 
at the point where pain and the prospect of death are as intol- 
erable as was, say, Surrealism in 1930 or Cubism in 1910. It 
could therefore be argued that arts which infringe all traditional 
rules, and eventually get away with it, are preparing us for will- 
ing acceptance of the extinction of our species. Learning to 


118 DOES IT MATTER? 


enjoy their assaults upon our sensibilities will put us in a frame 
of mind to contemplate annihilation by H-bombs as a real gas. 

But I am not being frivolous. It has always been known that 
the capacity to accept death in the midst of life—to swing with 
a conventionally intolerable vibration—is a source of immense 
creative power. “Unless a grain of corn falls into the ground 
and dies, it remains isolated. But if it dies, it brings forth much 
fruit.” Or, as Goethe said it— 


Und so lang du das nicht hast, 
Dieses: stirb und werde, 


Bist du nur ein triiber Gast 


Auf der dunklen Erde. 


“As long as you do not know how to die and come to life again, 
you are but a sorry traveler on this dark earth.” And the Zen 


master Bunan: 


While living be a dead man, thoroughly dead. 
Then, whatever you do, just as you will, will be 


right. 


It is therefore my personal opinion that almost all avant- 
garde art forms of the twentieth century are transitional, in a 
peculiar and special sense. Obviously, all art is in transition, as 
is life itself. But the ear cleaning and eye washing that is now 
going on in the concert halls, galleries, and museums is in 
preparation for a return to the inseparability of art and every- 
day life. The paintings are vanishing into the walls: but they 
will be marvelous walls. In turn, the walls will vanish into the 
landscape: but the view will be ecstatic. And after that the 
viewer will vanish into the view. 


However, an art inseparable from everyday life will not be 


Seven Short Essays 119 


narrowly functional or utilitarian. By reason of electronics and 
automation we are moving—to the consternation of the 
Protestant conscience—into an age when there will hardly be 
any distinction between work and play. Mankind has to face the 
moral shock of realizing that masochistic work will be obso- 
lete, for the slaves will no longer be people but machines, 
watched and tended by swinging and fascinated engineers. Art 
will therefore cease to be a propaganda calling attention to mis- 
ery. It will use all the facilities of electronic technology to cre- 
ate an exuberant splendor which has not been seen since the 
days of Persian miniatures and arabesques, medieval stained 
glass, the illuminated manuscripts of the Celts, the enamels of 
Limoges, and the jewelry of Cellini. 

The wheel extends the foot. Brush, chisel, hammer, and 
saw extend the hand. But electric circuitry extends the brain it- 
self as an externalization of the nervous system, and will there- 
fore perform wonders of art (that is, of playful patterns of 
energy) which have not heretofore been seen. 


THE BUDDHISM OF ALDOUS HUXLEY 


Idous Huxley’s last major work, the utopia Jsland, ex- 

pressed his philosophy of life in its full maturity, and 
should be read as a philosophical essay rather than as a novel. 
During the years between the writing of Ends and Means and Js- 
land, 1 watched Huxley’s development with intense interest. 
For at the beginning of his “mystical period” (about 1937) he 
was inclined to a type of spirituality which regards material ex- 
istence as a fall into the gross bondage of the flesh, and differ- 
entiation and individuality as a sort of cosmic mistake—to be 
corrected by an ascetic yoga which restores the original state 
of homogenized, unitary consciousness. This is a spirituality, 
resembling Hinayana Buddhism and some types of Vedanta, 
which conceives the highest goal of life as a nirvana in which 
every form of multiplicity is wiped out. 

But in /s/and Huxley came forth with a rich “spiritual ma- 
terialism,” which resembles nothing so much as the general out- 
look of Mahayana Buddhism—with which he was, of course, 
familiar. Mahayana (the “great course” or “vehicle”), which 
came to birth in India between about 100 Bc and aD 400, is the 
form of Buddhism which migrated to China, Tibet, Mongolia, 


Korea, and Japan, and is contrasted by its followers with the 


120 


Seven Short Essays 121 


Hinayana (or “defective course”), which prevails in Southern 
Asia. The distinctive feature of Mahayana is that it regards nzr- 
yvana as one and the same reality as the physical world (sam- 
sara), the difference between the two lying only in one’s point 
of view or state of consciousness. It was this that enabled Ma- 
hayana Buddhism to be involved in and concerned with cul- 
ture, and to be a way of life for lay men and women as well as 
monks. 

Perhaps this is a merely subjective impression, but it has 
struck me (especially in Japan) that the attitude of Mahayana 
Buddhism, among all religions and philosophies, has been 
uniquely humane, openhearted, intellectually sophisticated and 
imaginative, and thoroughly civilizing—even without the ben- 
efits of Western technology. When I last visited Dr. Suzuki he 
spoke emphatically of the earthiness of Buddhism, and even 
went so far as to say that you could smell the essence of it in an 
incense prepared from aloes wood ( jinko), which somehow dis- 
tills and concentrates all one’s happy memories of the smell of 
wood and trees. 

Thus in Mahayana Buddhism the highest form of man is 
not the ascetic arhan, who remains in almost perpetual con- 
templation, but the bodhisattva, for whom everyday life and 
activity are entirely consistent with being in the state of nir- 
yana, and who lives in this world out of compassion for others, 
working to share with them his own state of vision. It is some- 
how significant that this philosophy appealed to such a highly 
cultured Westerner as Huxley, with his deep concern, not only 
for the arts and literature, but also for the sociological, educa- 
tional, and economic problems of the modern world. 

I do not say this to claim Huxley as a convert to a form 
of Buddhism, since Mahayanists have seldom any interest in 


122 DOES IT MATTER? 


sectarian propaganda and totting up adherents, their disciplines 
being closer to such inquiries as psychology and philosophy 
than to militant religions. For Mahayana is not so much an ide- 
ology as a complex of methods for correcting our perception 
and conception of life. Its essence is not a theory but a realiza- 
tion—almost a sensation—of relativity, that is, of the mutual 
interdependence of all things and events. 

Human consciousness is normally fixed or “hung up” (a 
perfect Americanism for the Buddhist sense of “attachment”) 
on the apparent separateness of things, including oneself. It is 
a type of attention to the world which screens out, or ignores, 
the fact that all phenomena go with each other inseparably — 
in the same way as back and front or the poles of a magnet. 
Thus we do not normally realize that being and nonbeing, life 
and death, self and other, solid and space, pulse and interval, 
go with each other in the same basic unity. We are therefore 
tormented with the anxiety that death may overcome life, that 
nonbeing may swallow being, or that the viewpoint which we 
call “self” may vanish, and leave only a world of objects or 
“others.” 

This view of the world as a mere assemblage of separate 
things and a sequence of distinct events gives the individual the 
feeling that he is no more than a temporary part of reality—a 
thing among things. According to Mahayana there are no 
things, considered as separate entities. So-called things are ges- 
tures of the universe, that is, of an energy system which is the 
only real “self” that we have, but which we cannot define or 
classify—in the same way that we cannot (and need not) look 
directly into our own eyes. Yet it is possible to be aware that 
this indefinable energy system, which, in its entirety, is what 
and who each individual truly is. 


Seven Short Essays 123 


Such an awareness opens up for us the possibility of par- 
ticipation in all the games of life—the patterns and gestures of 
the universe—without anxiety and with compassion, realizing 
that every other self is, under the surface, the same self as our 
own. And such compassion, as “feeling/suffering-with,” is not 
mere pity in the sense that “misery loves company.” It is 
grounded in the knowledge that existence is basically exuber- 
ance—that “energy is eternal delight,” and that, improbable as 
it may seem, every form of being lies somewhere on the vast 
spectrum of ecstasy which, in Mahayana, is called the sambho- 
gakaya, “The Body of Total Bliss.” 

Many people believe that without anxiety there would be no 
motivation for a creative life. “If 1am to be good, someone must 
beat me.” But creation is not mere flight from punishment and 
fear, and no one wants the surgeon to be anxious, with his knife 
in a trembling hand. The problem is that we are now wielding 
the incredible surgical instrument of technology with trembling 
hands, and what concerned Huxley was that such power cannot 
be handled constructively by anxious and alienated men with a 
fundamentally hostile attitude to nature. Mahayana Buddhists 
never had our technology; but they had art, and practiced it to 
high perfection (in China and Japan) as a cooperation between 
man and nature—indeed, as a work of nature itself. What if the 
same realization—that science can be the work of nature, and 
that the individual is one body with his environment—could 
become the informing spirit of Western technology? 


D. T. SUZUKI: THE “MIND-LESS” SCHOLAR 


have never had a formal teacher (guru or roshi) in the spiri- 
tual life—only an exemplar, whose example I have not really 
followed because no sensitive person likes to be mimicked. That 
exemplar was Suzuki Daisetsu, at once the subtlest and the 
simplest person I have known. His intellectual and spiritual 
mood or atmosphere I found wholly congenial, although I 
never knew him really intimately and although I myself am an 
entirely different kind of person. Suzuki introduced me to Zen 
when I first read his Essays in Zen Buddhism in mid-adolescence, 
and in the years that followed I read everything he wrote with 
fascination and delight. For what he said was always unexpected 
and open-ended. He did not travel in the well-worn ruts of philo- 
sophical and religious thought. He rambled, he digressed, he 
dropped hints, he left you suspended in mid-air, he astonished 
you with his learning (which was prodigious) and yet charmed 
you with scholarship handled so lightly and unpretentiously. 
For I found in the engagingly disorganized maze of his writ- 
ings the passage to a Garden of Reconciled Opposites. 
He showed why Zen is immensely difficult and perfectly 
easy, why it is at once impenetrable and obvious, why the infi- 


nite and eternal is exactly the same as your own nose at this 


124 


Seven Short Essays 125 


moment, why morals are both essential and irrelevant to the 
spiritual life, and why irik: (the way of personal effort) comes 
finally to the same point as zariki (the way of liberation through 
pure faith). The trick in following Suzuki was never to “stay 
put,” as if you had at last got his point and were on firm 
ground—for the next moment he would show you that you had 
missed it altogether. 

Suzuki was also outside the ordinary ruts in that, without 
any show of eccentricity, he did not present himself in the 
stereotype of the usual “Zen personality” which one finds 
among Japanese monks. Anyone visiting him for the first time, 
expecting to find an old gentleman with flashing eyes, sitting in 
a bare shibui-type room, and ready to engage you in swift and 
vigorous repartee, would have been very much surprised. For 
Suzuki, with his miraculous eyebrows, was more like a Chinese 
Taoist scholar—a sort of bookish Lao-tzu—gifted, as all good 
Taoists are, with what can only be called metaphysical humor. 
Every so often his eyes twinkled as if he had seen the Ultimate 
Joke, and as if, out of compassion for those who had not, he 
were refraining from laughing out loud. 

He lived in the Western-style section of his home in Ka- 
makura completely surrounded with piles of books and papers. 
This scholarly disarray was spread through several rooms, in 
each of which he was writing a separate book, or separate chap- 
ters of one book. He could thus move from room to room with- 
out having to clear away all his reference materials when feeling 
inclined to work upon one project rather than another; but some- 
how his admirable secretary Miss Okamura (who was actually 
an apsara sent down from the Western Paradise to take care of 
him in his old age) seemed to know where everything was. 

Suzuki spoke slowly, deliberately, and gently in excellent 


126 DOES IT MATTER? 


English with a slight and to our ears, very pleasing Japanese ac- 
cent. In conversation, he almost always explained himself with 
the aid of pen and paper, drawing diagrams to illustrate his 
points and Chinese characters to identify his terms. Though a 
man of wonderful patience, he had a genius for deflating windy 
argument or academic pedantry without giving offense. I re- 
member a lecture where a member of the audience asked him, 
“Dr. Suzuki, when you use the word ‘reality,’ are you referring 
to the relative reality of the physical world, or to the absolute 
reality of the transcendental world?” He closed his eyes and 
went into that characteristic attitude which some of his students 
call “doing a Suzuki,” for no one could tell whether he was in 
deep meditation or fast asleep. After about a minute’s silence, 
though it seemed longer, he opened his eyes and said, “Yes.” 
During a class on the basic principles of Buddhism: “This 
morning we come to Fourth Noble Truth...called Noble 
Eightfold Path. First step of Noble Eightfold Path is called sho 
ken. Sho ken means Right View. All Buddhism is really summed 
up in Right View, because Right View is having no special view, 
no fixed view. Second step of Noble Eightfold Path...” (and 
here there was a long pause) “Oh, I forget second step. You 
look it up in the book.” In the same vein, I remember his ad- 
dress to the final meeting of the 1963 World Congress of Faiths 
at the old Queen’s Hall in London. The theme was “The 
Supreme Spiritual Ideal,” and after several speakers had deliv- 
ered themselves of volumes of hot air, Suzuki’s turn came to 
take the platform. “When I was first asked,” he said, “to talk 
about the Supreme Spiritual Ideal I did not exactly know what 
to answer. Firstly, I am just a simple-minded countryman from 
a faraway corner of the world suddenly thrust into the midst 
of this hustling city of London, and I am bewildered and my 


Seven Short Essays 127 


mind refuses to work in the same way that it does when I am in 
my own land. Secondly, how can a humble person like myself 
talk about such a grand thing as the Supreme Spiritual Ideal? .. . 
Really I do not know what Spiritual is, what Ideal is, and what 
Supreme Spiritual Ideal is.” Whereupon he devoted the rest of 
his speech to a description of his house and garden in Japan, 
contrasting it with the life of a great city. This from the trans- 
lator of the Lankavatara Sutra! And the audience gave him a 
standing ovation. 

Being well aware of the relativity and inadequacy of all 
opinions, he would never argue. When a student tried to pro- 
voke him into a discussion of certain points upon which the cel- 
ebrated Buddhist scholar Junjiro Takakusu differed from him, 
his only comment was, “This is very big world; plenty of room 
in it for both Professor Takakusu and myself.” Well, perhaps 
there was one argument—when the Chinese scholar Hu Shih 
accused him of obscurantism (in asserting that Zen could not 
be expressed in rational language) and of lacking a sense of 
history. But in the course of a very courteous reply Suzuki 
said, “The Zen master, generally speaking, despises those who 
indulge in word- or idea-mongering, and in this respect Hu 
Shih and myself are great sinners, murderers of Buddhas and 
patriarchs; we are both destined for hell.” 

I have never known a great scholar and intellectual so de- 
void of conceit. When I first met Suzuki, I was flabbergasted 
that he asked me (aged twenty) how to prepare a certain article, 
and that when I was brash enough to give my advice he fol- 
lowed it. Academic pomposity and testiness were simply not in 
him. Thus certain American sinologists, who make a fine art of 
demolishing one another with acrimonious footnotes, are apt to 
go into a huff about his rather casual use of documentation and 


128 DOES IT MATTER? 


“critical apparatus,” and to speak of him as a mere “popular- 
izer.” They do not realize that he genuinely loved scholarship 
and thus made no show of “being a scholar.” He had no inter- 
est in using bibliography as a gimmick for boosting his per- 
sonality. 

Perhaps the real spirit of Suzuki could never be caught from 
his writings alone: one had to know the man. Many readers 
complain that his work is so un-Zen-like—verbose, discursive, 
obscure, and cluttered with technicalities. A Zen monk once 
explained to me that the attitude of mushin (the Zen style of 
unself-consciousness) was like the Japanese carpenter who can 
build a house without a blueprint. I asked, “What about the 
man who draws a blueprint without making a plan for it?” This 
was, I believe, Suzuki’s attitude in scholarship: he thought, he 
intellectualized, he pored over manuscripts and dictionaries as 
any Zen monk might sweep floors in the spirit of mushin. In his 
own words, “Man is a thinking reed but his great works are 
done when he is not calculating and thinking. ‘Childlikeness’ 
has to be restored with long years of training in the art of self- 
forgetfulness. When this is attained, man thinks yet he does not 
think. He thinks like showers coming down from the sky; he 
thinks like the waves rolling on the ocean; he thinks like the 
stars illuminating the nightly heavens; he thinks like the green 
foliage shooting forth in the relaxing spring breeze. Indeed, he 
is the showers, the ocean, the stars, the foliage.” 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


lan Watts, who held both a master’s degree in theology 

and a doctorate of divinity, is best known as an interpreter 
of Zen Buddhism in particular, and of Indian and Chinese phi- 
losophy in general. Standing apart, however, from sectarian 
membership, he has earned the reputation of being one of the 
most original and “unrutted” philosophers of the century. He 
was the author of some twenty books on the philosophy and 
psychology of religion, including The Way of Zen; The Wis- 
dom of Insecurity; Nature, Man and Woman; The Book; Beyond 
Theology; In My Own Way; and Cloud Hidden, Whereabouts Un- 
known. He died in 1973. 


129 


gin, New World Library is dedicated to publishing books and other 
media that inspire and challenge us to improve the quality of our 
“eu” lives and the world. 


We are a socially and environmentally aware company, and we strive to 
embody the ideals presented in our publications. We recognize that we 
have an ethical responsibility to our customers, our staff members, and 
our planet. 

We serve our customers by creating the finest publications possible 
on personal growth, creativity, spirituality, wellness, and other areas of 
emerging importance. We serve New World Library employees with 
generous benefits, significant profit sharing, and constant encouragement 
to pursue their most expansive dreams. 

As a member of the Green Press Initiative, we print an increasing 
number of books with soy-based ink on 100 percent postconsumer-waste 
recycled paper. Also, we power our offices with solar energy and con- 
tribute to nonprofit organizations working to make the world a better 
place for us all. 


Our products are available 
in bookstores everywhere. 
For our catalog, please contact: 


New World Library 
14 Pamaron Way 
Novato, California 94949 


Phone: 415-884-2100 or 800-972-6657 
Catalog requests: Ext. 50 
Orders: Ext. 52 
Fax: 415-884-2199 
Email: escort@newworldlibrary.com 


To subscribe to our electronic newsletter, visit 
www.newworldlibrary.com 


Philosophy $12.95 U.S. 


“A fascinating entry into the deepest ways of knowing.” 


— Robert Kirsch, Los Angeles Times 


THIS CLASSIC SERIES OF ESSAYS represents Alan Watts's thinking on 
the astonishing problems caused by our dysfunctional relationship with the 
material environment. Here, with characteristic wit, a philosopher best 
known for his writings and teachings about mysticism and Eastern philos- 
ophy gets down to the nitty-gritty problems of economics, technology, 
clothing, cooking, and housing. Watts argues that we confuse symbol with 
reality, our ways of describing and measuring the world with the world it- 
self, and thus put ourselves into the absurd situation of preferring money 
to wealth and eating the menu instead of the dinner. 


With our attention locked on numbers and concepts, we are increasingly 
unconscious of nature and of our total dependence on air, water, plants, 
animals, insects, and bacteria. We have hallucinated the notion that the 
so-called external world is a cluster of objects separate from ourselves, 
that we encounter it, that we come into it instead of out of it. Originally 
published in 1972, Does It Matter? foretells the environmental problems 
that arise from this mistaken mind-set. Not all of Watts’s predictions have 
come to pass, but his unique insights will change the way you look at 
the world. 


Counterculture philosopher Alan Watts was the author of 


more than twenty books, including The Way of Zen, The 
Wisdom of Insecurity, In My Own Way, and The Book: On 
the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are. He died in 
Sausalito, California, in 1973. 


8-1 585-! 


i 


Cover design by Mary Ann Casler SBN-13 


8157 


ile: 5 


m) Wor, 


YEN New World Library 


www.newworldlibrary.com 
UT 


