An Introduction to Meditation 


Alan Watts 


Personal Growth / Meditation $12.95 / $20.00 Canada 


ALAN WATTS became famous first as a brilliant intellectual and then as a seri- 
ous student of Buddhism and meditation. In the 1970s, the last years of his life, 
he retreated to a small, isolated cabin deep in the woods. He meditated every 
morning, then wrote. 


This wonderful book has been transcribed from recordings of several talks Watts 
gave in these later years, recorded and edited by his son, Mark. His speaking 
shows a maturity and wisdom that can only come after years of meditation, and 
his words are still as visionary today as when they were first spoken. 


Sa watch everything going on without 
attempting to change it in any way, without 
judging it, without calling it good or bad. Just 


watch it. That is the essential process of meditation. 


Alan Watts is able to use words to take us beyond them. He is able to instill 
in readers not only an understanding of meditation, but an experience of it as 
well. Whether you are experienced in meditation or just beginning, Still the 
Mind is an invaluable guide that takes you on a wonderful journey that shows 
you the great miracle of who you really are. 


ISBN 1-57731- 214-7 


51295 
se NEW WORLD LIBRARY 
Z NOVATO, CALIFORNIA 
“ex WV W.NEWWORLDLIBRARY.COM 
917815771312147 


Cover by John Miller and Aaron Kenedi 


Still the Mind 


TMNRANASSSSEES 


An Introduction to Meditation 


Alan Watts 


New WORLD LIBRARY 
NOVATO, CALIFORNIA 


wie 


aA 
New Wodd Library 
14 Pamaron Way 
Novato, California 94949 


Copyright © 2000 by Mark Watts 


Editors: Mark Watts, Marc Allen 
Cover design: Big Fish 
Text design: Tona Pearce Myers 


All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced in whole or 
in part, or transmitted in any form, without written permission 
from the publisher, except by a reviewer, who may quote brief 
passages in a review; nor may any part of this book be repro- 
duced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or 
by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, 
or other, without written permission of the publisher. 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Watts, Alan, 1915-1973. 
Still the mind : an introduction to meditation / Alan Watts. 

p. cm. 
1. Meditation. I. Title. 
ISBN 1-57731-214-7 (alk. paper) 
BL627.W38 2000 
291.4’35—dc21 
99-462340 


First paperback printing, February 2002 
ISBN 1-57731-214-7 
Printed in Canada on acid-free, partially recycled paper 
Distributed to the trade by Publishers Group West 


10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 


What I am really saying is that you 
don’t need to do anything, 
because if you see yourself in the correct way, 
you are all as much extraordinary phenomenon 
of nature as trees, clouds, the patterns 
in running water, the flickering of fire, 
the arrangement of the stars, 
and the form of a galaxy. You are all just like that, 
and there is nothing wrong with you at all. 


— Alan Watts 


CONTENTS 


Publisher’s Preface ix 
Introduction by Mark Watts xiii 


Part | 
The Essential Process of the World 


Chapter One: Who We Are in the Universe 21 
Chapter Two: Meet Your Real Self 53 


Part Il 
The Essential Process of Meditation 
Chapter Three: The Philosophy of Meditation 81 
Chapter Four: The Practice of Meditation 97 
Part Ill 
Still the Mind 
Chapter Five: Contemplative Ritual 113 


About the Author 123 
Recommended Reading 125 


PUBLISHER'S PREFACE 


By MARC ALLEN 


LAN WATTS BECAME FAMOUS in the 1950s as a bril- 

liant, intense intellectual, a former Episcopalian 
priest with a vast knowledge of both Eastern and 
Western religious and spiritual traditions. Unlike most 
of his peers, though, he embraced and actually prac- 
ticed the various traditions he studied. His under- 
standing, expressed through a great number of books 
and public talks, was peerless. 

In the 1960s, he became a serious student of Zen 
Buddhism, and was a teacher — and eventually dean 
— at the American Academy of Asian Studies (now 
CIIS, the California Institute of Integral Studies). The 
popularity of his books and talks soared. He gave a 
weekly talk on San Francisco public radio that was 


ix 


STILL THE MIND 


broadcast nationally. A large number of people listened 
every Sunday morning; many considered it their church 
service. 

Watts lived on a houseboat in Sausalito, just north of 
San Francisco, which became renowned as a center 
of endless discussions, parties, and meditation sessions, 
with famous and infamous spiritual leaders, gurus, intel- 
lectuals, writers, and others continually dropping by. 

He continued to practice his meditation, and his 
writing and talks deepened. More and more, he was 
leading people into meditation and spiritual experience 
rather than just talking about it. 

In the last years of his life, he left the houseboat and 
retreated to a small, isolated cabin deep in the woods. 
He spent nearly every morning alone, usually beginning 
with a Japanese tea ceremony followed by a period of 
meditation and contemplation. Then he would write. 

His writing and speaking grew quieter and deeper. 
This book has been transcribed from recordings of sev- 
eral talks he gave in his later years. They show a matu- 
rity and an understanding of his subject that only comes 
after years of meditation. He had transformed over the 
years from a serious intellectual to a joyous, sponta- 
neous lover of life. 

His words are still leading-edge, as fresh today as 
when they were spoken many years ago. He is a writer 


PUBLISHER'S PREFACE 


and student and teacher who will be remembered, and 
this book shows us why: 

He is able to use words to take us beyond them; he 
is able to instill in readers and listeners not only an 
understanding of meditation but an actual spiritual 
experience as well. 


xi 


INTRODUCTION 


By MARK WATTS 


| N THE BEGINNING of Still the Mind, Alan Watts men- 
tions the gift he had been given — and it was a 
unique gift. Watts was able to take his readers and 
listeners on a journey beyond the often-ignored lim- 
itations of calculation and reckoning. Perhaps the 
greatest part of this gift was his ability to show us 
how to discover simple ways of getting out of the 
mental trap we create for ourselves. 

In our modem society, it has become apparent 
that the power-based world — the world of politics, 
govemment, and international finance that influ- 
ences all of us — has been absolutely hypnotized 
and driven crazy by words and by thoughts. We have 
become slaves to recurring pattems in an endless 


xiii 


STILL THE MIND 


stream of words. Our political leaders talk incessantly 
about our many problems, but it’s as if they’re speaking 
a foreign language one might call “memorandese.” 
Almost everyone has had the experience of watching a 
political debate and wondering afterward what on earth 
the candidates were talking about. To some degree, all 
civilized people are out of touch with reality because we 
fail to distinguish between the way things are and the 
way they are described. For politicians this dichotomy 
has reached extreme proportions, but it affects every- 
one. We confuse money, which is an abstraction, with 
real wealth; we confuse the idea of who we are with the 
actual experience of our organic existence. 


During the sixties and early seventies, Alan Watts 
lectured at universities and blossoming growth centers 
across the country. To help his audiences better under- 
stand their connection with the word, he would 
describe in great detail the many ways that our organic 
existence inseparably connects us to the entire world. 
Starting when I was sixteen, and on into my early twen- 
ties, I followed along whenever I could with a portable 
tape deck, recording his talks. 

Whether the title of his talk was Ecological 
Awareness, The Psychology of Mystical Experience, or 
The Practice of Zen Meditation, he would often return to 
the theme of the inseparability of man and world. It was 


Xiv 


INTRODUCTION 


something he grasped on a deep level and could invani- 
ably help his audiences understand. His essential point 
was that one’s actual organic being is inseparable from 
the universe, but the distinct idea you have of this dis- 
tinct wiggle of the whole universe, which you call your 
body, can very easily persuade you to accept the illusion 
that you are a separate entity. 

One reason we fall for the idea of the separate, iso- 
lated self is that, even though we admire the beauty of 
the natural world, nearly everyone who has grown up in 
Western society has certain misgivings about actually liv- 
ing as an integral part of nature. Instead, we adopt cer- 
tain conventions that allow us to live in modem society; 
we cultivate our consciousness in order to “rise above” 
the level of natural instinct. 

At one extreme, we are rugged individualists who feel 
the need to conquer the physical wond and claim new 
territory for mankind. But even those who do not try to 
dominate the world in a physical sense may try to over- 
come what they perceive as their animal nature through 
the repression of their natural desires. We see this mani- 
fested nearly everywhere in our culture in conscious 
attempts to adhere to abstract ideals of virtuous living. 

But as Carl Jung wrote in his essay The Stages of 
Life that “instinct cares nothing for consciousness.” 
Like my father, Jung believed that the problems we have 
are manifestations of our consciousness, and more 


XV 


STILL THE MIND 


particularly, the direct result of self-consciousness and 
our attempt to make things better. This is at the root of 
so many of the dilemmas we create in so many areas of 
our lives. 

Look at the issue of ecology, for example: Although 
we sincerely want to get along with nature and not 
destroy it, we still see ourselves as people living sepa- 
rately from the natural world. We are still not a part of 
it, due to a trick of perception that many people have 
called the ego. In reality the whole problem is a mental 
trap, and the only way out of the trap is to wake up and 
simply be in the real world. 

It is necessary therefore to experience the real world 
directly — but here we run into a problem because 
some people believe that the real world is the spiritual 
world and others believe it is the physical world. Both 
of these, however, are simply ideas, concepts. As Alan 
Watts and so many others keep pointing out, the real art 
of connecting with the universe is to stop thinking, at 
least from time to time. 

Practicing the art of meditation or contemplation can 
help us stop the perpetual chatter that goes on inside 
our skulls. As my father often said, “A person who 
thinks all the time has nothing to think about except 
thoughts, and lives in a world of illusions.” To the 
degree we can stop thinking and start experiencing, we 
are getting back to sanity, and to reality. In meditation 


xvi 


INTRODUCTION 


or contemplation we can occasionally discover a state of 
consciousness that is truly not self-conscious. But the 
only way to do this is by allowing all attempts to men- 
tally describe the world to cease. If we talk all the time, 
we won't hear what anyone else has to say, and if we 
think all the time, we will never experience the nature 
of our organic existence. 


In the following pages we will explore what lies at 
the heart of what may still to this day be considered a 
new way of thinking and living. As Alan Watts and many 
others have understood, there is nothing new in it: We 
are connecting — or reconnecting — with an energy as 
old as the universe, and with a form of wisdom at least 
as old as the human race, well understood by indige- 
nous peoples and brilliantly taught by Buddhists and 
Hindus. 

In Still the Mind, we are taken on an experiential 
joumey. By participating in the experiments suggested, 
you will find a way to get back in touch with the real- 
ity that exists beyond our thinking — the great, unified 
reality our thoughts are supposed to represent but can 
never capture or express. 

Alan Watts says it much more clearly than I do — 
and it has been a gratifying experience for me to spend 
so much time with the hundreds of hours of his words 
that were recorded on tape. He is a speaker and writer 


xvii 


STILL THE MIND 


whose voice has continued to have a great impact many 
years after his passing, and I believe it is well worth 
spending a few quiet hours from time to time with the 
book you're holding in your hands. You will see how he 
used words and thoughts to guide us beyond our words 
and thoughts, and you will come to understand that we 
are far greater, far more miraculous in our nature than 
our words can express. 


xviii 


PA R T I 


THE ESSENTIAL PROCESS 


OF THE WORLD 


Cc H A P TE R O N E 


WHO WE ARE 
IN THE UNIVERSE 


WAS TAUGHT when I was a little boy that it was good 
L be unselfish and loving, and I used to think that 
I should grow up to serve other people. But after a 
while I found out that unless one has something to 
give people, there is nothing one can do to help 
them. Just because I thought I ought to help, it didn’t 
mean that I had anything to give. 

Gradually, over the years, as I understood what it 
was that I had received of significance from the 
world, I realized that these things were never intend- 
ed as gifts to be given in the usual sense of the word. 
However much one enjoys the song of birds, they are 
not singing for the advancement of music, and the 
clouds are not floating across the sky to be painted 
by artists. 


21 


STILL THE MIND 


In the words of a Zen poem, 


The wild geese do not intend 
to cast their reflection 
The water has no mind 
to retain their image 


When a mountain stream flows out of a spring 
beside the road, and a thirsty traveler comes along and 
drinks deeply, the traveler is welcome. But the mountain 
stream is not waiting with the intention of refreshing 
thirsty travelers; it is just bubbling forth, and the travel- 
ers are always welcome to help themselves. So in exactly 
that sense I offer these ideas, and you are all welcome 
to help yourselves. 


THREE WISHES 


I am offering these words for your entertainment, 
and to entertain myself. I am not trying to improve you, 
and I really do not know how I would improve you. It 
would be imprudent for me to recommend any improve- 
ments, because one never knows how these things may 
turn out — and as they say, be very careful of what you 
wish for, because you may get it. 

One of the problems when people ask for miracles 
is that they never know what the miracle they ask for 
ultimately involves. That is why magicians and genies 


22 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


always grant three wishes, so that after the first two 
you can always use the third one to get back to where 
you began. 

What invariably happens is that with the first wish, 
things never quite work out as you expected. You may 
not realize what it may involve if you wish for a glass to 
be changed into gold, for instance. If we change the 
arrangement of the universe in such a way that glass 
becomes gold, you may suddenly find that your eyesight 
fails or you lose all your hair, because that might go 
with it. We do not understand all the interconnections 
between things, because in reality what we call “things” 
are not really separate from each other. The words and 
the ideas about them separate them from each other, but 
they are not separate. They all go with each other, inter- 
connected in one vast vibratory pattern, and if you 
change it at one point it will be changed at all sorts of 
other points, because every vibration penetrates through 
the entire pattern. 


Wuy Do You BELIEVE? 


You never really know what is going to happen, and 
therefore I would not presume to say that you ought to 
be different than the way you are. I am not a guru, in 
the sense of a spiritual teacher or an authority from 
which you may expect something more than what you 
have. When you confer spiritual authority on another 


23 


STILL THE MIND 


person, you must realize that you are allowing them to 
pick your pocket and sell you your own watch. 

How can you be certain with any great teacher (or 
scripture for that matter) that they know what they say 
they know? You may believe in a religion; that is a 
choice you have made. But how do you know, and why 
do you believe? 

If you believe in something simply because the 
Bible says it is true, for instance, you do so because you 
believe that the Bible has the authority to tell you it is 
true. You may well say that your fathers and mothers 
and all sorts of reliable people believed it, and therefore 
you have accepted it on their authority. If you are curi- 
ous, however, you will also ask, “How did they know it 
was true?” Did they, by their light and example, show 
that they were enormously improved because of their 
belief? 

If we look at human history with a clear eye, we see 
that over an appallingly long period of time people have 
not improved very much despite their religions and 
ideals. When you become a grandfather with five grand- 
children as Iam, you realize that you are just as stupid 
as your own grandfather was because you still look at 
things from your own limited position. And although my 
grandchildren may think that I am a wise and venerable 
man with a beard, I know that I am still a child, and I 
feel pretty much as I have always felt. So when you set 


24 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


someone up as an authority, never forget that the belief 
that you have in this authority is just your opinion. 


IT RESTS ON OUR AUTHORITY 


When De Tocqueville said that the people get the 
government they deserve, he was quite right. We allow 
the government, whether it be political or spiritual, to 
get away with it, and so it rests on our authority. This is 
true also of God. If you believe in God — that God 
is good, or that God is God at all — it is your opinion. 
And so God derives from you, and therefore this 
thought has some very peculiar implications with regard 
to the government of the universe. 

Awareness of the source of spiritual authority — 
understanding that it comes from us, from the people — 
may imply that there is some sort of democracy in the 
kingdom of Heaven. Of course it does not overthrow 
God, except in the sense of a certain kind of God, and 
most people do not realize that there can be many quite 
different ideas of God. 

God does not have to be a monarch, there can also 
be an organic god. There are also personal and imper- 
sonal gods, and there are gods that are neither personal 
nor impersonal. There are gods that exist and gods that 
do not exist, and there are gods that neither exist nor do 
not exist. But whatever you believe God is, it always 
goes back to you. 


25) 


STILL THE MIND 


WHAT DOES CONSCIOUSNESS REST UPON? 


When his disciples approached the great Hindu sage 
Sri Ramana Maharshi and asked, “Guruji, who was I in 
my last incarnation?” he would answer, “Who wants to 
know?” 

When they asked, “Guruji, how does one attain lib- 
eration?” he would reply, “Who is it that wants to attain?” 

Who is asking the question? It always gets back to 
you, where it all begins — and what is that? Of course 
we might think we know who we are — we have been 
told who we are, and we bought the story we were told. 

So you can’t really blame anybody else for what you 
think of yourself. You can’t go way back, in a sort of 
psychoanalytical way, and find the causation for what 
you are now. The answer is not in the behavior of your 
parents, or in your peer group, or whatever your situa- 
tion was when you were a child, because the universe 
doesn’t work that way. Instead it works the other way: 
It goes backward into the past from you, because you 
started it. And so when you blame somebody else for 
putting you into your current situation, it merely means 
that you have defined yourself incorrectly. Perhaps you 
have defined yourself as being limited to your conscious 
attention, and limited to your voluntary musculature. 
But is that all there is? Is that the real you? 

What does consciousness rest upon? Have you ever 
asked yourself that question? 


26 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


WHo ARE You? 


Consciousness does not illumine the lamp from 
which it shines, just as a flashlight doesn’t shine on the 
battery that powers it. When you make a decision, does 
that come from somewhere other than you? No, it comes 
from the depths of you, of which you are not really 
aware. You encompass far more than anything you 
know about in a conscious way. 

But we are so used to thinking of “I” as simply the 
center of our consciousness, and the center of our will, 
that we ignore (or are ignorant of) most of ourselves. 
When you think of a particular person, what do you 
think of? Suppose I say, “Think of your uncle,” or “Think 
of your mother.” What instantly comes to mind is their 
face, because we are most accustomed to seeing photo- 
graphs and images of faces. When we see images of the 
president, most often it is the president’s face, the head 
and shoulders, and only occasionally is the whole body 
seen. 

What do you think of when you think of a flower? 
In the same way, you think mostly of the blossom, 
sometimes of the stalk, and occasionally of the whole 
plant. But very rarely when we think of a flower do we 
think of the flower out in a field. We would say, “That’s 
more than the flower. The flower is not the field.” But is 
that so? Where would the flower be without the field? 


I can say in words, “The flower grows in the field.” 


27 


STILL THE MIND 


In words I can chop the field off and say, “The flower 


9 


grows,” and the phrase will still make sense. However, 
it will not make sense in nature. If I take the field away 
from the flower, the flower cannot grow. The flower is 
connected with the field in a very deep way, and so in 
the same way a person is not just their head. The head 
has to go with the body, and the body has to go with a 
social and natural environment — but we never think of 
in that way. We know it is all there, but it doesn’t come 
to mind automatically. 

So who are you? And who decides on the limits of 
an organism? Who are you that gives spiritual authority 
to somebody else, and then pretends, “Of course it does 
not come from me. I bow down because I know that 
person really knows.”? 

Now the Buddhists have a very funny trick when it 
comes to bowing, because Buddhists do not have the 
idea of a supernatural authority that watches over them. 
So why, then, do they bow when they pay respect to 
a Buddha? Why do they bow when they meet you, and 
greet you so reverently? Bowing is paradoxically the act 
of a king, because it confers authority. The one who 
bows sets the revered image on its pedestal, and if there 
were no one to bow, there would be no image on the 
pedestal. 

You put it there, but again you would ask, “How 
could it be so that what puts the authority up there is 


23 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


just poor little me, who is neurotic, or sinful, and doesn’t 
really even understand what’s going on?” But funda- 
mentally the you that does this is the greater you, which 
is not just the activity of consciousness but the whole 
activity that expresses itself as you sit here and read this 
page. And what is it that expresses itself as you read? 
And what am I that is called Alan Watts and is offering 
these ideas? 

I stated in the beginning that I am doing all this for 
entertainment, and I meant it. But who is it that is doing 
this for entertainment? If I say, “Alan Watts is a big act,” 
who is it that puts on this act? 

To try to trace the answer down, we might go to an 
astrologer and ask, “Who puts on the act?” “Well,” he 
would say, “Where were you born, and at what time?” 
And he would go and look up the positions of the stars 
and the planets, and then he would draw a picture of 
my character, which just happens to be a very crude pic- 
ture of the universe. 

“There you are,” he would say. “But I see you’ve 
drawn a picture of the universe,” I would reply. That may 
be a surprise to him, because he probably thinks of the 
influences of the stars and of the planets as something 
that affects me, and that implies a certain separation 
between the bodies that cast the influences and the pup- 
pet that is influenced. But does the root of a flower influ- 
ence the flower as something fundamentally different 


29 


STILL THE MIND 


from it? No, surely the root and the flower are one 
process, and like your head and your feet it all goes 
together. In that sense then, the universe, and what you 
or I do, all goes together, and so that picture of the uni- 
verse is really a picture of you. 

We may not recognize ourselves because we think 
of ourselves as a chopped-off piece surrounded by our 
skin, and therefore we see ourselves in a rather impov- 
erished way. And this form of perception is almost auto- 
matic. We think of ourselves as separate beings who 
stand alone and move through all sorts of different 
places but are cut off from the environment. 

As a result we have an underlying feeling of alien- 
ation, of not really belonging in this universe, and we 
feel that we are being confronted by something that 
does not give a damn about us. It was here long before 
us, and will be here long after we are gone. We come 
into this world for a brief span as a little flash of con- 
sciousness between two eternal darknesses. Of course 
during our lives all sorts of other things go on, but nev- 
ertheless the feeling that haunts almost everybody is that 
this “I” is an orphan, here on a visit, and we don’t feel 
that we really belong here. 

In the same way, what do you feel when you look 
out at those galaxies? If you go out into a desert or up 
in the mountains where the sky is clear, you see this 
colossal affair that you are involved in. It makes a lot of 


30 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


people feel very small, but it shouldn’t. It should make 
you feel as big as it is, because it is all inseparably con- 
nected with what you call you. 

This tremendous whirling of energy is exactly one 
and the same energy that is looking out of your eyes, 
that is running along inside your brain, that is breathing, 
and that makes noises when you talk. The whole energy 
of the universe is coming at you and through you, and 
you are that energy. 


THE NATURE OF ENERGY 


“Well,” we say, “but surely we die, and we disap- 
pear, we turn into dust, and this will go on long after I 
am gone.” The whole nature of energy, however, is that 
it is a vibration, and a vibration is a wave, and a wave 
has a crest and a trough. It is like a pulse, it goes on and 
it goes off, and everything goes on and off. 

Things like light go on and off so quickly that you 
can’t see the off, because by definition on is always a lit- 
tle bit more noticeable than off. It is positive, whereas 
off is negative. 

The outside of things is vibration, but because it goes 
very fast we don’t quite sense it, and therefore it seems 
constant or solid, like the blades of an electric fan. This 
is true of light and also true of sound, but when you 
hear a very deep sound it vibrates noticeably. You can 


hear the texture in it; you can hear the vibrations 


31 


STILL THE MIND 


going on and off. When you hear a great pipe organ, 
the whole building shudders with these vibrations. We 
barely notice most of the pulses, however, including 
the slower pulses created by the turning of the earth, 
the cycles of the tides, or the coming and going of the 
equinoxes. These are very slow vibrations, but they 
always go on, and then off. 

We are aware of these changes only because of the 
contrast within them. Of course you would not know 
something was on if it did not occasionally go off, and 
you would not know it was off if it did not sometimes 
go on. So I have often asked the question “How would 
you know you are alive unless you had once been 
dead?” 


WHERE WOULD You BE WITHOUT NOTHING? 


Where were you before you were born? 

Where will you be when you die? 

We may think we will become nothing, but what 
we don’t realize is that nothing, in its own way, is as 
important as something. Where would you be without 
nothing? What is the background to being if it is not 
nonbeing? 

You have to have nothing to have something. It is so 
simple, but nobody sees it because it is fundamental to 
Western philosophy that out of nothing comes nothing. 
But how can that be? According to our logic, in order for 


32 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


something, or someone, to come out of nothing, there 
must be some kind of hidden structure inside nothing. It 
must contain some sort of inner workings out of which 
something comes. But this is not the case at all. The 
whole point is that there is no concealed structure, and it 
is just because it is honest-to-goodness plain nothing that 
something comes out of it. That is elementary logic, but 
no one sees it because everybody is afraid of nothing. 

People think, “Well, if it’s nothing, it will never be 
something again, because that’s going to be the end.” 
The theologians get this mixed up too, and even some- 
one like Saint Thomas Aquinas believed that out of noth- 
ing comes nothing, and then he said, “God created the 
world out of nothing.” He made a mistake because he 
tried to identify God exclusively with being — and of 
course you cannot have being without nonbeing. 

The Hindus understand this, as well as the Buddhists, 
who inherited their philosophy and mythology. They say 
God is neither being nor nonbeing; it is what they have 
in common. Yet nobody can say what that is, and still 
you know perfectly well that being and nonbeing go 
together, like an inside and an outside, a front and a 
back, a top and a bottom. Being and nonbeing are polar- 
ities, like the North and South Poles. What is in between? 

Nobody really knows, because you can only know 
what you can compare with something else. You can 


know something only because you can compare it with 


33 


STILL THE MIND 


nothing, and vice versa, but nobody knows what to 
compare with that which is common to both something 
and nothing. 

It is for that same sort of reason that you cannot see 
for yourself the color of consciousness. What’s the color 
of eyesight? We know all of the colors because they are 
different from each other. We see different colors in a 
mirror, but what is the color of the mirror? 

We may say, “Silver” — but it isn’t really. Although 
a mirror will reflect a silver spoon as something differ- 
ent from something else, the mirror is a noncolor. We 
can’t compare it with any other color, and so it is trans- 
parent to our consciousness. And like your conscious- 
ness, and like space, it is a big nothing. 

Most people treat space and consciousness as if they 
were not there, yet suppose there wasn’t any space, 
only solid. There would be no outside the solid, and no 
one would know if it was round or square because there 
would be nothing to compare it to, and it would be all 
there would be. 

It would appear rather dense, but of course most of 
what we call something is largely nothing when you get 
down to atoms. Whatever it is they are really made of is 
vast distances apart, and when we get to the inner struc- 
ture of atoms, we find precious little there. It is a lot of 
nothing — and this nothing turns out to be very power- 
ful stuff. 


34 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


EVERYTHING GOES AROUND 


In order to have room to move around, you have to 
have a void to move around in, and moving around is 
energy, which is definitely something. So that is the sort 
of thing we are in, and that is the sort of thing we are. 
We are not just i it, we are it, and it vibrates, it oscil- 
lates, and it goes around. 

The cycles are not just simply wave motions or 
undulations, they are also cycles of a circular kind. 
Everything goes around, just as when we dance we go 
around — and it is tremendously important to get hold 
of this principle of going around. We are in a phase of 
the life of mankind when we seem to have forgotten 
that cyclic quality; instead of going around we all think 
we are going somewhere, and that implies there is 
somewhere else to go. But as I wander along, I can’t 


help but wonder where that other place would be. 


HIGHER ORDERS OF BEING 


In the same way, when we think of evolution, we 
think of a scale and of a hierarchy of different sorts of 
beings. We might think, for example, that above us there 
are angels, and then gods, and then Buddhas with 
attending bodhisattvas going up to we know not what 
heights of amazing human development. And then we 
think that below us are the other mammals, perhaps 


35 


STILL THE MIND 


demons, insects, bacteria, plants, rocks, down, down to 
we know not what depths. 

So we congratulate ourselves and say, “How great it 
is to be human and not to be a cat, not to be a rose, and 
not to be a fish.” And we think how much better it will 
be when we can get to be angels. We human beings are 
very conceited, and we think we can get up there and 
be gods or Buddhas. 

But how do you know that you are a higher order 
of being than a potato? What do you really know about 
potatoes anyway? You probably have never studied 
potatoes beyond knowing how to cook and eat them. 
That’s probably about it. But have you ever thought 
about how a potato feels? 

“Well,” you say, “it doesn’t feel, it’s only a potato, it 
has nothing to feel with.” But wait a minute. When you 
put a lie detector on a potato — some kind of skin 
response machine — it certainly registers, and its readings 
change when you do certain things. If you prick the po- 
tato, or shout at it, it will flinch. As a matter of fact, if you 
learn how to turn on your alpha waves and you sit beside 
a plant, you will find that it will pick up those alpha 
waves. So maybe plants are not so stupid after all. 

“Well,” we might say, “how can it be? It has no civ- 
ilization. It has no house. It has no automobiles. It has 
no pianos, no art galleries, and no religion.” 


But the potato might say, “I don’t need them. It’s 


36 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


you poor uncivilized human beings who have to have all 
this crap around you to tell you who you are and what 
it’s all about. You are messy and inefficient, and you are 
cluttering up the planet with your culture. But I, the 
potato, have it all built into me.” 

“Well,” we might say, “that’s impossible, because 
you are stuck in one place all the time. How can you 
know anything about the world?” 

But the potato doesn’t need to go running around 
because its sensitivity extends all over the place. And so 
it might say, “I want to introduce you to a few things. 
There is my neighbor over here, the thistle. Have you 
ever seen how my thistle neighbor gets around? It has 
tiny seeds with down sticking out all over them, and 
when the wind comes these seeds float off into the air. 
And my neighbor the maple tree has little helicopters it 
sends off, and they spin in the air and fly away. And 
then I have a friend the apple tree, and it has fruit that 
is so delicious that the birds like it. They eat the apple 
and swallow the seeds, then they fly away and when 
they drop the seed it is sown.” 

These are incredible devices. Others have burrs that 
stick in the hides of deer, and they carry these seeds 
around. “This is one of the ways we get around and 
we spread our people so that we aren’t all crowded 
together and don’t strangle ourselves.” 


The potato would go on to explain, “But this is only 


37 


STILL THE MIND 


the beginning of the extraordinary things that we do. We 
have vibrations going on inside our fibers that are quite 
as good as anything invented by your Bach and Mozart. 
We enjoy this, and although you may think we are not 
doing anything because we just sit here all the time, we 
are vibrating, and we are in ecstasy. We are humming to 
the great hum that is going on everywhere.” 

Your plants may be in such an advanced state of con- 
sciousness that, unknown to you, angels are growing in 
a flowerpot at your door. Unbeknownst to you they may 
have a great deal to do with the way you think. 

Consider also that the humble fly may be extremely 
intelligent too. With all those eyes he sees a complex rela- 
tionship of perspectives, and with the ability to walk 
upside down on the ceiling he may have a certain per- 
spective that is far beyond ours. Whatever do flies do 
when they buzz? What is it all about? We don’t know, 
because we don’t even how know to begin to study them. 

It took many years to find out that bees communi- 
cate with each other by dancing, and that was such a 
shock that one entomologist at UCLA said, “I have the 
most passionate reluctance to accept this evidence.” 

It is a shock to find out that dolphins, for example, 
may be more intelligent than people, and that so-called 
killer whales are a very intelligent kind of dolphin. Look 
at those creatures. They are mammals, and it is said — 


although we are not sure if this is true — that they once 


38 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


lived on the land. Apparently they decided that being on 
the land is a pretty stupid way for a mammal to live, and 
they said, “Let’s go skin diving.” 

They said, “You really don’t have to do much for a 
living, and you can dance and play.” And so dolphins 
spend most of their time simply fooling around — and 
they fool around in very complicated ways. If we were 
dolphins, we would call this art. 

When we practice any art, we are in a way just fool- 
ing around. We mix a lot of paint and make beautiful 
patterns on flat surfaces or on textured surfaces. We put 
together all kinds of boxes with pluckable wires, little 
tubes that we can blow our breath through, and enor- 
mous tubes that we blow breath through mechanically. 
We stretch great taut skins that we bang with our fists or 
with sticks, and do all kinds of other things. 

When a symphony orchestra gets up on a stage, it is 
essentially just a lot of baboons blowing through holes, 
and yet this is something very important. There is a 
hush, the concertmaster comes in, and everybody 
applauds and sits down. The concertmaster then sum- 
mons the orchestra into being, and people in their tiaras 
and pearls and ties sit back because this is culture and 
this is very serious. The whole atmosphere of the con- 
cert hall is very proper, like a church. 

It is a little different when a rock band takes over, 
and there is a light show and everything is just blowing. 


39 


STILL THE MIND 


This is authentic music, and it is very important music. 
Perhaps this is the continuation of the great Western tra- 
dition. The concert hall is good for classical music, but 
as the new artists take over with their rather sophisti- 
cated new music, musicians like the Beatles and the 
Grateful Dead continue the tradition, but it is done in a 
different spirit. That music is a celebration, and there is 
nothing sedate about it. It’s music to groove with, to be 
right there with, because you are not pretending that 
you are doing something important in a solemn sense. 
You are doing something important because you are 
right in the belly of things, and you’re moving with it. 

All of the vegetables understand this, and so from 
their point of view they are very highly evolved beings. 
Perhaps they don’t consider us inferior beings, and just 
regard us as something different, but we are very unfair 
to vegetables. When at last a human being approaches 
the end of life and lapses into a coma, we say, “Poor old 
so-and-so, he’s just a vegetable.” Or when somebody is 
lazy, we say, “They’re just vegetating.” 

Now that shows a lack of compassion toward veg- 
etables. The word “compassion” means to feel with, or 
to have passion with. If you have compassion for veg- 
etables, or for flies, or mushrooms, or viruses, what it 
means is that you have put yourself in their position. 
When you begin to really empathize, you discover that 
they think of themselves as people, and they have just 


40 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


as much right to think that they are civilized and cul- 
tured as you and I do. 

So what does that do to our perception of an 
ordered universe? Think about it for a moment in human 
terms. For one thing, most of the people we call primi- 
tive are far less violent and less diabolical than we are 
as a society. They live more peaceable lives, and even 
though the tools they use are not as developed or com- 
plex as ours, these are very dignified, civilized people. 
They certainly are not savage. 

Many primitive peoples look at us with grave con- 
cern. They don’t regard us as civilized at all. Instead 
they view us as a rather serious menace to the planet, 
because we are out of touch with the ecology of nature, 
and tend on the whole to be extraordinarily miserable. 
Some of the richest places I know of are full of wealthy 
people who are really amazingly miserable because, 
despite their tremendous resources, they are always 
worrying about their health, their taxes, politics, or los- 
ing their money. You can always worry about something 
if you are the worrying type, and it doesn’t matter how 


rich you are or how poor you are. 


A PLACE CALLED You 


As you carefully observe the cycles of life, a very 
strange kind of relativity begins to take root in your 


consciousness. Everywhere on a sphere is the same 


41 


STILL THE MIND 


place, because there is as much east of you as there is 
west of you, and by the same logic, any point on the 
sutface of the sphere is the center of the circle. 
Furthermore, if we live in a curved space-time continu- 
um, any planet can be regarded as the center of the 
whole universe, and therefore any person on a planet 
stands in the situation of God — as that circle whose 
center is everywhere and whose circumference is 
nowhere. So when you want to become something more 
than you are, different from what you are, or higher 
than where you think you are, all that means is that you 
haven’t discovered where you are, and you are under 
the illusion that there is somewhere else that you ought 
to be besides here. 

What we are engaging in here is a journey to the place 
where we are, and I would like to describe to you some 
of the peculiarities of this journey. It is a sort of Alice in 
Wonderland story, because it is full of paradoxes. 

If I say, “We are going on a journey to where we are, 
a journey to the center of the universe and to the mid- 
dle of space and time, and it’s a place called you,” peo- 
ple will invariably begin to pass judgment about one’s 
progress along the way. They will say things like, “I 
think this person is more aware than somebody else. 
He’s more there than so-and-so is.” 

Then we begin to think about the stages one goes 
through in getting to be more where they are than they 
were before. You find this particularly in sophisticated 


42 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


circles, where people are concerned with spiritual and 
psychological development, and with religion. Some 
very curious games are played, and many of them are 
forms of spiritual one-upmanship. People become con- 
cerned with being more humble than other people. 


PASSING JUDGMENTS 


Suppose we see somebody who has a reputation, 
either deserved or undeserved, for being “spiritually 
evolved.” That is the sort of phrase that is usually used. 
But if they get influenza and feel very sick, people shake 
their heads and say, “If so-and-so were really spiritual, 
they wouldn’t be affected by sickness.” 

We have a funny notion in our heads that truly spir- 
itual people are made of cast iron, that they are not sen- 
sitive, so that if you bang them about it won’t affect 
them. But as the great Sixth Patriarch of China pointed 
out, you must learn to distinguish between a living 
Buddha and a stone Buddha, because if a buddha was 
simply one who was not affected by anything, then 
lumps of wood and pieces of stone would be Buddhas. 
And perhaps they are in their own way, but that wasn’t 
the point he was making. His point was that if you think 
that the greatest ideal in life is to be invulnerable, then 
you are on your way to becoming geological rather than 
spiritual. 


This kind of spiritual geology is very prevalent if you 


43 


STILL THE MIND 


know spiritual people as well as I do. I perpetually hear 
tales of people insisting that “my guru’s better than 
yours.” This goes on insufferably, whether it is my min- 
ister, my church, my society, or my own organization. I 
have heard all the reasons why, and I have heard peo- 
ple putting down other teachers and gurus, saying how 
dreadful it is that such and such a Zen master made 
them do so-and-so. Or we hear of the yogi who is a 
drunk, or sleeps with his students, or gambles, or drives 
cars too fast. 

A great many spiritual people in this country are 
actually crypto-Protestants and still believe strongly in 
the Protestant ethic. Therefore they pass all of these 
judgments, despite the fact that the founder of the 
Christian religion said, “Judge not that you be not 
judged.” 


ALL THE DIFFERENT PERFORMANCES 
OF THE UNIVERSE 


If you look at all the religions and all the different 
kinds of practices that people are doing in the same way 
that you look at different kinds of vegetables and differ- 
ent kinds of flowers and insects and butterflies, you will 
see that while yogis are assuming one perspective and 
Baptists are assuming another, what they are all really 
doing is a different kind of dance — and you can accept 
this, and look at it with absolute amazement, and say, 


44 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


“Wow, look at all these different performances this uni- 
verse is doing.” 

If you do this, you tend to stop griping and arguing 
about which one is the right one. Of course, you may not 
accept all of the performances entirely, you may not 
agree with their points of view. I must admit that I have 
some prejudices. I don’t like the flavor of some Bible Belt 
religions, because I find them exceedingly depressing. I 
also don’t like boiled onions; they’re distasteful as well. 

On the other hand, I can worship with the Roman 
Catholics, and the Episcopalians, and Theosophists, and 
Hindus, and Muslims, and feel perfectly at ease because I 
find that they are all doing the same thing in different and 
fascinating ways. Sometimes I draw the line, but I know 
when I do that it is nothing more than a personal preju- 
dice, and I am entitled to some because I am human. 

After all, to be human you have to have within you 
a touch of rascality. When God created Adam, he put in 
him just a touch of the wayward spirit, in the same way 
that one adds a little salt to a stew. If this slight oddity, 
this bit of unpredictability, had not been there, nothing 
would ever have happened, because Adam would never 
have tasted the apple. 


A PINCH OF RASCALITY 


Once, Carl Jung felt that he had met a man with no 
human failings at all, and he was terribly disturbed, 


45 


STILL THE MIND 


because it made him feel guilty. He thought that he 
should probably take a closer look at himself. Then a 
day or two later Jung met the man’s wife, and he ceased 
to worry about it. It wasn’t because she had said, “You 
should know my husband is very difficult to live with.” 
That wasn’t the story at all. Instead, the wife embodied 
all the things that were repressed in her husband, 
because when you live together that intimately you 
begin to share your psychic life. So if one becomes too 
much of a light, their partner may grow compensatory 
and become a shadow, and vice versa. So there has to 
be the element of rascality — but not too much, just a 
pinch of it. 

When I come across somebody who does not 
appear to have it, especially so-called spiritual people 
who are very pure and sincere, I always suspect they are 
unconscious of human nature. There is something about 
these solemn purists that makes me feel uncomfortable, 


because I like people I can let my hair down with. 


THE HIERARCHY OF LIFE 


You may find this is disconcerting, however, 
because then you begin to wonder, “Is there no perfect 
human being? Isn’t there somebody up there, a great 
being who we can all look up to and respect, or are 
saints and saviors pretty much like anyone else?” 


When you look closely at the idea of the hierarchy 


46 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


of life, you realize that even someone as remarkable as 
Jesus Christ — who from a Buddhist point of view would 
be considered a great bodhisattva — can emerge at any 
level. According to the Buddhist idea of reincarnation, 
we have all occupied every position in the hierarchy, or 
on the Wheel of Becoming, as the Buddhists call it, since 
the image of time they use is a wheel. In this view, by 
moving around the wheel, you eventually realize that 
every position to which you can shift is the same posi- 
tion you were always in. While you are shifting you may 
feel there is a change going on, but once you have set- 
tled into your new position, it feels like any other 
settled position always felt. From the inside we know 
what it feels like to have a settled position because from 
time to time we can change — but, as the French say, 
the more it changes, the more it remains the same. 

We who live in a fidgety culture are apt to feel that 
this is an awfully boring philosophy, and that we are not 
going to get anywhere because there is no real progress. 
But, on the other hand, suppose there is a possibility of 
real advancement and improvement. Use your imagina- 
tion to the best of your ability, and figure out exactly, 
and in detail, where you would rather be, and who you 
would rather be than who you are. 

If you work on this for a while, somebody who is 
ingenious enough will always be able to point out to 
you that you have left something out, and that there is 


47 


STILL THE MIND 


something else you could improve upon. You can go on 
and on, and as you go about this imaginative creation of 
the perfect life you will eventually realize that what you 
are really doing is extending power. 

The process is very much like the people who are 
now working on gene manipulation so that man can 
direct the future of evolution and we can breed intel- 
lectual Einsteins, physical Elizabeth Taylors, and moral 
Sister Teresas. All of these people had extraordinary 
direction as human beings by virtue of their integrity 
and ingenuity, and so some people may look at this idea 
and think it would be just great. But look how we have 
extended our power now. We may think it would be 
good to be in charge of evolution, but along comes the 
old problem of the three wishes again. How do we 
know which way is really better? 

When human beings attempt to take charge of evo- 
lution, they do so using their minds and a kind of con- 
sciousness that scans the world and looks at everything 
serially — but the problem is that the world itself is not 
serial. The world is what we call multidimensional, 
which is to say that everything is happening all together 
everywhere at once, and going along much too fast for 
us to take adequate cognizance merely through a scan- 
ning procedure. Because scanning is confined to linear 
limits, it always leaves things out, and these things may 
be very important. 


48 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


That is why, as I pointed out before, turning the 
glass into gold may mean that your eyesight will fail or 
your hair will fall out. When we bring about change 
with our quite limited vision, and when we change peo- 
ple by altering their genes, we certainly will have a new 
situation, but it will not necessarily be any better, 
because we are unable to see in advance the fullness of 
the role that every individual will play. 

In terms of projecting power, you will see that the 
geneticists’ power is limited because they have a limit- 
ed view. If we decide to give them all the computers 
they need to add it all up so that they will have a com- 
plete view of life, we are then placing ourselves in a 
position to control life on the planet. This is to be the 
final creation, and we are trying to carefully arrange it 
with our seemingly vast intellect and omnipotent con- 
sciousness. We are to be the master magicians; we are 
to have complete control over ourselves, and nothing is 
to happen that is not in accordance with our will. 

Yet suppose we do all this, and suppose we have 
even managed to will our will so that it is always a good 
will. I am not quite sure how we would know it was a 
good will unless there was a possibility for bad will, but 
suppose we have managed. Ultimately, you must ask, 
“Do I want to be in that kind of situation?” In other 
words, think of where those directions we speak of as 
progressive are really going, and extrapolate on them. 


49 


STILL THE MIND 


Perhaps you will say, “Of course I wouldn’t do that, 
because I realize I’m never going to get there.” But 
even so, why are you even heading in that direction? 
Are you sure it’s a better direction to go in? After all, we 
kill more people with cars than we do with wars, and 
you have to think about things like that. I am not argu- 
ing that we should not have technological develop- 
ments, but perhaps it is shortsighted to conclude auto- 
matically that they are improvements. They may not be 
improvements at all in the long run — and so it is very 
important to consider whether you want to control the 
direction in which you are heading. 


FULL OF SURPRISES 


Inwardly, do you really and truly want to have 
power over everything that occurs within the sphere of 
your consciousness? Perhaps, speaking as a man, I 
would like to cast a spell over a woman so that she 
would become exactly as beautiful as I could conceive 
beauty to be, and so that every inflection of her voice 
and gesture would obey me like a violin under the hand 
of a perfect master. I would entirely direct her actions, 
and although in her every action she would be my 
dream, I would quickly begin to worry about this 
Frankenstein woman. I would think that perhaps there 
was nobody home, and that all I had done was to cre- 
ate a machine. When I think about it, what I really want 


50 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


is for her to do something that I don’t expect. 

That is one of the reasons why it is so nice when we 
have an occasion to give gifts. We love surprises, 
because a surprise means there was someone else there, 
someone who made it fun by doing something that we 
could not have predicted. 

I’ve heard people who think that in the future, due 
to our psychic development, we are all going to be able 
to read each other’s minds. Through direct transference 
from one mind to another we will have access to every- 
body’s thoughts, and there will be no privacy left. Of 
course, since everybody will be completely transparent 
to everyone else, we won't be able to surprise each 
other. Personally I am not looking forward to that kind 
of world, because I am afraid it will be quite devoid of 
spontaneity. We may lose that little element we call 
vitality. 

Now this may sound as if I am saying the best sort 
of thing is not a universe where we realize that there is 
a profound underlying unity through all things, but 
rather a universe that is pluralistic, that is not one at all. 
Certainly it may be said that one of the best parts of life 
is having lots of separate things all surprising each other, 
but I see still a different scheme. 

The world I see is what we might call unity in diver- 
sity. What we call self and what we call other are like 
something and nothing. They are fundamental polarities, 


51 


STILL THE MIND 


which — just because they contrast with each other — 
have something in common. We cannot say what it is, 
though, and therefore our world will always be full of 
surprises. 


52 


C H A PT ER T W O 


MEET YOUR 
REAL SELF 


W: HAVE STARTED out on ajoumey together to the 
place where we are. It’s good to reflect, at 
some point along the way, on the futility of a certain 
kind of power game we play with our energy. 


THE FUTILITY OF POWER GAMES 


There are two kinds of games — the game you 
play to win and the game you play to play. There is 
a difference between the two, in the same sense as 
there isa difference between traveling to get some- 
where and traveling just to travel, which we might 
call wandering. 

There is a difference between motion with the 
objective of changing place and motion with the 


53 


STILL THE MIND 


objective of dancing. All those forms of energy that are 
moving to dance, or traveling to wander, are joyous 
manifestations of energy. On the other hand, all those 
forms of energy that have us moving to get somewhere 
tend to become frantic, and have a quality of urgency 
that moves us faster and faster until we simply can’t go 
fast enough to accomplish the object. Even when it 
comes to practicing meditation, people keep asking 
about the fastest way, and they want to know how long 
it is going to take. 

Nishkarma means action or doing (karma) without 
attachment, especially without attachment to the results 
of action. Nishkarma is the whole point and message of 
the Bhagavad Gita, or “Song of the Lord,” which consists 
of the instructions of the chanioteer Krishna to the warrior 
Ayuna about his conduct on the field of battle. With this 
principle we can view not only our ordinary activities of 
everyday life, but also our religious activity in an entirely 
new way — not as something done to achieve a result. 


Wuy Do It? 


Of course, people then ask, “Why do it?’ 

People are always asking why, but one must realize 
that why is a barren question. You expect an answer 
addressed in terms of motivation: you want to know the 
cause of what somebody is doing, and the goal it leads 
to. If you are acting without a goal in mind, however, 


54 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


you can’t say why you're doing it, except to do it. 

Yet people are still bothered, and ask, “Why do it 
then?’ — as if to say, “Why use energy at all? Why not 
just be still?’ But of course that’s the same as asking, 
“Why does the universe exist?’ Why, in other words, is 
there motion? 

The answer to that is because there is stillness. And 
why is there stillness? Because there is motion. In this 
way you reach an end to the question why, because it 
just goes around in circles. 

Another way to reach an end to the question why is 
to go back into the past, because when you do you find 
explanations behind explanations, so that, in the words 
of a favorite semanticists’ verse: 


Big explanations have little explanations 
upon their backs to bite them, 
and little explanations have lesser explanations, 
and so on infinitum. 


In other words, you can never get there. 

What happens, in fact, when we search the past to 
try to understand why we are doing what we are doing? 
What happens is that the track fades away. Look back as 
far as you may, but you will never find the beginning 
because the track gives out, just as the wake of a ship 
vanishes, or the contrail of a plane melts into the air. 


55 


STILL THE MIND 


The past, which we considered to be the push-off point, 
or the cause, is gone. 

The real reason the past doesn’t work as an expla- 
nation, however, is of course very simple: the push-off, 
the cause, never was in the past, it has always been in 
the present. It is perfectly obvious that if there was a 
time when the universe came into being, when it did do 
so, it was now. And that now is still here, and it is still 
beginning, right at this moment. So what we call the 
past is simply the traces, the fade-outs trailing away 
from the present. 

So there is little point in asking why you are here, 
because unless you think you are here to resolve some 
past business — in which case you have been motivated 
as if you were a billiard ball hit by a cue — the issue is 
irrelevant. 

Everybody is always talking about motivation and 
asking why, “Why do it?’ But you can always say, “Why 
not?” And although that sounds a little childish by way 
of an answer, there is no why, and in a way that is rather 
splendid. 

We tend to think that things are meaningless and 
dreadful if we can’t explain why they happen. A police- 
man who pulls over a motorist who wasn’t going fast 
enough asks, “Where are you going?” “Nowhere spe- 
cial,” comes the answer. This irritates the policeman 
because he thinks you must be on the road for some 


56 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


reason, and that you ought to be going somewhere. If 
you are not, you are suspect because you're probably 
crazy or up to no good. 


DESIRES AND DRIVES 


Why do you do anything? Is it because of desire? 

When people refer to their basic desires, they call 
them instincts, which is simply a way to label desires as 
drives. We all feel driven — and yet you don't realize 
that the energy of a drive is you. When you habitually 
abstract yourself from what you are experiencing as the 
experiencer or the knower of the experience, you come 
to feel like a puppet being driven by your emotions, or 
by your appetites or desires, whatever they are. But in 
fact they do not drive you, for there is no you to be driv- 
en by them. They are you. 

And so this notion that leads to saying or thinking, 
“Excuse me, I am driven,” or “Excuse me, I have to eat, 
I have to work, I have sexual desires” — all this is rub- 
bish. I will not apologize for what is called “my hunger.” 
Iam very happy to be hungry, and to eat. So instead of 
saying, “Excuse me, but I must eat,” I eat with pleasure. 
Look at what a degradation of ourselves that attitude 
carries with it, and it all comes from this feeling of being 
pushed or driven by something we believe is greater 
than we are. 


57 


STILL THE MIND 


THE Vast WorRKINGS UNDERNEATH 


The reason we feel it is greater than ourselves is 
because we have a conception of ourselves as nothing 
more than the superficial scanning mechanism called 
“consciousness.” Of course, if that is all you are, natural- 
ly you feel driven, because you are disconnecting your- 
self from the vast workings that lie behind consciousness. 

We disown the part of ourselves that we call instinc- 
tual, animal, or primitive. We think instead that as human 
beings we are the garnishing on top of the evolutionary 
pile. We feel we are much more evolved, not realizing 
that everything we have by way of consciousness and 
reason grows out of the primal energy that lies under- 
neath it. 

Therefore, if reason grows out of the primal energy 
that we are, then it means that the primal energy is at 
least reasonable, whatever else it may be. You can tell 
the tree by its fruits — for “by their fruits you shall know 
them” — and so it is that figs do not grow on thistles, or 
grapes on thorns, and a stupid universe does not create 
people. People are a manifestation of the potentiality in 
the energy of the universe, and if we are intelligent, then 
that which we express is also intelligent. By logical 
extension, that in which we express it is our central self. 
The world is not something external; it is what is most 
fundamentally you. 

As long as we think we are motivated by something 


58 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


external, however, and therefore feel insufficient, as 
long as we have that conception of ourselves, we are 
playing to win, because what we want is to win more, 
and become more. But as I pointed out, our conception 
or image of ourselves is only a caricature, and as such 
is abstract and completely inadequate. It feels as if we’re 
insufficient in some way. 

If you ask, “What did you do yesterday?’ the aver- 
age person will consult memory and give you a very 
attenuated, strung-out chronicle of events, having 
reduced yesterday’s experience to a thin line of words. 
What you did yesterday becomes what you noticed yes- 
terday, and what you noticed yesterday was a very tiny 
part of what happened. It was only as much as you 
could record in some memory code, in words or in brief 
impressions. 

If you identify yourself with that skinny little stream 
of life, itis no wonder that you feel unsatisfied, because 
you ate the fish bones instead of the fish. And since we 
think that is what is happening all the time, and that life 
is only this skinny little thing, we feel hungry for expe- 
rience, for thrills, and for ecstasy. 

We say, “There must be more coming,” and we need 
more and more future, because the past is gone, and it 
was a scraggly past anyway. We have no present, 
because life looks like an hourglass: It has a big future 
and a big past, but only a tiny little neck of a present 


59 


STILL THE MIND 


that everything is squeezed through. 

In Buddhist symbology the idea behind the hour- 
glass is represented as a kind of being called a preta. A 
preta is thought of as a hungry spirit, and these crea- 
tures are represented as having enormous bellies but 
mouths and throats only about the diameter of a needle, 
so they can never get enough. That tiny mouth and 
immense belly represents the neck of the hourglass, 
and the feeling of having no present. 

In fact, our present is enormously rich, and you will 
realize this if you understand that there is no time 
except present time. There is only now; there never was 
any time but now, and there never will be any time but 
now. It is all now. There is no hurry to gobble life 
down, and if you do you won't be able to digest it. We 
can go on much longer than we suppose without eating, 
so it’s all right to just sit and be in the present. 

But if you identify with the linear conception of 
yourself, with your story, and with the abstract ego, you 
feel inadequate, and therefore it becomes necessary to 
try to make up for that inadequacy by using energy 
to attain more in all sorts of ways. 


WANTING More CONTROL 


We want more control over what happens, and this 
leads us through a progression of steps. We start of 
course by attempting to acquire power in a physical 


60 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


way, through the possession of material wealth, histon- 
cally of cattle, of slaves, of land, of crops. Then to retain 
all that and keep command over people’s minds, we 
construct societies to dole out this material wealth. 

But as everybody who has ever had this kind of 
wealth knows, it doesn’t stop the feeling of inner frus- 
tration. We notice that when wealth has been in a fam- 
ily for a few generations, the descendants of the original 
robber baron become spiritual, and they go into the arts 
and into religion because they still feel unsatisfied. Of 
course, many people who have never been through the 
phase of having material wealth have nontheless under- 
stood that it is a blind alley, and gone into the arts or 
religion right away. 


THE FIRST PHASE OF RELIGION: SIMPLE MAGIC 


Religion in its first phase, however, is what we call 
“simple magic” and is typified by the attempt to control 
the world not by the violence of arms and muscular 
strength, but by hypnotizing it and enchanting it. 
Women sometimes control men by enchanting them, 
and men try to control women by a similar process — 
and throughout history, religion has been an attempt to 
enchant the universe, to enchant the gods by offering 
sacrifices and through religious dances and rituals. Thus 
religion becomes magical religion. 

People ask a person who goes to church, particularly 


61 


STILL THE MIND 


if they go to a church where they practice magic, “Why 
do you do that? Why do you have to do those rituals?” 
The answer inevitably is, in one way or another, “We 
perform these rites because we believe they are pleas- 
ing to God, and we have been ordered to do these 
things. This is the way it has been revealed that we 
should worship, and therefore we do it, hoping of 
course that God will bless us with long life, health and 
wealth, and sons and daughters.” In this sense, all of this 
is still being done out of a feeling of inadequacy. 


THE MoRAL PHASE OF RELIGION 


A more sophisticated phase of religion comes into 
play when the prophet finally says, “Your burnt offer 
ings are an offense to me. Your feast days and your rites 
are all foolish. What I require is justice and mercy 
towards other people.” Then religion passes from a 
magical phase into a moral phase, in which the empha- 
sis is placed on living and loving, the building up of 
human solidarity and community. 

At this level the teacher of religion becomes primar- 
ily the prophetic teacher of morals, but unfortunately 
you cannot love out of aridity. If you have an arid iden- 
tity, you have no love to give. If you conceive yourself 
to be this cut-off plant that we call the conscious ego, 
you have no roots into a rich and luscious soil, and so 
all you have to give is just a little surface energy; you 


62 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


have no deep and abiding love. 

As a result, the moral preachings are given to peo- 
ple who are perfectly incapable of observing them. The 
preachers will tell you how you ought to behave, specif- 
ically what you should do and what you should not do, 
but they never tell you how to become the kind of per- 
son who can do those things. And so all they succeed in 
is making matters worse by making you feel guilty and 
inadequate. You know you should do what they say, but 
you can’t figure out for the life of you how to do it, and 
so you feel guilty. 

A person who feels guilty feels more deprived than 
ever, and so has to resort to all sorts of measures to 
assuage their sense of guilt. Naturally this does not 
work, and then we begin to see that religion must 
involve more than moral precepts. 


GRACE: THE TRANSFORMING POWER OF THE DIVINE 


Religion must be a way of putting us in touch with 
what the Christians call “grace” — that is to say, the 
transforming power of the divine. Of course, they usu- 
ally turn this around and say you will receive grace 
through magic, and so they practice the magic cere- 
monies of Baptism and Holy Communion. It is thought 
that if you participate in these ceremonies in the proper 
way, the magical power of God will come through and 
will change you. But it somehow does not seem to do 


63 


STILL THE MIND 


so. In that situation the Buddhists and Hindus might say 
that the magic failed because it was not performed prop- 
erly — because you were in the wrong frame of mind. 

Jesus essentially said the same thing: If you will have 
faith, it will work. But somehow you have to find faith, 
and how do you find faith when you don’t have it? If 
you ask that question of the preachers and the priests, 
they don’t know how to answer. They may write very 
clever books to persuade you that God really does exist 
and that it is quite scientific to believe in God, but they 
cannot instill faith. The more cleverly you reason it out, 
the more all this implies doubt, and the very need to 
resort to clever reasoning assures us there is no genuine 
expression of faith. 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


On this level of religion you find the quest to trans- 
form consciousness through the practice of meditation. 

One may have heard that by fasting or by concen- 
trating on breathing there is a way of opening oneself 
up to higher energies. One may believe that as these 
energies course through you they produce a magical 
power — and so therefore we learn what is essentially 
self-hypnosis, and it can do some very startling things. 

However, we soon come back to the same problem 
we found with the geneticists, who can also do some 
very startling things. As all skilled technologists know, 


64 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


the question is, What are you going to do with it? Do 
you know what to do when you acquire power through 
meditation? How are you going to use it? 

And the question still is, Who are you? Who is going 
to decide how to use it? Who is getting this power? 

Of course, at the back of your mind you still have 
the attenuated and impoverished conception of you 
and the feeling of chronic tension that holds on tight 
and is the basis for the feeling of “I,” of ego. There are 
teachers of sensory awareness who can show you how 
to relieve that chronic tension so you can relax and let 
go of the experience of being an ego fora while. That 
is very nice, of course, but soon afterward you relapse 
once again into that tension. 

As long as you believe that you are your image of 
yourself and that you can govern your thoughts and 
your feelings, you will relapse into the habit of making 
muscular tensions to control yourself, and you will 
experience the ego illusion all over again. Then you 
may feel guilty because you are not relaxing, and the 
minute you feel guilty you can be certain that the ego is 
operating very well, although this guilty feeling means it 
feels injured. The ego’s pride has been hurt, and no 
amount of guilt will get rid of the underlying problem. 

At this point you may begin to realize that the med- 
itation exercises are still a form of magic done to aggran- 
dize yourself, and that like preachers and teachers who 


65 


STILL THE MIND 


inculcate a sense of guilt, you are simply trying to 
quench thirst with salt water. 

The problem is that the self-improvement approach 
is based on an experience of yourself that is completely 
inadequate. So long as you are the thinker separate from 
the experience of thoughts, the feeler separate from the 
experience of feelings, or the experiencer separate from 
the experience, you will feel strangled like the neck of 
the hungry spirit, the neck of the hourglass. 

In trying to make improvements, that is the way 
you've defined yourself, and therefore you will not be 
able to use energy joyously because you will be using it 
with an ulterior motive. In approaching “the problem,” 
you have defined yourself as a motivated and driven 
being, as a puppet. 

When this illusion dissolves, however, you will dis- 
cover something very strange — that meditation and 
religious and spiritual exercises of any kind are not nec- 
essary. People always ask if it is necessary to learn yoga 
breathing, or to practice tai chi, or to be psychoana- 
lyzed. And I always ask, “Necessary for what? Where are 
you going? What do you want?” 

Yes, if you want to get to New York it may be nec- 
essary to take the freeway. But where are you going? 
And what do you mean by necessary? Is it necessary for 
becoming a Buddha? Does anybody want to be a 
Buddha? Do you know what it means to be a Buddha? 


66 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


How do you know you want to be a Buddha if you 
don’t know what a Buddha is? 

People think it would be nice to have peace of 
mind, to be serene, to be calm, to be undisturbed by 
this, that, and the other. But as long as you make all 
those things objects of desire, you have defined yourself 
as lacking them, and a person who is looking for peace 
is obviously in turmoil. 

The person who is looking to end conflict is in con- 
flict, and so the more you strive to stop the interior com- 
motion, the more you are stirring it up. You are trying 
to smooth the waters with an iron, and it will never 
work. 


Wuy Do You MEDITATE? 


Invariably at this point the big question arises: “If 
you are going to tell us that meditation is not necessary, 
and that it is all here and now, then why do you medi- 
tate? Why do you practice religion, perform rituals, or 
chant? Why do you even talk about it?’ 

My answer is that there is no good reason for it 
whatsoever. This is all a form of joyous energy, and to 
play with it is a form of dance. It is a great thing to do, 
and there are all kinds of great things to do, and we are 
free to explore according to our own tastes. 

You can make any human activity into meditation 
simply by being completely with it and doing it just to 


67 


STILL THE MIND 


do it. If you really enjoy swimming, you swim not to get 
to the other side of a river or to complete a certain 
number of laps, or to go so far out into the ocean, or 
to compete in any way with yourself or with other peo- 
ple. You swim to experience the water nppling past 
you, and to enjoy the floating sensation when you lie 
on your back and look at the blue sky and the birds cir- 
cling about. Every moment of it you are simply 
absorbed in this ripply, luminous world, looking at the 
patterns and the shifting net of sunlight underneath, 
and the sand way down below — that’s what swimming 
is about. 

Some of us like swimming, and in the same way 
some of us like religion and meditation. 


A MAGNIFICENT ART FORM 


We have gone through all the levels of religion until 
we arrive at the religion of nonreligion, where we can 
see that it was all here anyway and there was nothing 
that had to be done. In the same spirit we can then go 
back through the rest of life and turn it into an art form 
— and it is a magnificent art form. 

But if you ask me why you should choose that 
expression rather than some other, I won’t have an 
answer for you, except to say that getting together and 
meditating or chanting is what a lot of people did before 
they had television to absorb them. 


68 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


In the jungles and on the terraces in mountain com- 
munities, for as long as anyone can remember people 
have gotten together to do a thing I call “digging 
sound.” Some people still play with this sonic energy of 
the universe, in just the same way as I described some- 
body playing with the water while swimming. When 
these people do this, they don’t worry about where they 
are going, or what their destiny is, or any such non- 
sense. Instead, they are completely alive. 


A VAST CELEBRATION 


To better understand all that I am trying to say, I 
would like to ask if you would for the moment change 
your basic notions of economics — and by this I mean 
the economics of energy. We are always scrimping and 
saving because our economic models are based on 
scarcity rather than exuberance. But notice that the eco- 
nomics of nature are allegedly wasteful by our stan- 
dards, and they are based on exuberance. Many more 
seeds than are necessary for trees and many more sper 
matozoa than are necessary for people are produced, 
and there are many more stars than anybody could con- 
ceivably want, with galaxies galore. Nature is a vast cel- 
ebration of energy. 

If you complain about this and say, “Oh dear me, it’s 
all going to run out,” that only means you are still look- 
ing for fulfillment in the future. Essentially you are 


69 


STILL THE MIND 


saying, “If there is not enough future, we won't get the 
golden reward we are looking forward to at the end of 
the line.” 

At the heart of our economic model is a view of time 
that is strung out on a line, but in the natural world 
everything happens in cycles, which is to say in circles. 
Life moves through the cycles of birth, growth, flower 
ing, and bearing fruit, which in turn casts the seed that 
begins life. The flowering is our symbol for the exuber- 
ance of life, and the fruits the enjoyment of its abun- 
dance. 

In religious art, the golden flower represents fulfill- 
ment, and when a human being tries to symbolize what 
it is that they really want at the end of the line, very 
often they think of a flower. It is there in the celestial 
rose in Dante’s vision of paradise, and in the golden 
lotus of Mahavairocana, the great Sun Buddha at the 
center of the mandala. There are rose windows in 
cathedrals, and always that flower at the end of the line. 

Freud says of the flower that it is where everybody 
wants to go, and, being Freud, he says it is going back 
to the womb. What is so attractive about the womb? To 
explain the religious imagery of the flower by analogy 
with sex is only to add another puzzle. What is so great 
about sex? What’s so great about going back to the 
womb? There we are regressed to the place that psy- 
chologists don’t really like to talk about, and they may 


70 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


say that in the womb the baby feels omnipotent, but this 
is of course a fantasy. 

We have assumed the Darwinian struggle for exis- 
tence as our personality, and say of the exuberance of 
flowers and the abundance of fruit that they flourish 
only to ensure survival — but this is truly an impover- 
ished view of life, a secular view in which the person 
in the world is divorced from the womb. In the womb 
the baby floats, and the floating baby does not know the 
difference between what is inside its skin and what is 
outside. It has what Freud calls the “oceanic feeling,” 
and this is just another form of cosmic consciousness, 
only the baby does not have the language to express it 
like an adult. Yet there it is, drifting in the cosmic ocean 
— and in a way that is what everybody wants, because 
that is our original nature. 

Oscar Wilde described the womb-flower of exis- 
tence as “the flowers in which the gold bees dream.” Yet 
that golden flower isn’t at the end of the line — you are 
living in it. The radiating petals, the mandala, the great 
circle of the flower is the galaxy in which you live, and 
itis the whole universe radiating around you. Of course, 
this radiance is also in a cycle, and that cycling is the 
dance you are intimately involved in, if you can only 
realize that the purpose of life is not in the future. 

Of course, if you think it is in the future, you will go 
on and on looking for it there and never find it. The 


71 


STILL THE MIND 


future fades away in the same way the past fades out. 
You get older and older, and the future never comes, 
and you just peter out. It was never there, and you may 
feel vaguely cheated about the whole thing. You 
thought that there was something coming, that there 
was some great thing at the end of the line, the golden 
reward. 

And you have been sitting in the middle of that 
golden reward all the time. 

Now all this should be very easy to understand, 
unless you take a masochistic view and you feel that if 
you do not suffer the experience is not real. Everybody 
seems to be looking for new ways of suffering, as if 
there weren’t enough in life anyway, and trying to get in 
touch with their “authentic” existence. But in fact, 
whether you're in touch with your authentic existence 
or not, you can’t lose it, so there is no need to worry 
about losing the feeling of it, no need to say, “I know 
it’s there because I’ve seen it once, but I am afraid I will 
lose the feeling of it.” 

Just forget about it. When you are trying to feel it — 
as if you couldn’t — that is pushing it away. You can’t get 
rid of your real self any more than you can get rid of now. 
It is you. It’s your being — to be more accurate, your 
being is not your being, you are the being. It doesn’t mat- 
ter if you live or die; it doesn’t make the slightest dif- 
ference. It is nothing just as much as it is something, and 


72 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


nothing and something are simply the alternations and 
the vibration of energy. 


WHat Does IT FEEL LIKE AT THIS MOMENT? 


How are you feeling now? Just feel yourself. What 
does it feel like just to be here now? Just feel the feel- 
ing — and can you feel, in addition to this feeling, 
someone feeling it, or is that the same as the feeling? 

Some of you may have what you would call nega- 
tive feelings — depression, anxiety — and you may feel 
tension in the chest, a funny feeling in the stomach, or 
pressure in the head. Or if you are sick in a chronic way, 
you may feel trouble from the center where the sickness 
is located. But, at this moment, don’t name that feeling 
— just explore it. It is there, whatever it is. Now you 
may want to change that feeling, but suppose you can’t. 
For a while you may be able to think about something 
else, but now let’s say to ourselves, “I feel the way I feel, 
and I can’t really do much about it.” As we have seen, 
that is because the “I” that is supposed to be separate 
from and controlling the feeling is only imaginary. 


INNER AND OuTER WORLDS 


So if that is the case, then what you are is the total- 
ity of this present experience — the inner feelings, the 
discomfort and rumblings and pulsations inside your 


73 


STILL THE MIND 


organism, together with your outer feelings, because 
actually your outer sensations are happening inside your 
brain. What you see out in front of you is the state of 
your optical nerves, which are inside your head. What 
you hear is the state of your auditory nerves, which are 
inside your head. So inner and outer are really so mixed 
up with each other that there is no difference. 

The skin is the bridge between the world “inside the 
skin” and the world “outside the skin.” But there would 
be no external world if there weren’t an internal one, 
and vice versa. Your internal world is in my external 
world, and my internal world is in your external world. 
It all goes together in a great mixed sensory field where 
everything is essential to everything else, like backs to 
fronts and fronts to backs. 

So here it is, and you can feel everything happening. 
Your breath is going along. Your ears are working. The 
people across from you are moving, the trees and build- 
ings are coloring and shaping. It is all that kind of a hap- 
pening. 

Now we can equally well define this happening as 
your doing. This whole happening that is going on — 
that is you, if there is a you, a self, in any sense what- 
soever. So if you try to change it, you are differentiating 
yourself from it. You are standing away from it and, in 
that moment, you split the unity. 

But don’t worry if you find yourself habitually 


74 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


standing away from it. Simply treat that as part of the 
happening. If you can’t stop standing away from it — 
objectifying it, as it were — that is also part of the hap- 
pening and it is going on. If there are some things you 
can’t accept, and you are fighting them, that fighting is 
part of the happening too. So don’t try to interfere with 
it, just let be whatever is. 

There is no hurry, and no place else to be. I suppose 
you can go away if you want to, if you are nervous and 
want to do something else. But has it occurred to you 
that there may be really nowhere to go, because you take 
yourself with you if you go somewhere else? And if you 
have a problem here, you will have a problem some- 
where else, because you are the problem. So there is 
no hurry, and in a way there is no future. It is all here 
— so take it easy, take your time, and get acquainted 
with it. 


WATCH QUIETLY 


Just watch quietly this “going on.” Whether you 
close your eyes or keep them open makes little differ. 
ence. You find yourself once again tending to put 
names, words, descriptions on everything that you expe- 
rience, and that’s not necessary. Don’t try to stop your- 
self putting names on things, just regard your doing that 
as an activity that is happening, like the sound of a car 
going by. If you ask, “Why am I doing this?’ just hear 


75 


STILL THE MIND 


the sound — “why am I doing this, why am I doing this” 
— as “da da da, dadada.” 

When you feel those outside sounds and activities 
and motions, they may seem strange because they are no 
longer under your voluntary control — but neither are 
your belly rumbles or the mechanisms of your optical 
nervous system. None of this is under your control, but 
it is all definitely you. The idea that you control some- 
thing really isn’t under your control either, because when 
we move our fingers, we’re using energy, but we don’t 
control that energy. Our thoughts are just energy too — 
itis all bubbling up in us, and we don’t know why. 

In the same way, all the happenings that are by 
social definition outside your skin — not under your 
voluntary control and so not you — are just as much 
you as the belly rumbles and the energy bubbling up 
inside you. This whole experience is you going along, 
and if you try to control it, you will again begin all sorts 
of absurd straining, like trying to lift an airplane off the 
ground by pulling at your seat belt. So just let all this 
that you are feeling happen, because in fact there is 
nothing else you can do. There is no choice; it is going 
to happen anyway. 


Your FULL Boby, Your REAL SELF 


Now in this state it is your full body that you are 
experiencing, the whole body of your experience. 


76 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


In the Far East, the Buddhists say that our full body, 
our real body, is composed of a trinity of three bodies: 
Nirmanakaya is the functioning body, the physical 
body with which we usually identify. Sambhogakaya is 
the body of our mental and emotional activity, and it 
is our capacity to enjoy, for it is the energy of eternal 
delight. Dharmakaya is our ultimate body, our real 
body, which consists of nothing less than the whole 
quantum field of the universe, for, in truth, we are One 
with All That Is. 

Feel it, it is happening. 

Your wandering thoughts are just happening. The 
buzz in the head is just happening. There you are. 

It is not being pushed around by anything. It is the 
big happening, and that means it’s free. It isn’t happen- 
ing to you, itis you happening, and that’s the difference. 

Meet your real self. 


77 


PAs RT I I 


THE ESSENTIAL PROCESS 


OF MEDITATION 


CHAPTER THREE 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF 
MEDITATION 


|p BY NATURE a person who has the fundamental 
feeling that existence is extremely odd. 

Other people apparently think that existence is 
quite even — thatis to say, ordinary — and not to be 
questioned, but I have always had in the bottom of 
my heart the sense that it is very strange indeed that 
I am here at all. The feeling of “I” gives me what I 
can only describe as a funny feeling, and I do not 
take it for granted. 

This feeling is not something that I can just toss 
off, and then go on with my everyday business — 
and yet the curious paradox of this is that, at the 
same time, I do not take it seriously. On one hand I 
have the feeling that to be alive, to participate in this 
universe, is so wonderful I simply don’t know what 


81 


STILL THE MIND 


to say about it, but on the other | can’t identify myself 
with any of the parts or the social roles that people play. 


THE PROBLEM WITH EXISTENCE 


There does seem to be a problem with existence, and 
with being alive. What that problem is about, at the sort 
of nitty-gritty level, is the very basic idea in our thinking 
that one must live, that we need to survive to go on, and 
therefore we need money for food and shelter. We feel 
we must go on, even though we know that we are not 
going to get away with it for very long, and we know that 
after a certain number of years we are going to die and 
that this thing we call life is going to end. 

When life ends the thing that we call “I” is going to 
go somewhere else, maybe into a deep sleep, maybe 
even without dreams. Between now and that inevitable 
event we may experience the most ghastly pains — not 
only the pains of physical disease, or of being wounded 
or hurt, but perhaps the pains of worrying about the fail- 
ure of our responsibility to people who depend on us. 
So we suffer other people’s suffering simply because we 
are sensitive and have imagination; we do it so much 
that our adrenaline levels respond simply by imagina- 
tion to the sufferings of other people. 

Obviously all these problems cannot be solved on 
the physical level — we don’t expect in our lifetime that 
medical skill will make us exempt from death. We also 


82 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF MEDITATION 


don’t seriously expect that human beings will all leam 
to be nice to each other, and will refrain from war, racial 
prejudice, and horrors of that kind. We don’t seriously 
expect to find a method of being protected against all 
possible disease and pain by taking some sort of drug. 


ANOTHER Way AROUND THESE PROBLEMS 


Over the years I have begun to wonder if there is 
another way around these problems. Perhaps instead of 
resolving these issues at the technical level, we could 
solve them at the psychological and spiritual levels by 
disciplining ourselves so that we wouldn't be afraid of 
them anymore. And so, in accord with that motivation, 
we seek out spiritual and psychological teachers. 

We wonder if we could somehow be made over so 
that we would not have to worry about our problems. 
But if you examine the desire to overcome this mess 
through a spiritual discipline, you will see that this want- 
ing to overcome the mess and not to have it anymore is 
precisely the mess. The thing that we object to about 
ourselves is precisely what we continue to do in our 
attempts to overcome it; in other words, the activity that 
we employ in overcoming the mess is the mess that we 
object to. It is very important to realize this, and if you 
do realize it, it raises the question “Then what can I do?’ 
What can I do to transform this quaking mess into the 
state of mind of the true mystic? 


83 


STILL THE MIND 


Now, if you are the mess, there is obviously nothing 
that you can do to transform yourself into the state of 
mind you idealize as that of a true mystic, a saint, or 
even the Christ. But by pursuing this line of thought you 
may realize that all your ideals are simply manifestations 
of the mess trying to get away from itself. 

You are put in the position of feeling that it is 
absolutely necessary to be different from the way you 
are, but there is absolutely nothing you can do about it 
because being the way you are, you can’t be different 
from your self. It’s as if one were to say, “I know that I 
shouldn’t be selfish, and I would very much like to be 
an unselfish person, but the reason why I want to be an 
unselfish person is that I am very selfish. And really | 
would love myself far more and respect myself far more 
if I were unselfish.” 

The same is true of people who believe that they 
ought to love God. One might well ask, “Why do you 
want to love God?’ And the answer is invariably, 
because God is the most powerful ruler, and it is always 
best to be on the side of the big battalions. Most often 
that is the real reason why people believe in God, and 
it comes down to the fact that they are looking out for 
the safety of their own spiritual skins. 

All sophisticated saints have known this, including 
Saint Paul, Saint Augustine, and Martin Luther. None of 
these great men knew what to do about this contradiction, 


84 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF MEDITATION 


because if people believe in it there is really nothing to 
be done. But apparently something has to be done — 
however, when you really look into yourself, you real- 
ize there is nothing you can do. There is nothing any- 
one can do to be anyone else than who they are, or to 
feel any other way than the way they feel at this 
moment. 

We are this mess that has the capacity to know the 
horrors of what life can do to us — yet this is not as 
much of a blind alley as it seems to be. If you discover 
yourself in a blind alley, or even a cul-de-sac, the fact 
that you found yourself there will invariably tell you 
something. 

Watch the flow of water when it floods an area of 
land and you will see that it puts out fingers, and some 
of them stop because they come to blind alleys. But the 
water doesn’t pursue that course; it simply finds its way 
around. The water never uses any effort, however, only 
its weight and gravity, and by following its level it finds 
the path of least resistance. 

As human beings we do the same thing, and when 
we think that we have come to a dead end or a blind 
alley we try to find another way around. Suppose the 
water, when it reaches a place where a finger of water 
stretches out over dry ground and doesn’t go further, 
were to say to itself, “I failed!” Why, we would say it was 
just being neurotic. “Just wait,” we would advise, “and 


85 


STILL THE MIND 


you will find the way to get through.” 

Now when you discover that you are like the water, 
and that there is no way of transforming yourself, you 
become a fearless, joyous, divine being, as distinct from 
a quaking mess. 

When you see that there is no way, it is not a 
gloomy realization, but a very important communica- 
tion. It is telling you something in the same way that the 
land is telling the water this is not the way to go. It is 
really saying, “There is another way — try over here.” 

Sometimes life is telling you that the course you are 
on is not the way to go, and the message underlying all 
of this is that you cannot transform yourself. Life is giv- 
ing you the message that the “you” that you imagine to 
be capable of transforming yourself does not exist. In 
other words, as an ego, I am separate from my emo- 
tions, my thoughts, my feelings, my experiences. So the 
one who is supposed to be in control of them cannot 
control them because it isn’t there. And as soon as you 
understand that, things will be vastly improved. 


Wuat Do You MEAN BY THE WorpD “I”? 


Now we can go into this and ask, “What do you 
mean by the word ‘I’?’ We are going to try some exper- 
iments on a number of different levels, first in the ordi- 
nary way: What do you mean by the word “I’?1, myself. 
Your personality, your ego — what is it? 


86 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF MEDITATION 


First of all, itis your image of yourself, and it is com- 
posed of what people have told you about yourself. 
Who you are is based upon how others have reacted to 
you, and what sort of impression they have given you of 
the kind of person you are. Your education plays into 
the process as well, and out of all this an ego emerges 
that is a conceptual expression of who you think you 
are. The style of life you then live is a reflection of this 
image. 

But remember, it is an image — just an idea. It is 
your thoughts about yourself, but in fact you are not this 
at all. Your total physical organism, your psychological 
organism, and forces beyond that are all you, because 
an organism doesn’t exist as an isolated entity any more 
than a flower exists without a stalk, without roots, with- 
out earth, without the environment. 

In the same way, although we are not stalked to the 
ground, we are nevertheless inseparable from the world 
around us, and from a huge social context of parents, 
siblings, and people who know us and work with us. It 
is simply impossible to cut ourselves off from either our 
social environment or our natural environment. We are 
all that, and there is no clear way of drawing the bound- 
ary between this organism and everything that sur- 
rounds it. 

And yet, the image of ourselves that we have does 
not include all those relationships. Our idea of our 


87 


STILL THE MIND 


personality and of ourselves includes no information 
whatsoever about the hypothalamus or even the brain 
stem, the pineal gland, the way we breathe, how our 
blood circulates, how we manage to form a sentence, 
how we manage to be conscious, or even how we open 
and close our hands. The information contained in your 
image of yourself says nothing about any of this. 

Therefore it is obviously an extremely inadequate 
image, but nonetheless we do think that the image of 
self refers to something because we have the very strong 
impression that “I” exist. And we think that this impres- 
sion isn’t just an idea, it is really substantially there, right 
in the middle of us. And what is it? 

What do you actually sense? When you are sitting on 
the floor, you feel the floor is there and is real and hard. 
What is the “you” sitting on the floor, and what do you 
have the sensation of when you know that it’s you, right 
here? What is it? 

First of all, let’s ask, “In what part of your body do 
you feel your self — the real “I” — exists?’ We can 
explore this question very deeply, and maybe you want 
to think about it for a moment before I suggest a pre- 
liminary and superficial answer: 

The sensation that corresponds to the feeling of “I” 
is a chronic muscular tension in the body, which has 
absolutely no function whatsoever. 

What do you do when you try, or concentrate, or 


88 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF MEDITATION 


pay attention? When I was a little boy in school I sat 
next to another boy who had great difficulty in reading. 
And as he worked over the textbook with its perfectly 
piffling information, he groaned and grunted as he read, 
trying to get the sounds out, as if he were heaving 
enormous weights with his muscles. The teacher was 
vaguely impressed that he was trying, and although he 
seemed to be making a tremendous effort, all of his 
straining had absolutely nothing to do with getting any- 
thing done. 

Tying yourself up into a knot has absolutely nothing 
to do with the way your mind works. If you try very 
hard, and look very intensely, perhaps you will tighten 
the muscles around your temples, and maybe clench 
your jaw a bit, but if it does anything, it will just make 
your vision blurry. If you want to see something clearly, 
you relax, and instead of making an effort you simply 
trust your eyes and your nervous system to do their job. 

The other night I was writing and I completely for- 
got somebody’s name, but I knew that eventually my 
memory would produce it. I just sat for a while and said 
to my memory, “You know very well who this person is, 
please give me the answer.” And there it was, because 
that’s the way nerves work. They don’t work by forcing 
themselves, and yet we’ve all been brought up to try to 
force our nervous activity, our concentration, our mem- 
ory, our comprehension, and indeed our very love. 


89 


STILL THE MIND 


We have tried to force it with our muscles — and 
men will understand me if I say you can’t force yourself 
to have an erection by muscular effort. Women will 
understand me if I say you can’t force yourself with 
muscles to have an orgasm — it just has to happen, and 
you must trust it to happen. There is absolutely nothing 
you can do about it by using your muscles. In much the 
same way, the notion that we have of ourselves, of ego, 
is a composite of an image of ourselves that doesn’t fit 
the facts, and a sensation of muscular straining that is 
futile. When you come down to it and take a closer 
look, what you conceive to be yourself is the marriage 
of an illusion and futility. 


We Are No LESS THAN THE UNIVERSE 


Well what are we, if we aren’t who we think we are? 
When you take a scientific point of view, your organism 
is inseparable from its environment, and so you really 
are the organism/environment. In other words, you are 
no less than the universe, and each one of you is the 
universe expressed in the particular place that you feel 
is here and now. You are an aperture through which the 
universe is looking at itself and exploring itself. 

When you feel that you are a lonely, put-upon, iso- 
lated little stranger confronting all this, you are under 
the influence of an illusory feeling, because the truth is 
quite the reverse. You are the whole works, all that 


90 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF MEDITATION 


there is, and always was, and always has been, and 
always will be. But just as my whole body has a little 
nerve end centered here, which is exploring and which 
contributes to the sense of touch, you are just such a lit 
tle nerve end for everything that is going on. Just as the 
eyes serve the whole body, you serve the entire uni- 
verse. You are a function of all that is. 

Yet if this is so, the facts just do not fit the way we 
feel, because we feel it the other way around: “I am a 
lonely little thing out here exploring this universe and 
trying to make something out of it. I want to get some- 
thing out of it and do something with it. And I know I 
am going to fail because I know I’m going to die one 
day.” So we are all fundamentally depressed, and as a 
result think up fantasies about what is going to happen 
to us when we are dead, and try to make ourselves feel 
better about it. 

But if you are essentially the universe, what is going 
to happen to you when you are dead? 

What do you mean by you? If you are the universe, 
in the greater context that question is irrelevant. You 
never were bom and you never will die, because what 
there is, is you. That should be absolutely obvious, but 
from an egoistic perspective it is not obvious at all. It 
should be the simplest thing in the world to understand 
that you, the “I”, is what has always been going on and 
always will go on, coming and going forever and ever. 


91 


STILL THE MIND 


We have been bamboozled, however, by religionists, 
by politicians, by our fathers and mothers, by all sorts of 
people who tell us, “You’re not it.” And we believed it. 

So, to put it in a negative way, you can’t do anything 
to change yourselves, to become better, to become hap- 
pier, to become more serene, to become more mystical. 
But if I say you can’t do a damn thing, you can under- 
stand this negative statement in a positive way. What I 
am really saying is that you don’t need to do anything, 
because if you see yourself in the correct way, you are 
all as much extraordinary phenomena of nature as trees, 
clouds, the patterns in running water, the flickering of 
fire, the arrangement of the stars, and the form of a 
galaxy. You are all just like that, and there is nothing 
wrong with you at all. 


AN ELEMENT OF DouBT 


You may have an element of doubt in you, howev- 
er. We all object to ourselves in various ways, and in a 
sense there is nothing wrong with that either, because 
that is part of the flow, of what is going on. That is part 
of nature, and a part of what we do. To deliver you from 
the sense of guilt, I am going to teach you that you 
needn't feel guilty because you feel guilty. 

They taught you as a child to feel guilty, and you 
feel guilty — that’s no surprise. If somebody comes 
along and says you shouldn't, that is not the point. I am 


92 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF MEDITATION 


not going to say that you shouldn’t — but I say that if 
you do, don’t worry about it. And if you want to say, 
“But I can’t help worrying about it,” I’m going to say, 
“Okay, go ahead and worry about it.” 

This is the principle called judo in Japanese, which 
means the gentle way. Go along with it, go along with 
it — and then you can redirect the energy to go your 
Own way. 

The most interesting thing you can do in life is really 
the most natural thing to do: to call into question the 
rules of the game. If we say, “Let’s all be honest with 
each other,” what do you mean by honesty? Do you 
know what the truth is? 

If you call these things into question, a curious thing 
happens, and that is that nobody knows what they are 
supposed to do. And this is the most embarrassing situ- 
ation in life. When we are all here and we don’t know 
what we're supposed to do, now we are really up 
against our view of reality. 


THE ESSENTIAL PROCESS OF MEDITATION 


This is the beginning of meditation. You don’t know 
what you're supposed to do, so what can you do? Well, 
if you don’t know what you're supposed to do, you 
watch. You simply watch what is going on. 

When somebody plays music, you listen. You just 
follow those sounds, and eventually you understand the 


93 


STILL THE MIND 


music. The point can’t be explained in words because 
music is not words, but after listening for a while, you 
understand the point of it, and that point is the music 
itself. 

In exactly the same way, you can listen to all expe- 
riences, because all experiences of any kind are vibra- 
tions coming at you. As a matter of fact, you are these 
vibrations, and if you really feel what is happening, the 
awareness you have of you and of everything else is all 
the same. It’s a sound, a vibration, all kinds of vibrations 
on different bands of the spectrum. Sight vibrations, 
emotion vibrations, touch vibrations, sound vibrations 
— all these things come together and are woven, all the 
senses are woven, and you are a pattern in the weaving, 
and that pattern is the picture of what you now feel. 
This is always going on, whether you pay attention to it 
or not. 

Now instead of asking what you should do about it, 
you experience it, because who knows what to do about 
it? To know what to do about this you would have to 
know everything, and if you don’t, then the only way 
to begin is to watch. 

Watch what's going on. Watch not only what’s going 
on outside, but what's going on inside. Treat your own 
thoughts, your own reactions, your own emotions about 
what's going on outside as if those inside reactions were 


94 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF MEDITATION 


also outside things. But you are just watching. Just fol- 
low along, and simply observe how they go. 

Now, you may say that this is difficult, and that you 
are bored by watching what is going on. But if you sit 
quite still, you are simply observing what is happening: 
all the sounds outside, all the different shapes and lights 
in front of your eyes, all the feelings on your skin, inside 
your skin, belly rumbles, thoughts going on inside your 
head — chatter, chatter, chatter. “I ought to be writing a 
letter to so-and-so....1 should have done this” — all this 
bilge is going on, but you just watch it. 

You say to yourself, “But this is boring.” Now watch 
that too. What kind of a funny feeling is it that makes 
you Say it’s boring? Where is it? Where do you feel it? “I 
should be doing something else instead.” What’s that 
feeling? What part of your body is it in? Is it in your 
head, is it in your belly, is it in the soles of your feet? 
Where is it? The feeling of boredom can be very inter- 
esting if you look into it. 

Simply watch everything going on without attempt- 
ing to change it in any way, without judging it, without 
calling it good or bad. Just watch it. That is the essential 
process of meditation. 


95 


CHAPTER FOUR 


THE PRACTICE OF 
MEDITATION 


W* WE CALL MEDITATION or contemplation — for 
want of a better word — is really supposed to 
be fun. I have some difficulty in conveying this idea 
because most people take anything to do with reli- 
gion seriously — and you must understand that I am 
not a serious person. I may be sincere, but never seri- 
ous, because I don’t think the universe is serious. 
And the trouble comes into the world largely 
because various beings take themselves seriously, in- 
stead of playfully. After all, you must become serious 
if you think that something is desperately important, 
but you will only think that something is desperately 
important if you are afraid of losing it. In one way, 
however, if you fear losing something, it isn’t really 
worth having. There are people who live in dread, 


97 


STILL THE MIND 


and then drag on living because they are afraid to die. 
They will probably teach their children to do the same, 
and their children will in turn teach their own children 
to live that way. And so it goes on and on. 

But let me ask you, if you were God, would you be 
serious? Would you want people to treat you as if you 
were serious? Would you want to be prayed to? Think of 
all the awful things that people say in their prayers. 
Would you want to listen to that all the time? Would you 
encourage it? No, not if you were God. 

In the same way, meditation is different from the 
sort of things that people are supposed to take serious- 
ly. It doesn’t have any purpose, and when you talk 
about practicing meditation, it’s not like practicing 
tennis or playing the piano, which one does in order to 
attain a certain perfection. You practice music to become 
better at it, maybe even with the idea that you may 
someday go on stage and perform. But you don’t prac- 
tice meditation that way, because if you do, you are not 
meditating. 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


The only way you can talk about practice in the con- 
text of meditation is to use the word practice in the 
same way as when somebody says that they practice 
medicine. That is their way of life, their vocation, and 
they do it nearly every day. Perhaps they do it the same 


98 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


way, day after day — and that’s fine for meditation too, 
because in meditation there is no right way and there is 
no idea of time. 

In practicing and learning things, time is usually of 
the essence. We try to do it as fast as possible, and even 
find a faster way of leaming how to do things. In med- 
itation a faster way of learning is of no importance what- 
soever, because one’s focus is always on the present. 
And although growth may occur in the process, it is 
growth in the same way that a plant grows. 


THE PERFECT PROCESS OF GROWTH 


Once upon a time in China, there was a farming 
family, and they were having dinner. The oldest son 
came in late, and they asked him, “Why are you late for 
dinner?’ 

“Oh,” he said, “I've been helping the wheat to 
grow.” 

They came out the next moming and all the wheat 
was dead. It turned out that the son had pulled each 
stalk up a little bit, to help it grow. 

The point is that growth always occurs in a being as 
it does in a plant, and it is perfect at every step. No 
progress is involved in the transformation of an acom 
into an oak, because the acorn is a perfect acorn, and 
the sapling is a perfect sapling, and the big oak tree is 
a perfect oak, which again produces perfect acorns. At 


99 


STILL THE MIND 


every stage perfection is there, and it cannot be other 
wise. 

Practicing meditation is exactly the same. We should 
not talk about beginners as distinct from experts, and 
we should develop, if we can, a new vocabulary 
because it is very difficult in the context of our compet- 
itive world to speak about things like this. To bring 
across the idea of doing something that is not acquisi- 
tive — something you are not going to get anything out 
of — is difficult. And it’s even more difficult when there 
is no one to get anything. When “you” understand the 
art of contemplation, there is no experiencer separate 
from experience, and there is no one to get anything out 
of life, or therefore to get anything from meditation. 


REVERSED EFFORT 


We have a principle here of reversed effort, some- 
thing to understand as a background to anything said 
about techniques — because whenever we talk about 
techniques, we seem to be talking about the competi- 
tive, and about mastery. The idea of mastery of tech- 
nique is very important if you play a musical instrument, 
because technique is the key in the making of a satis- 
factory sound. But if you force the leaming of tech- 
nique, or force the performance of it, everyone will hear 
it, and you will hear the forcing yourself. 

To be musical you have to address yourself to the 


100 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


playing of an instrument without hurrying, and without 
forcing anything. You will find there is a point then 
where the instrument seems to play itself, and when you 
get the peculiar feeling that the sound coming out of a 
flute or a violin string is happening of itself. Then you 
are playing the instrument properly. 

It’s the same when you sing: there comes a point 
when your voice takes over. This is the difference 
between perspiration and inspiration. 

You may say, as Christians do, that the act of wor- 
ship is inspired by the Holy Spirit. When monks are 
chanting, they believe that the Holy Spirit is chanting 
through them, and they are flutes for the Holy Spint. 
This is a very precise and particular phenomenon 
because there is a way of resonating the breath and of 
harmonizing sound so that it comes of itself and you 
don’t do it. We attribute that way of producing sound to 
the “Holy Spirit,” but it is based on breath. 


WATCHING BREATH 


Breath is a curious operation, because it can be 
experienced as both a voluntary doing and an involun- 
tary happening. You can do a breathing exercise and 
feel that “I am breathing” in just the same way as you 
can feel “I am walking.” Yet on the other hand, you 
breathe all the time when you are not thinking about it, 
and in that way it is involuntary. You must breathe — 


101 


STILL THE MIND 


and so it is the faculty through which we can realize the 
unity of the voluntary and involuntary systems. 

In Buddhism, this is called mindfulness of the 
breath, or watching breath. And watching breath is fun- 
damental in meditation because, like sound, it is easy to 
see the happening in it, as distinct from what we 
thought of as the doing of it. Breath happens, but the 
curious thing is that you can get with the breath, and in 
getting with it, extraordinary things can happen. 

Anyone who swims knows this, and anyone who 
sings knows that breathing is important. In archery, in 
any athletic discipline, the alignment of body and breath 
is critical. The synchronization of what you are doing 
with your breathing is the whole art. But powerful 
breath is not accomplished through muscle power. It is 
accomplished by gravity, by weight. 


A MEDITATION EXERCISE 


I would like you to sit upright, either in a comfort- 
able chair or on the floor on a cushion or pillow. The 
reason for sitting straight is so the part of your body in 
which the breathing is occurring is unencumbered. Also, 
when you sit upright on the floor you are slightly 
uncomfortable, and you won't go to sleep, because in 
any peaceful and quiet state of mind it is very easy to 
go to sleep. 

Now in this position, simply become aware of your 


102 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


breathing, without trying to do anything about it at all. 
Let it happen, and watch it. 

At the same time, let your ears hear whatever they 
want to hear. In other words, let them hear in the same 
way you are letting your lungs breathe. 

Now beyond this, you can breathe out by letting the 
breath fall outward without pushing it, and as you get to 
the end of the out breath, let go with the same sort of 
feeling that you have when you let your body drop into 
a very comfortable bed — let it drop out and fall. Let the 
weight of the air do it. Don’t push, drop. Then after a 
while, the breath will return. But don’t pull it in, let it 
fall back in. The breath will drop in until you’ve had 
enough; then let it drop out again. 

It’s a good idea in this exercise to breathe in through 
the nostrils and out through the lips, allowing there to 
be a slight sensation of moving air on your lips so that 
you know you are breathing. Never force anything — 
just have the feeling of going this way and that way by 
virtue of weight, and of gravity. 


ADDING SOUND 


Then, if you wish, as you let the breath fall outward, 
you can simply float a sound on it. First, you can just do 
this mentally. Think of a sound that pleases you, a note 
that seems agreeable to your voice. As you breathe out 
heavily, imagine that sound to yourself, whatever sound 


103 


STILL THE MIND 


you feel like. Now if you've got a humming sound in 
mind, on the next round of the out breath, hum it out 
loud, and keep it going. 

At first you may be a little short-winded and uneasy 
about something like this. As well as allowing the sound 
to hum and happen with the breath that is falling out, 
you can, as it were, simply request it to increase in vol- 
ume without forcing it. 

And when your sound ends, bring it in again quite 
softly, and then allow the volume to rise. You will get 
an almost continuous sound, and if you do this in a 
group, the sounds will run together. 

Try it now, if you wish, picking your own note. 

Try it again, once more. 

Now ask it to increase its volume. Listen a moment. 
What we are working into is the completely liberated, 
yet soft and gentle, act of letting sound happen through 
us without the slightest sense of strain, so that you are 
not singing it, but it is singing with your voice. 

Don’t premeditate a tune, but let it come, so that it’s 
almost as if you were talking nonsense. Let it play gently 
with your voice. You are simply preoccupied with it, like 
easy humming to yourself. 


Hmmmm.... 


Or, Abhh.... 
Or, Oooommmm.... 


104 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


When you are thus absorbed in sound, where are 
you? 

You are in a state of consciousness that is, even at 
first, at least a primitive form of samadhi; that is to say, 
we are happily absorbed in what we are doing, and we 
have forgotten about ourselves. You can’t very well do 
that and still worry or think about anything serious. 

Notice that there is a special way of doing it. We 
can get wild with it and do a kind of Native American 
chant or one of the more vigorous and forceful Tibetan 
Buddhist chants, but that form of chanting can be strain- 
ing, unless you're in a large group and can soar on the 
group’s energy. If you keep it down to a soft tone, you 
will find the floating feeling of the voice. If you feel any 
sound that is uncomfortable, you can instantly avoid it. 
Slip down if you are going too high, or slip up if you 
are getting too low. If your voice tends to change, fol- 
low its change, so that you are just going along with it. 


THE DIVINE ELEMENT 


This is why, from ancient times, people have dis- 
covered humming and singing, and everybody used to 
sing while they worked. But you'll notice that today very 
few people sing at all; you have to make a point of it. 
People are afraid of their voices — that is, their melod- 
ic voices as distinct from the spoken voice. I know an 
enormous number of people who never sing at all. 


105 


STILL THE MIND 


In India to this day when the scriptures — the 
Upanishads and the Sutras — are read, they are invari- 
ably chanted, because as soon as you bring a note into 
it an extra dimension is added to the voice. That is the 
divine element, which is symbolically the singing sound 
of the universe. 

This is a form of what I would call free mantra 
chanting, which isn’t used much. But as you do it, it will 
give you a very good idea of what the meditative state 
is. It isn’t just letting things going on around you hap- 
pen, it is inside you as well. In free mantra, as distinct 
from prescribed mantra, each spontaneous chant has a 
different feeling to it. 

The Tibetan monks go down to an extraordinarily 
deep sound — they go as deep as one can get. There is 
a reason for this, but it is very difficult to explain 
because you have to do it to understand it. But when 
you get as deep down into sound as you can go, you 
are going to an extreme of the vibration, and you feel 
naturally that what is deep is part of the underpinnings, 
the foundation. When monks go into that deep sound, 
they are literally exploring the depths of sound, going 
into it deeply. They will get down somewhere on an 
Om, and take it to what feels like the center of the earth. 

When you try the meditation we have just been 
through with sound, you might sometimes find that 
you hear your voice go wrong, but you always get a 


106 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


sensuous feeling of the breath, and of course it is very 
enjoyable to breathe. You will find this enjoyment will 
help in the quality of the sound you produce — although 
we have to get away from some of our musical preju- 
dices when we do this. You can make up your own non- 
sensical mantras, and there are lots of traditional mantras 
as well. But to make one up, just absorb yourself in a 
vibration that gets you going and then play with it. 

Play with the sound you are making, and when you 
stop you will still feel the pulse going through you. 
These sounds are easy to run along with. 


DEEP LISTENING 


Some people think that to spend a lot of time gently 
humming nonsense to yourself is a waste of time. But 
ask yourself, What are you going to do with the time that 
you save? 

With all this, the first thing we have to understand is 
what I call deep listening. Very few people ever really 
listen, because instead of receiving the sound, they 
make comments on it all the time. They are thinking 
about it, and so the sound is never fully heard. You just 
have to let it take over, let it take you over completely, 
and then you get into the samadhi state of becoming it. 

This also means that you abandon your socially 
nervous personality. One of the reasons why people 
don’t sing is that they hear so many masters performing 


107 


STILL THE MIND 


on records that they are ashamed of their own voices. 
You may think there’s no point in singing unless you are 
good at it, but that is like saying there is no point in 
doing anything at all unless you are particularly gifted at 
it, which is ridiculous. Of course singing is very good for 
you, but we won't dwell on that because it brings too 
much purposiveness into it — having to fulfill a con- 
scious purpose and design. 


ANY SOUND FROM THE SOURCE 


Instead we are like children making noises because 
of the absorbing sound they produce. Children make all 
sorts of noises to explore the possibilities of what they 
can do with their voice. But you don’t see adults going 
around humming and burbling, even though it is 
tremendous fun. All of this is perfectly at home within 
meditation. 

Joshu Sasaki, a Zen master from Los Angeles, tells 
his students to stand up and laugh for five minutes every 
moming because that’s a better form of meditation than 
siting for a long time getting sore legs. It embarrasses 
the hell out of some people to even try it, and instead 
when they see someone doing it they ask, “What are 
you laughing at? You know I don’t see any point in 
laughing unless there’s something funny.” 

I had a friend, a very fat friend, and he was a theo- 
logical student. He used to take the elevated train that 


108 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


went from Evanston into Chicago and sit in the middle 
of the car where everybody could see him. He would 
sit there with a kind of vacant look and chuckle to him- 
self. And slowly he’d work it out, laughing louder and 
louder with all his flesh vibrating. By the time they got 
to Chicago, the whole car was inevitably hysterical with 
laughter. 

I tell you this story to illustrate that any sound you 
feel coming from the inside can be used as mantra med- 
itation, and the deeper the source, now matter how 
ridiculous, the better. 


109 


PART Te ok 


STILL THE MIND 


CHAPTER FIVE 


CONTEMPLATIVE 
RITUAL 


FR” A LONG TIME, the kind of religious celebrations 
that we have conducted in the West have been 
filled with the spoken word and impossibly didactic. 
Almost all our religious observances are nothing but 
talk and consist of telling God what to do, as if He or 
She did not already know, and telling the people 
what to do, as if they were able or even willing to 
change. All of this is throwing the book at people, 
and telling them the Word, and I think we have had 
enough of it. 

The history of religion in the West is nearly equiv- 
alent to the history of the failure of preaching. By and 
large, preaching is a kind of moral violence that 
excites people’s sense of guilt, and there is no less 
creative sense than that. You cannot love and feel 


113 


STILL THE MIND 


guilty at the same time, any more than you can be afraid 
and angry at the same time. 


A SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE 


What seems to me to be lacking in our Western reli- 
gious observances is some sort of ritual that gives us an 
opportunity for spiritual experience. By a spiritual expe- 
rience I am referring to a transformation of the individ- 
ual consciousness so that, in one way or another, the 
individual is able to realize his oneness with the eternal 
energy behind this universe, which some people call 
God and others prefer not to name or to conceive. 

When Western people hear that an Asian practices 
meditation, they ask, “What do you meditate on?’ But 
that question puzzles a Buddhist or a Hindu, because 
you do not meditate on anything, any more than you 
breathe on anything. You breathe, and in the same way, 
you meditate. The verb is in a way intransitive. 
Meditation is the act of allowing one’s thoughts to cease. 


ComING INTO TOUCH WITH REALITY 


In the beginning of the Yoga Sutra, Patanjali 
described yoga — which means union — as sponta- 
neously stopping the agitation of thinking. Thinking is 
talking to yourself, or figuring to yourself, and it is habit- 
ual for most of us. If I talk all the time, however, I do 


114 


CONTEMPLATIVE RITUAL 


not hear what anyone else has to say. Equally, if I talk 
to myself all the time, I will not have anything to think 
about except thoughts. 

There is no interval between thoughts during which 
I can come into touch with reality — that is to say, the 
world my thoughts represent, in the way words repre- 
sent events, or money represents wealth. If I am never 
silent in my head, I will find myself living in a world of 
total abstraction divorced from reality altogether. 

You may ask, “What is reality?” People have various 
theories about what it is, but it is important to remem- 
ber that they are all theories. Those who believe that 
reality is material are projecting upon the world a cer- 
tain philosophical theory about it, and those who say 
that it is mental, or spiritual, are doing likewise. 

Reality itself is neither mental nor spiritual, nor any 
other concept that we can have of it; reality is simply the 
present moment. 


You CANNOT MEDITATE 


Words are reality insofar as they are noises, but even 
that is saying too much. To meditate, you might think that 
you should attempt to suppress thought, but you don’t do 
that because you cannot meditate. Let me repeat that 
emphatically: you cannot meditate. You, your ego image, 
can only chatter, because when it stops, it isn’t there. 

When you are not thinking, you have no ego, 


115 


STILL THE MIND 


because your ego is nothing more than a habitual con- 
cept. The thinker behind the thoughts and the feeler 
behind the feelings are only thoughts; each of these is 
an idea of some reference point to which all our expe- 
riences happen. That thought, however, cuts us off from 
what we experience and creates the illusion of a gap or 
gulf between the knower and the known. 

This in turn is responsible for the feeling of alien- 
ation we have from the world, and as a result we suffer 
from conflict and hatred. The spirit of domination arises 
from that basic division that has been constructed in 
thought, and modem societies are typically obsessed 
with this highly destructive illusion. 

When you come to an end of thought, you don’t 
know how to meditate, and you don’t know what to do 
with your mind, and nobody can tell you. But still, 
thinking comes to an end naturally, and you just watch. 

You don’t have to ask who watches because that 
question merely arises from the fact that in grammar 
every verb has to have a subject by rule — but that is 
not a rule of nature, it is a rule of grammar. In nature 
there can be watching without a separate watcher. 


AND So You BEGIN TO MEDITATE 


When you realize that you have come to your wit’s 
end, you can begin meditation. Or meditation happens, 
and that happening is simply the watching of what is, of 


116 


CONTEMPLATIVE RITUAL 


all the information conveyed to you by your exterior 
and interior senses, and even the thoughts that keep 
chattering on about it all. 

You don’t try to stop those thoughts, you just let 
them run as if they were birds twittering outside, and 
they will eventually become tired and stop. 

But don’t worry about whether they do or don't. Just 
simply watch whatever it is that you are feeling, think- 
ing, or experiencing — that’s it. Just watch it, and don’t 
go out of your way to put any names on it. This is 
really what meditation is. 

You are in meditation in an eternal present, and you 
are not expecting any result. You are not doing it to 
improve yourself, because you found that you can’t. 
Your ego can’t possibly improve you because it is what’s 
in need of improvement, and your ego can’t let go of 
itself because it is a complex of thoughts called “cling- 
ing to one’s self.” When it is finally understood that it is 
unable to achieve a transformation of consciousness, or 
the vivid sense of union of individual and cosmos, it just 
evaporates. 


ONE OF THE Easiest Ways To ENTER IN 


One of the easiest ways to enter into the state of 
meditation, therefore, is listening to what is, and experi- 
encing the qualities of sound. 

Curiously enough, sound is a sense that bores us less 


117 


STILL THE MIND 


easily than sight. When you hear it, just listen to the ran- 
dom sounds that you know are going on in the room, or 
in the street. Listen as if you were listening to music, 
without trying to identify its source, to name it, or to put 
any label on it at all. Just enjoy whatever sound may be 
going on, whether it is outside or in the area where you 
are sitting. That is part of the ritual: just listen. 


LETTING SOUND HAPPEN THROUGH US 


We can go on from that listening to making sound 
ourselves while also listening to it. But instead of mak- 
ing sound, we will get the knack of letting it happen 
through us. 

Once, a great choirmaster in England was rehearsing 
a choir in the presence of the archbishop of Canterbury, 
who was then William Temple, a great theologian. And 
this was a rather raw choir that didn’t really know much 
about singing. The master gave them a hymn to sing that 
they knew very well, and to impress the archbishop they 
sang it with gusto, and it sounded forced and terrible. 

Then the choirmaster asked them to sing a 
little-known hymn and had them go over it several times 
until everybody got the hang of it. “Now,” he said, “I 
want you to sing this hymn again, but there’s one very 
important thing: don’t try to sing it. You mustn't try. You 
must think of the melody and let it sing itself.” And they 
sang it very well. 


118 


CONTEMPLATIVE RITUAL 


Afterward he turned to the archbishop and said, 
“Your Grace, that’s good theology, isn’t it?’ And it obvi- 
ously was, since the archbishop told me the story. 


MANTRA 


In India we find the use of mantra — a mantra is 
what we would call a chant, where words and sounds 
are chanted not for their meaning but for their sound. 
Most mantras are not intended to be understood in a 
discursive and intellectual sense. Instead, you are asked 
only to go down into the sound, and the sound pene- 
trates you. You are able to settle right to the bottom of 
it, because when you are listening to sound, and when 
you are letting sound hum through you, it is one of the 
most obvious manifestations of the energy of the uni- 
verse. 

It is commonly said in India that sound is Brahman, 
sound is God, and perhaps that is the original meaning 
of saying, “In the beginning was the Word.” It did not 
mean that in the beginning was the chatter, or in the 
beginning was the commandment or the orders. It meant 
the vibration, the sound of the word. 

So concentrate purely on the sound, and you will 
find some mantras that play in your ears are so simple 
that you will be able to join in with them effortlessly, 
and please do so quite freely. 

It is a pity that the Roman Catholic Church, which 


119 


STILL THE MIND 


used to have a mantric service, is dropping it and putting 
the Mass in the vernacular, and not particularly good ver- 
nacular at that, as far as the English translation is con- 
cerned. It has begun to sound ternbly intellectual, and 
often there is somebody standing by the altar with a 
microphone to explain what’s going on, so that it is no 
longer possible to practice contemplative prayer at Mass. 
Instead you are hammered with information, with exulta- 
tion, with edification all the time, and the Catholic Church 
should realize that in giving up Latin it has lost its magic. 

Although we associate mantras with religion, they 
are not supposed to be understood, because religion is 
that which is past understanding. Understanding may 
lead up to it, but to express religion intellectually is to 
try to use the intellect for something it cannot do. It is 
comparable to picking up the telephone and dialing 
W-H-A-T I-S G-O-D, and expecting to get a useful ans- 
wer. Although the telephone is very useful otherwise, 
you cannot find out the mystery of the universe 
through talk — only through awareness. 

For that reason I have suggested that churches get 
rid of their pews, where everybody looks at the backs 
of each other’s necks, and that they spread their floors 
with rugs and cushions, so that instead of a sermon they 
have a ritual in which people can approach an ineffable 
spiritual experience rather than being forced into a par- 
ticular pattern of thinking. 


120 


CONTEMPLATIVE RITUAL 


In this spirit I have only given the slightest sugges- 
tion of how one uses the mantra, or the silence, for 
meditation. You all have your own way of doing things 
like that, so do it your own way. This technique is a 
vehicle, or a support for contemplation, and I suggest 
you simply sit quietly, and when you feel settled pro- 
ceed into contemplation. 


STILL THE MIND 


Sit quietly and be with your breath, your mind, and 
all your feelings. 

It doesn’t matter whether you are sitting cross- 
legged or on your knees with your legs folded under- 
neath you. The point is to settle into a posture that is 
stable and comfortable. You can cross your legs in front 
of you, or if you are limber you may wish to try the 
half-lotus or full-lotus position. You can sit on a cush- 
ion with your knees bent and legs on either side, or you 
can sit in a chair. The idea is to be comfortable and find 
a position that you can maintain effortlessly. 

As you settle in, remember that although stillness is 
emphasized in meditation, this does not mean that you 
should hold still in a rigid way. Becoming still physi- 
cally helps one to find stillness of mind, but if you need 
to move, get comfortable, so that you can settle even 
more deeply. 

Keep your back upright and your head erect, but let 


121 


STILL THE MIND 


your arms relax. Rest the left palm in the right palm, and 
put your thumbs together as if you were holding an egg. 
Your hands should be positioned at your belly with your 
thumbs just below the navel. 

If you are sitting cross-legged you may wish to rock 
back and forth for a moment to find your natural center. 
If you are sitting in a chair, plant your feet on the ground 
so that you are grounded. 

Your mouth should be closed, the eyes lowered 
slightly. 

When you have found a stable posture, allow your 
awareness to sink into your breath and to find the bottom 
of your breath. You are not trying to cultivate a particular 
kind of breath; just gently pay attention to your breath- 
ing. Allow the breath to come and go as it may. 

That’s all you need to do. Your body will become 
still, and your mind will naturally, at some point, 
become still as well. 

That is the essential process of meditation. 


If you wish, you can begin to hum when you feel 
comfortable with it. As your voice rises, begin to play 
with the sound. 

The play of sound will eventually settle into a pat- 
tern, and a mantra will spontaneously form. Go with it, 
and in this moment you are experiencing ritual in its 
richest form. 


122 


ABOUT THE 
AUTHOR 


LAN WATTS WAS BORN in England in 1915. 

Beginning at age sixteen, when he wrote essays 
for the journal of the Buddhist Lodge in London, he 
developed a reputation over the next forty years as a 
foremost interpreter of Eastern philosophies for the 
West, eventually developing an audience of millions 
who were enriched through his books, tape record- 
ings, radio and television appearances, and public 
lectures. He became widely recognized for his Zen 
writings and for The Book on the Taboo Against 
Knowing Who You Are. In all, Watts wrote more than 
twenty-five books and recorded hundreds of lectures 
and seminars, all building toward a personal philoso- 
phy he shared honestly and joyfully with readers and 


123 


STILL THE MIND 


listeners throughout the world. His overall works have 
presented a model of individuality and self-expression 
that can be matched by few philosophers. 

Watts came to the United States in 1938 and earned 
a master’s degree in theology from Seabury-Westem 
Theological Seminary. He was Episcopal Chaplain at 
Northwestern University during World War II, and held 
fellowships from Harvard University and the Bollingen 
Foundation. He became professor and dean of the 
American Academy of Asian Studies in San Francisco 
and lectured and traveled widely. 

He died in 1973 at his home in northern California, 
survived by his second wife and seven children. 


For more information, and for access to a greater 
collection of his recorded material, call the Electronic 


University at (800) 969-2887, or see these websites: 


www.alanwatts.com 
www.audiowisdom.com 


124 


RECOMMENDED 
READING 


If you enjoyed Still the Mind, we highly recommend 
the following books and cassettes from New World 
Library: 


As You Think by James Allen is a quiet, powerful 
masterpiece that shows us the greatness we are capa- 
ble of and gives us the tools to achieve it. 


Body Mind Mastery: Creating Success in Sport and 
Life by Dan Millman offers a regimen that integrates 
physical training with psychological growth, trans- 
forming training into a path of personal growth and 
spiritual discovery. 


125 


STILL THE MIND 


Creative Visualization by Shakti Gawain. This pioneer- 
ing best-seller and perennial favorite teaches methods of 
meditation and visualization that have proven to have 
powerful effects on readers’ lives. 


Living in the Light: A Guide to Personal and Planetary 
Transformation by Shakti Gawain emphasizes the 
importance of listening to our intuition and relying on it 
as a guiding force in our lives. 


Meditation for Busy People by Dawn Groves is a concise, 
jargon-free guide to simple forms of meditation that any- 
one can practice. 


Meditation: The Complete Guide by Patricia Monaghan 
and Eleanor G. Viereck gives us a clear explanation of 
more than fifty meditation practices, including the his- 
torical background, contemporary use, a description of 
the practice, and resource lists. 


The Seven Spiritual Laws of Success by Deepak Chopra 
distills the essence of his teachings into simple yet pow- 
erful principles that can be easily applied in all areas of 
your life. 


Simple Truths by Kent Nerbum gives us, in simple, moving 
prose, clear and gentle guidance on the big issues in life. 


126 


RECOMMENDED READING 


Stress Reduction and Creative Meditations by Marc Allen 
is a powerful and popular forty-five-minute audiocas- 
sette program. Side One guides us through a deep, com- 
plete physical relaxation; Side Two is filled with creative 
meditations for health, abundance, fulfilling relation- 
ships, and attainment of life’s purpose. 


A Visionary Life: Conversations on Personal and 
Planetary Evolution by Marc Allen gives readers simple 
keys to first envision and then move toward realizing 
their deepest dreams and highest aspirations. 


The Wonders of Solitude, edited by Dale Salwak, is a 
deeply touching volume of more than 300 inspiring and 
diverse quotations on the nature, importance, and 
power of solitude. 


You Can Be Happy No Matter What by Richard Carlson 
is the book many consider the finest work to date by the 
best-selling author of Don’t Sweat the Small Stuff. The 
secret to happiness is deceptively simple, for happiness, 
inner peace, and contentment is our natural state, 
beyond the mental barriers we have created. 


New World Library is dedicated to publishing 
books and audio and video projects 
that inspire and challenge us 
to improve the quality of our lives 
and the world. 


New World Library 
14 Pamaron Way 
Novato, CA 94949 


Phone: (415) 884-2100 
Fax: (415) 884-2199 
Or call toll-free (800) 972-6657 
Catalog Requests: Ext. 50 
Ordering: Ext. 52 


E-mail: escort@nwlib.com 
www.newworldlibrary.com 


