THE TAO 
OF PHILOSOPHY 


THE [AO oF 
PHILOSOPHY 


THE EDITED TRANSCRIPTS 


ALAN WATTS 
at a seminar aboard the Vallejo, 1966 


THE [AO oF 
PHILOSOPHY 


THE EDITED TRANSCRIPTS 


Ay waMs 


TUTTLE PUBLISHING 
Tokyo « Rutland, Vermont « Singapore 


First paperback edition published in 2002 by Tuttle Publishing, an 
imprint of Periplus Editions (HK) Ltd., with editorial offices at 364 
Innovation Drive, North Clarendon, Vermont 05759. 


Copyright © 1995 Mark Watts 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or 
utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval 
system, without prior written permission from the publisher. 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 


Watts, Alan, 1915-1973 
The Tao of philosophy: the edited transcripts / Alan Watts. 
96p., 23cm.—(Love of wisdom library) 
1. Philosophy, Comparative. 2. East and West. 3. Philosophy. 
I. Title. II. Series: Watts, Alan, 1915-1973. Alan Watts “Love of 
wisdom” library. 
B799.W34 1995 
191—dc20 95-22261 
CIP 


Photo courtesy of Alan Watts Electronic Educational Programs 


ISBN- 10: 0-8048-3204-8 
ISBN-13: 978-0-8048-3204-5 
ISBN: 978-1-4629-1673-3 (ebook) 


Distributed by: 


North America, Latin America & Europe 
Tuttle Publishing 

364 Innovation Drive 

North Clarendon, VT 05759-9436 

Tel: I (802) 773-8930 

Fax: I (802) 773-6993 

tuttle-sales@gol.com 


www.tuttlepublishing.com 


Asia Pacific 

Berkeley Books Pte Ltd 

61 Tai Seng Avenue #02-12 
Singapore 534167 

Tel: (65) 6280-1330 

Fax: (65) 6280-6290 
tuttle-sales@gol.com 
www.periplus.com 


Japan 

Tuttle Publishing 

Yaekari Building, 3rd Floor 

5-4-12 Osaki, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 
Japan 141-0032 

Tel: (81) 3 5437-0171 

Fax: (81) 3 5437-0755 
tuttle-sales@gol.com 


10090807 10987 
Cover design by Jeannet Leenderste 
Printed in Singapore 


Tuttle Publishing® is a registered trademark of Tuttle Publishing, a 
division of Periplus Editions (HK) Ltd. 


Dedicated to Al Chung-liang Huang 


CONTENTS 


Introduction 
Foreword: On Philosophical Synthesis 
I. Myth of Myself 
II. Man in Nature 
II. Symbols and Meaning 
IV. Limits of Language 
V. Images of God 
VI. Sense of Nonsense 
VII. Coincidence of Opposites 
VIIL Seeing Through the Net 


INTRODUCTION 


) q elcome to The Tao of Philosophy, and to some remarkable ideas 


about the role of philosophical inquiry and the “true purpose” of living. 
These thoughts spring from a life-long study of Eastern philosophy by an 
inspired and articulate Westerner, Alan Watts. A prolific writer and 
speaker, Watts is well known for his numerous books on Christianity, 
Zen, Hinduism, and Taoism, including his classic The Way of Zen. 
Originally from England, Watts was the Chaplain at Northwestern 
University during the time of World War II. Following the publication of 
Behold the Spirit in 1947, Watts left the Church in 1950, and soon 
thereafter traveled to California to teach at the Academy for Asian 
Studies in San Francisco with Dr. Fredrick Spiegelberg. 


Three years later Watts began the “Way Beyond the West” radio 
series on KPFA in Berkeley. His radio talks were so well received in the 
Bay Area that they continued on KPFA for thirty years. At various times 
the shows also aired on other Pacifica stations in Los Angeles, New York, 
and Boston on Sunday mornings, and became popularly known as “the 
hangover cure” in the late sixties and early seventies. During this period 
the Los Angeles Times reviewed his books and described Watts as 
“perhaps the foremost Western interpreter of Eastern thought.” He spoke 
regularly at colleges, seminar centers, and progressive churches across 
the country. The Sunday radio programs were by that time recorded in 
the field instead of at the studios of KPFA, and his early radio style of 
presentation gave way to a dynamic speaking style that earned him a 
reputation as a modern philosopher/entertainer. Alan Watts passed away 
in 1973 in the midst of writing a companion volume to The Way of Zen 
on Taoism. 

Recently, when I began to select original live recordings to re- 
introduce radio audiences to my father’s spoken works, many of his later 
talks with generally Taoist themes stood out as excellent examples of his 


mature philosophy. It was apparent that he felt comfortable with a view 
of the world which is “of itself so,” and not the construct of a personified 
ultimate reality. The wisdom of working with the course and current of 
nature to solve the problems of ecological balance also appealed to his 
sensibilities, and he spoke of the “organism/environment” as “more 
nearly us than I” 


The Tao of Philosophy is a literary adaptation of talks selected to 
introduce the new “Love of Wisdom” series to today’s audiences. The 
following chapters provide rich examples of the way in which the 
philosophy of the Tao is as contemporary today as it was when it 
flourished in China thousands of years ago. Perhaps most significantly, 
these selections offer modern society a clearer understanding of what it 
will take for a successful reintegration of humans in nature. 


We begin with a foreword written in July of 1953, entitled “On 
Philosophical Synthesis.” The contrast between the style of this earlier 
article and the following chapters reveals the transformation Watts 
underwent as he moved from the academic environment, in which these 
questions were first raised, to the personal experience, in which they 
were resolved. For as his close friend, poet Elsa Gidlow, wrote of his 
growing into the spirit of the Tao: 


.. it transformed him as he allowed it to permeate his being, so 
that the reserved, somewhat uptight young Englishman, living 
overmuch in his head, in his mature years became an outgoing, 
spontaneously playful, joyous world sage. He believed that a 
widespread absorption of the profound wisdom of Taoism could 
similarly transform the West. 


—Mark Watts 
1995, San Anselmo, California 


FOREWORD 


ON PHILOSOPHICAL SYNTHESIS 


L, many respects the formal, academic philosophy of the West has 


come to a dead end, having confined itself to a method of inquiry which 
compels it to move in a vicious circle. This is especially true in 
epistemology, which, because it involves the whole work of self- 
knowledge, is really the central problem of philosophy. As the West 
understands it, epistemology is really the task of trying to “think 
thought”—to construct words about words about words—since 
philosophical thinking is, for us, not a changing but a verbalization of 
experience. 


The inquiring mind is perennially fascinated with the problem of the 
mind’s own nature and origins—not only to know just by way of 
information what knowing is, but also to employ such information for 
the greater control of the knower, for is it not frequently said that the 
problem of modern man is to be able to control himself as effectively as 
he can control his environment? 


But there is a basic contradiction in the attempt of reason to 
transcend itself. To know the knower, to control the controller, and to 
think thought implies a circular and impossible situation, like the effort 
to bite one’s own teeth. It is for this reason that modern logical 
philosophy tends to dismiss such inquiries as “metaphysical and 
meaningless” and to confine philosophy to the investigation of relatively 
pedestrian problems of logic and ethics. This situation has arisen in the 
West because, for us, “to know” really means “to control”; that is, to see 
how events may be fitted to consistent orders of words and symbols so 
that we may predict and govern their course. But this mania for control 
leads ultimately to a barren confusion, because we ourselves are by no 
means separated from the environment we are trying to control. 


Western man has been able to pursue this mania only so far because of 
his acute feeling of individual isolation, of the separation of his “I” from 
all else. Thus, in philosophy, in technology, and in the whole ordering of 
our society, we run into the ancient problem of Quis custodiet custodies? 
—who guards the guard, polices the policeman, plans the planner, and 
controls the controller? The logical end of all this is the totalitarian state 
of George Orwell’s 1984, the nightmare of mutual espionage. 


On the other hand, such major Oriental philosophies as the Vedanta, 
Buddhism, and Taoism arise in cultures far less concerned with 
controlling the world, and in which the whole notion of the dominance 
of the universe by man (the conscious ego) seems palpably absurd. For 
all these philosophies it is a first principle that the seeming separateness 
of the ego from the world, so that it could be its own controller, is an 
illusion. Individual consciousness did not contrive itself and, not being 
sui generis (un-born, anutpanna), can never be the directive source of 
life. 


Thus, for Oriental philosophy, knowledge is not control. It is rather 
the “sensation”—the vivid realization—that “I” am not this individualized 
consciousness alone, but the matrix from which it arises. This knowledge 
consists, not in a verbal proposition, but in a psychological change, 
similar to that which occurs in the cure of a psychosis. One in whom this 
change has come to pass does not attempt to control the world, or 
himself, by the efforts of his own will. He learns the art of “letting things 
happen,’ which is no mere passivity but, on the contrary, a creative 
technique familiar to the activity of many artists, musicians, and 
inventors in our own culture, whereby skill and insight are found to be 
the fruits of a certain “dynamic” relaxation. 


It is obvious that a philosophy, a wisdom, which offers deliverance 
from the vicious circle of “controlling the controller” is of immense value 
to cultures, like our own, which are hopelessly confused by their 
schemes to organize themselves. However, it will be extraordinarily 
difficult for a wisdom of this kind to come within the scope of Western 
philosophy unless the latter can admit that philosophy is more than 
logic, more than verbalization, to the point where philosophy can 
include the transformation of the very processes of the mind, and not 
simply of the words and symbols which the mind employs. 


THE [AO oF 
PHILOSOPHY 


THE EDITED TRANSCRIPTS 


MyTH OF MYSELF 


CHAPTER ONE 


| (Pe that if we are honest with ourselves, the most fascinating 


problem in the world is “Who am I?” What do you mean and what do 
you feel when you say the word “I”? I do not think there can be a more 
fascinating preoccupation than that because it is so elusive and hidden. 
What you are in your inmost being escapes your examination in rather 
the same way that you can not look directly into your own eyes without 
using a mirror, and that is why there is always an element of profound 
mystery in the question of who we are. This problem has fascinated me 
for many years and so I have asked a number of people, “What do you 
mean by the word ‘I’?” Now there is a certain agreement about this 
especially among people who live in Western civilization, and we have 
what I have called the conception of ourselves as a skin-encapsulated 
ego. 

Most of us feel “I”—my ego, my self, my source of consciousness—to 
be a center of awareness and of a source of action that resides in the 
middle of a bag of skin. It is very funny how we use the word “I” In 
common speech, we are not accustomed to say, “I am a body.’ We rather 
say, “I have a body.’ We do not say, “I beat my heart” in the same way we 
say, “I walk, I think, I talk” We feel that our heart beats itself, and that 
has nothing very much to do with “I” In other words, we do not regard 
“I, myself” as identical with our whole physical organism. We regard it as 
something inside it, and most Western people locate their ego inside 
their heads. You are somewhere between your eyes and between your 
ears, and the rest of you dangles from that point of reference. This is not 
so in other cultures. When a Chinese or Japanese person wants to locate 
the center of himself, he points to what Japanese call the kokoro and the 
Chinese call shin, the heart-mind. Some people also locate themselves in 


the solar plexus, but by and large we locate ourselves behind the eyes 
and somewhere between the ears. It is as if within the dome of the skull 
there was some sort of arrangement such as there is at SAC Air Force 
headquarters in Denver where men sit in great rooms surrounded with 
radar screens and all sorts of monitors, watching the movements of 
planes all over the world. So, in the same way, we have really the idea of 
ourselves as a little person inside our heads who has earphones on which 
bring messages from the ears, and who has a television set in front of 
him which brings messages from the eyes, and has all sorts of electrodes 
all over his body giving him signals from the hands, and so on. He has a 
panel in front of him with buttons and dials and things, and so he more 
or less controls the body. He is not the same as the body because “I” am 
in charge of what are called the voluntary actions, but what are called the 
involuntary actions of the body happen to me. I am pushed around by 
them, although to some extent also I can push my body around. This, I 
have concluded, is the ordinary, average conception of what is one’s self. 


Look at the way children, influenced by our cultural environment, 
ask questions. “Mommy, who would I have been if my father had been 
someone else?” The child gets the idea from our culture that the father 
and mother gave him a body into which he was popped at some 
moment; whether it was conception or parturition is a little bit vague, 
but there is in our whole way of thinking the idea that we are a soul, a 
spiritual essence of some kind, imprisoned inside a body. We look out 
upon a world that is foreign to us and, in the words of the poet A.E. 
Housman, perceive “I, a stranger and afraid, in a world I never made.” 
Therefore we speak of confronting reality, facing the facts. We speak of 
coming into this world, and there is a sensation we are brought up with 
of being an island of consciousness locked up in a bag of skin. Outside us 
we face a world that is profoundly alien to us in the sense that what is 
outside “me” is not me, and this sets up a fundamental sensation of 
hostility and estrangement between ourselves and the so-called external 
world. Therefore we go on to talk about the conquest of nature, the 
conquest of space, and view ourselves in a kind of battle array towards 
the whole world outside us. I shall have much more to say about that in 
the second chapter, but in the first I want to examine the strange feeling 
of being an isolated self. 


Now actually it is absolutely absurd to say that we came into this 
world. We did not: we came out of it! What do you think you are? 
Suppose this world is a tree. Are you leaves on its branches or are you a 
bunch of birds from somewhere else that settled on a dead old tree? 


Surely everything that we know about living organisms—from the 
standpoint of the sciences—shows us that we grow out of this world, that 
each one of us is what you might call a symptom of the state of the 
universe as a whole. However, that is not part of our common sense. 


Western man has, for many centuries, been under the influence of 
two great myths. When I use the word “myth” I do not necessarily mean 
a falsehood. The word myth signifies a great idea in terms of which man 
tries to make sense with the world; it may be an idea, or it may be an 
image. Now the first of two images which have most profoundly 
influenced Western man is the image of the world as an artifact, much 
like a jar made by a potter. Indeed, in the Book of Genesis there comes 
the idea that man was originally a clay figurine made out of the earth by 
the Lord God who then breathed into this clay figurine and gave it life. 
The whole of Western thought is profoundly influenced through and 
through by the idea that all things—all events, all people, all mountains, 
all stars, all flowers, all grasshoppers, all worms—are artifacts; they have 
been made. It is therefore natural for a Western child to say to its 
mother, “How was I made?” On the other hand, that would be quite an 
unnatural question for a Chinese child, because the Chinese do not think 
of nature as something that was made. Instead, they look upon it as 
something that grows, and the two processes are quite different. When 
you make something you put it together: you assemble parts, or you 
carve an image out of wood or stone, working from the outside to the 
inside. However, when you watch something grow, it works in an entirely 
different way. It does not assemble its parts. It expands from within and 
gradually complicates itself, expanding outwards, like a bud blossoming 
or a seed turning into a plant. 


Yet behind our whole thought process in the West is the idea that the 
world is an artifact and that it is put together by a celestial architect, 
carpenter, and artist, who therefore knows how it was done. When I was 
a little boy I asked many questions which my mother could not answer. 
She used to resort in desperation to saying, “My dear, there are some 
things that we are not meant to know,’ and I would say, “Well, will we 
ever find out?” And she would answer, “Yes, when we die and we go to 
Heaven it will all be made clear’ So I used to think that on wet 
afternoons in Heaven we would all sit around the throne of grace and say 
to the Lord God, “Now, just why did you do it this way, and how did you 
manage at that?” and He would explain it and make it all very clear. All 
questions would be answered because, as we have in popular theology 
understood the Lord God, He is the mastermind who knows everything. 


If you ask the Lord God exactly how high is Mount Whitney to the 
nearest millimeter, He would know exactly, just like that, and would tell 
you. You could ask any question of God, because He is the cosmic 
Encyclopedia Britannica. However, this particular image, or myth, 
became too much for Western man because it is oppressive to feel that 
you are known through and through, and watched all the time by an 
infinitely just judge. 

I have a friend who is a very enlightened Catholic convert, and in her 
bathroom she has an old-fashioned toilet, and on the pipe that connects 
the tank with the toilet seat there is a little framed picture of an eye. 
Underneath it, in Gothic letters, is written “Thou God seest me’ 
Everywhere is this eye—watching, watching, watching—watching and 
judging you, so that you always feel you are never really by yourself. The 
old gentleman is observing you and writing notes in his black book, and 
the idea of this became too much for the West. We had to get rid of it, 
and so instead we developed another myth, the myth of the purely 
mechanical universe. This myth was invented at the end of the 
eighteenth century, and became increasingly fashionable throughout the 
course of the nineteenth century and well into the twentieth century, so 
that today it is common sense. Very few people today really believe in 
God in the old sense. They say they do, but although they really hope 
there is a God, they do not really have faith in God. They fervently wish 
that there was one, and feel that they ought to believe that there is, but 
the idea of the universe being ruled by that marvelous old gentleman is 
no longer plausible. It is not that anybody has disproved it, but it just 
somehow does not go with our knowledge of the vast infinitude of 
galaxies and of the immense light-year distances between them, and so 
on. 


Instead, it has become fashionable, and it is nothing more than a 
fashion, to believe that the universe is dumb and stupid, and that 
intelligence, values, love, and fine feelings reside only within the bag of 
the human epidermis, and beyond that it is simply a kind of a chaotic, 
stupid interaction of blind forces. For example, courtesy of Dr. Freud, we 
have the idea that biological life is based on something called “libido,” 
which was a very loaded word. This blind, ruthless, uncomprehending 
lust is seen as the foundation of the human unconscious, and to thinkers 
of the nineteenth century like Hegel, Darwin, and T.H. Huxley, there was 
similarly the notion that at the root of being is an energy, and this energy 
is blind. This energy is just energy, and it is utterly and totally stupid, and 
our intelligence is an unfortunate accident. By some weird freak of 


evolution we came to be these feeling and rational beings, at least more 
or less rational, but all this is a ghastly mistake because we are here in a 
universe that has nothing in common with us. It does not share our 
feelings, has no real interest in us, and we are just a sort of cosmic fluke. 
Therefore, the only hope for mankind is to beat this irrational universe 
into submission, to conquer it and master it. Of course all this is 
perfectly idiotic. If you think that the idea of the universe has been the 
creation of a benevolent old gentleman, you soon realize He is not so 
benevolent after all, and He takes an attitude of “this is going to hurt me 
more than it is going to hurt you.” You can have that idea on the one 
hand, and if that becomes uncomfortable you can exchange it for its 
opposite idea that the ultimate reality does not have any intelligence at 
all, and at least that would get rid of the old bogey in the sky in exchange 
for a picture of the world that is completely stupid. 


Of course, these ideas do not really make any sense because you 
cannot get an intelligent organism, such as a human being, out of an 
unintelligent universe. You do not find an intelligent organism living in 
an unintelligent environment. Here is a tree in the garden, and every 
summer it produces apples; and we call it an apple tree because the tree 
“apples”—that is what it does. Here is a solar system inside a galaxy, and 
one of the peculiarities of this solar system is that, at least on the planet 
earth, it “peoples” in just the same way that an apple tree “apples.” Now, 
maybe two million years ago, somebody came from another galaxy in a 
flying saucer and had a look at this solar system, and they looked it over 
and shrugged their shoulders and said, “Just a bunch of rocks,’ and they 
went away. Later on, two million years later, they came around again and 
they looked at it and they said, “Excuse me, we thought it was a bunch of 
rocks but it is peopling, and it is alive after all; it has done something 
intelligent” We grow out of this world in exactly the same way that the 
apples grow on the apple tree, and if evolution means anything, it means 
that. But curiously, we twist it. We say, “Well, first of all in the beginning 
there was nothing but gas and rock. Then intelligence happened to arise 
in it like a sort of fungus or slime on the top of the whole thing” 
However, we are thinking in a way that disconnects the intelligence from 
the rocks. Where there are rocks, watch out, because the rocks are going 
eventually to come alive and they are going to have people crawling over 
them. It is only a matter of time, just in the same way the acorn is 
eventually going to turn into the oak because it has the potentiality of 
that within it. Watch out, because rocks are not dead. 


Now all of this depends on what kind of attitude you want to take to 


the world. If you want to put the world down, you might say, “Oh well, 
fundamentally it is only a lot of geology, sheer stupidity, and it just so 
happens that a kind of a freak comes up in it which we call 
consciousness.’ Now, that is an attitude that you may take when you 
want to prove to people that you are a tough guy, that you are realistic, 
that you face facts, and that you do not indulge in wishful thinking. 
However, it is just a matter of role-playing, and you must be aware of 
these things; these are fashions in the intellectual world. On the other 
hand, if you feel warm-hearted towards the universe, you put it up, 
instead of putting it down, and you say about rocks, “They are really 
conscious, but it is a different form of consciousness.” After all, when I 
tap on this crystal, which is glass, it makes a noise. Now that resonance is 
an extremely primitive form of consciousness. Of course, consciousness 
is much more subtle than that, but when you hit a bell and it rings, or 
you touch a crystal and it responds, inside itself it has a very simple 
reaction. It goes “jangle” inside, whereas we go “jangle” with all sorts of 
colors and lights and intelligence, ideas, and thoughts, and it is more 
complicated. Yet both are equally conscious, but conscious in different 
ways. Now that is a perfectly acceptable idea. All I am saying is that 
minerals are a rudimentary form of consciousness, whereas other people 
are saying that consciousness is a complicated form of minerals. What 
they want to do is to say everything is kind of drab, whereas what I want 
to say is “Hooray! Life is a good show!” 


Nevertheless, as we study man or any other living organism and try 
and describe him accurately and scientifically, we find that our normal 
sensation of ourselves as isolated egos inside a bag of skin is a 
hallucination. It really is absolutely nutty because when you describe 
human behavior, or the behavior of a mouse or a rat or a chicken (or any 
organism you want to describe), you find that as you try to describe its 
behavior accurately you must also describe the behavior of its 
environment. Supposing I walk and you want to describe the action of 
walking. You cannot talk about my walking without also describing the 
floor, because if you do not describe the floor and the space in which I 
am moving all you will be describing is somebody swinging their legs in 
empty space. So as to describe my walking, you must describe the space 
in which you find me. You could not see me unless you could also see my 
background, that which stands behind me. If the boundaries of my skin 
were coterminus with your whole field of vision you would not see me at 
all. You would see the things that filled your field of vision, but you 
would not see me, because in order to see me you have to see not only 


what is inside the boundary of my skin, but you have to see what is 
outside it too. 


Now, that is terribly important. Really, the fundamental, ultimate 
mystery—the only thing you need to know to understand the deepest 
metaphysical secrets—is this: that for every outside there is an inside and 
for every inside there is an outside, and although they are different, they 
go together. There is, in other words, a secret conspiracy between all 
insides and all outsides, and the conspiracy is to look as different as 
possible, and yet underneath to be identical. You do not find one without 
the other. Tweedledee and Tweedledum agreed to have a battle. So there 
is a secret: what is esoteric, what is profound, and what is deep is what 
we will call the “implicit” What is obvious and in the open is what we 
will call the “explicit” So, I in my environment and you in your 
environment are explicitly as different as different could be, but 
implicitly we go together. This is quickly discovered by the scientist when 
he tries to describe exactly what you do, and since the whole art of 
science is to describe your behavior, it is not something that can be 
separated from the world around you. ‘The scientist realizes then that you 
are something that the whole world is doing, just as when the sea has 
waves on it the ocean is waving. So each one of us is a “waving” of the 
whole cosmos, the entire works, all there is, and with each one of us it is 
waving and saying, “Yoo-hoo! Here I am!” yet it does it differently each 
time because variety is the spice of life. 


However, the funny thing is we have not been brought up to feel that 
way. Instead of feeling that we, each one of us, are something that the 
whole realm of being is doing, we feel that we are something that has 
come into the whole realm of being as a stranger. When we are born we 
do not really know where we came from because we do not remember, 
and so we think when we die that is just going to be that. Some people 
console themselves with the idea that they are going to Heaven, or that 
they are going to be reincarnated, or something, but people do not really 
believe that. For most people it is implausible, and the real thing that 
haunts them is that when they die they will go to sleep and are never 
going to wake up. They are going to be locked up in the safe deposit box 
of darkness forever and ever. However, all of this depends upon a false 
notion of what is one’s self. Now, the reason why we have this false 
notion of ourselves, as far as I can understand it, is that we have 
specialized in one particular kind of consciousness. Generally speaking, 
we have two kinds of consciousness. One I will call the “spotlight,” and 
the other the “floodlight.” The spotlight is what we call conscious 


attention, and we are trained from childhood that it is the most valuable 
form of perception. When the teacher in class says, “Pay attention!” 
everybody stares, and looks right at the teacher. That is spotlight 
consciousness; fixing your mind on one thing at a time. You concentrate, 
and even though you may not be able to have a very long attention span, 
nevertheless you use your spotlight: one thing after another, one thing 
after another ... flip, flip, flip, flip, flip. However, we also have floodlight 
consciousness. For example, you can drive your car for several miles with 
a friend sitting next to you, and your spotlight consciousness may be 
completely absorbed in talking to your friend. Nevertheless, your 
floodlight consciousness will manage the driving of the car, will notice all 
the stoplights, the other idiots on the road, and so on, and you will get 
there safely without even thinking about it. 


However, our culture has taught us to specialize in spotlight 
consciousness, and to identify ourselves with that form of consciousness 
alone. “I am my spotlight consciousness, my conscious attention; that is 
my ego; that is me” Although we very largely ignore it, the floodlight 
consciousness is working all the time, and every nerve ending that we 
have is its instrument. You can go out to a luncheon and sit next to Mrs. 
So-and-So, and you go home and your wife asks you, “Was Mrs. So-and- 
So there?” 


“Yes, I sat next to her” 
“Well, what was she wearing?” 
“Well, I haven't the faintest idea” 


You saw, but you did not notice. Now, because we have been brought 
up to identify ourselves with the spotlight consciousness, and the 
floodlight consciousness is undervalued, we have the sensation of 
ourselves as being just the spotlight, just the ego that looks and attends 
to this and that and the other. So we ignore and are unaware of the vast, 
vast extent of our being. People, who by various methods become fully 
aware of their floodlight consciousness, have what is called “a mystical 
experience,’ or what the Buddhists call bodhi, an awakening. The Hindus 
call it moksha, or liberation, because they discover that the real deep, 
deep self, that which you really are fundamentally and forever, is the 
whole of being—all that there is, the works, that is you. Only that 
universal self that is you has a capacity to focus itself at ever so many 
different here-and-nows. So, as William James said, “The word ‘T’ is really 
a word of position like ‘this; or ‘here.” Just as a sun or star has many rays, 
so the whole cosmos expresses itself in you and you and you in all the 


different variations. It plays games: it plays the John Doe game, the Mary 
Smith game. It plays the beetle game, the butterfly game, the bird game, 
the pigeon game, the fish game, the star game. These are games that 
differ from each other just like backgammon, bridge, poker, or pinochle; 
or like the waltz, mazurka, minuet, and tango. It dances with infinite 
variety, but every single dance that it does—that is to say, you—is what 
the whole thing is doing. However, we forget and we do not know who 
we are. We are brought up in a special way so that we are unaware of the 
connection, and unaware that each one of us is the works, playing it this 
way for awhile. So we have been taught to dread death as if it were the 
end of the show because it will not happen any more. Therefore we are 
conditioned to be afraid of all the things that might bring about death: 
pain, sickness, suffering. If you are not really vividly aware of the fact 
that you are basically “the works,’ chances are you have no real joy in life, 
and you are just a bundle of anxiety mixed in with guilt. 


When we bring children into the world, we play awful games with 
them. Instead of saying, “How do you do? Welcome to the human race. 
Now my dear, we are playing some very complicated games, and these 
are the rules of the game we are playing. I want you to understand them, 
and when you learn them when you get a little bit older you might be 
able to think up some better rules, but for now I want you to play by our 
rules.” Instead of being quite direct with our children, we say, “You are 
here on probation, and you must understand that. Maybe when you 
grow up a bit you will be acceptable, but until then you should be seen 
and not heard. You are a mess, and you have to be educated and 
schooled until you are human.” These attitudes which are inculcated into 
us from infancy go on into old age because the way you start out is liable 
to be the way you finish. So people are going around feeling 
fundamentally that they do not belong because their parents said to 
them in the first place, “Look, you are here on sufferance. You are on 
probation. You are not a human being yet.’ So people feel this right on 
into old age and figure that the universe is presided over by this kind of 
awful God-the-Father parent who has our best interest at heart, and is 
loving, but “Who spares the rod, spoils the child. Whom the Lord loveth, 
He chasteneth.” So, where is it going to hit next? You do not feel that you 
belong, and so we get this ghastly sense of what I call the “Christian ego,’ 
and it is a little bit Jewish, too, who really feels that he does not belong 
and is a homeless orphan. The Christians say we are sons of God by 
adoption; not real sons but only by adoption, grace, and sufferance. So 
there comes a sensation so characteristic of Western man and, indeed, of 


all highly civilized people, of being a stranger on the earth, a momentary 
flash of consciousness between two eternal blacknesses. 


Therefore, we find ourselves in constant contentiousness with 
everything around us, not only with other people but with the earth, 
with the waters, and the symbol of it all in our culture is the bulldozer. 
Where I live aboard a ferryboat there are opposite us across the water 
some lovely hills. They are going to put houses there, but they are going 
to try and put the sort of houses you would find in a suburban tract lot 
on a hill. A good architect can make a house fit the hill and he does not 
have to destroy a hill to put a house on it. If you want to live on a hill, 
obviously you want to live on a hill, and you do not want to destroy the 
hill by virtue of living on it. Yet that is what they do, especially in 
California. In California where we have lots of hills, they always scrape 
the tops off them until they are perfectly flat. They put the houses on, 
and then scrape the hill off in terraces all the way down. Of course, by 
doing this they upset the ecology of the hill and eventually all houses fall 
down, but the builder says, “So what?” By that time the payments have 
been made and obviously the builder does not feel that the external 
world is his own body, but of course it is. The external world is your own 
body extended, and an intelligent architect always goes up to the hill and 
says, “Good afternoon. I very much want to build a house here, and I 
would want to know what kind of house you would like built on you” 
Instead of that, he has a prejudice about what kind of a house is a house, 
and he has to make the hill submit to this prejudice, and so he has to 
ruin the hill and get rid of it pretty much to put a house on it. He is 
absolutely out of his mind because he does not realize that the external 
world is his body, and when he realizes that he will get his mind back. 


MAN IN NATURE 


CHAPTER Two 


Pes I was discussing the disparity between the way in which 


most human beings experience their own existence, and the way man’s 
being and nature is described in the sciences. I was pointing out that 
sciences such as ecology and biology, for example, describe and study the 
relationship between all organisms and their environments. However, 
the way they describe human, animal, and insect behavior is in flat 
contradiction with the way in which most of us experience our thinking, 
our action, and our existence. We have been brought up to experience 
ourselves as isolated centers of awareness and action, placed in a world 
that is not us, that is foreign, alien, and is something other which we 
confront. Whereas, in fact, the way an ecologist describes human 
behavior is as an action. What you do is what the whole universe is doing 
at the place you call “here and now,’ and you are something the whole 
universe is doing in the same way that a wave is something that the 
whole ocean is doing. 


Now, this is not what you might call a fatalistic or deterministic idea. 
You might be a fatalist if you think that you are a sort of puppet which 
life pushes around and that you are separate from life, but life dominates 
you. However, in the point of view I am expressing, the real you is not a 
puppet which life pushes around. The real deep down you is the whole 
universe, and it is doing your living organism and all of its behavior, and 
expressing it as a singer sings a song. We have been hoodwinked into the 
feeling that we exist only inside our skins, and I was showing you last 
night that that is a hallucination. It is just as nutty as anybody could be 
who thinks that he is Napoleon, or thinks he is a poached egg and goes 
around finding a piece of toast to sit on. It is just like that, a 
hallucination. I was discussing how we need to experience ourselves in 


such a way that we could say that our real body is not just what is inside 
the skin but includes our whole total external environment. If we do not 
experience ourselves that way, we tend to mistreat our environment. We 
treat it as an enemy. We try to beat it into submission, and if we do that, 
then comes disaster. We exploit the world we live in and we do not treat 
it with love and gentleness and respect. We cut down millions of acres of 
forests to turn it into newspaper, of all things. Lovely trees are turned 
into information about nothing, and we do not replace them properly. 
We kick the world around in revenge for our feeling that really we are 
puppets which the world kicks around. 


So, my main point last night was that we need a new kind of 
consciousness in which every individual becomes aware that his real self 
is not just his conscious ego. For example, let us consider a headlight of a 
car. The headlight shines on the road in front of it and not on the wire 
which connects it with its own battery. So, in a way, the headlight is 
unaware of how it shines, and in the same way we are unaware of the 
sources of our consciousness. We do not know how we know. There was 
a young man who said, “Though it seems that I know that I know, what I 
would like to see is the ‘T’ that knows me, when I know that I know that I 
know.’ So, we are ignorant; that is, we ignore and it does not come 
within the scope of our attention how it is that we manage to be 
conscious, or how it is that we manage to grow our hair, to shape our 
bones, to beat our heart, and to secrete all the necessary fluids that we 
need from our glands. We do it, but we do not know how we do it. 
Underneath the superficial self, which pays attention to this and that, 
there is another self more really “us” than “I”? The more you become 
aware of the unknown self—if you become aware of it—the more you 
realize that it is inseparably connected with everything else that is. You 
are a function of this total galaxy, bounded by the Milky Way, and this 
galaxy is a function of all other galaxies. You are that vast thing that you 
see far, far off with great telescopes, and you look and look, and one day 
you are going to wake up and say, “Why, that is me!” and in knowing that 
you know that you never die. You are the eternal thing that comes and 
goes, that appears now as John Jones, now as Mary Smith, now as Betty 
Brown; and so it goes, forever and ever and ever. 


Now, the reason I made this point as an introduction is to draw your 
attention to the problem of the relationship of man and _ nature. 
Incidentally, what do you mean when you use the word “nature”? What 
is nature study or natural history? What do you expect to find in the 
Museum of Natural History? For many people nature means the birds, 


the bees, and the flowers. It means everything that is not artificial. 
People think, for example, a building is not natural; it is artificial. The 
natural state of the human being is to be naked, but we wear clothes, and 
that is artificial. We build houses, but is there any difference between a 
human house and a wasp’s nest or a bird’s nest? Not really, but we do 
have in our minds the idea that nature is somehow outside us. We 
believe we have some nature in us, and we say there is a thing called 
human nature, though it seems to be mostly bad. Human nature, 
according to Dr. Freud, is motivated by the libido, and you cannot trust 
it. In the old days they used to beat it with whips, but Freud said, “Don’t 
do it that way! You will have to treat it as a good horse trainer trains a 
horse by giving it a lump of sugar every now and then, and control it in 
that way. Be kind to it and respect it, even though it is really very 
disrespectable” 


In the history of philosophy there are three dominant theories of 
nature. The first theory is the Western theory, which is that nature is a 
machine, or an artifact. We inherited this idea from the Hebrews who 
believed that nature was made by God in somewhat the same way a 
potter makes a pot out of clay or a carpenter makes a table out of wood. 
It is not insignificant that Jesus is the son of a carpenter because our 
tradition has been to look upon the world as a construct, as if somebody 
knows how it was put together. Somebody understands how it was done, 
and that is the constructor, the architect, the Lord God. However, it so 
happens that in the eighteenth century Western thought began to 
change. People became increasingly doubtful as to whether there was a 
maker—whether there was a God—but they continued to look upon the 
creation as an artifact, as a machine. By the time of Newton, people were 
explaining the world in terms of mechanism and we are still under the 
influence of that idea today. After all, in an article on human physiology 
the author will usually include drawings which show the human body as 
a sort of factory. They show how peristaltic action carries the food in and 
how it is processed by this organ and that organ, just as if a certain 
product is fed into a factory as a cow at one end and comes out canned 
corned beef at the other. The human being is illustrated in just such a 
way, and in some kinds of rather degraded medicine, that is now 
practiced when you go to the hospital for a medical examination, you are 
treated as a machine and they process you. Even if you are perfectly 
healthy and can walk, nevertheless they have to have you in a wheelchair 
immediately. Then they put you through a process whereby the heart 
specialist looks only at your heart, because he does not understand 


anything else. The otorhinolaryngologist, which means an ear, nose, and 
throat doctor, looks at that section of you, and he does not know about 
anything else. Then perhaps a psychiatrist takes a look at you and 
goodness knows what happens there; and so on, and so on. Everybody 
looks at you from their specialized point of view as if they were a bunch 
of mechanics examining your automobile. However, as I said last night, 
we just ask for this because most of us consider ourselves as chauffeurs 
inside our bodies, which we own in the same way as we own a car. When 
it goes wrong we take it to the mechanic to fix it and we do not really 
identify with our body, just as we do not really identify with our car. So 
this is the theory which has grown up in the West of nature as an 
artifact, or something that is made. 


The second theory of nature is an East Indian theory. Nature is seen 
not as an artifact but as drama. Basic to all Hindu thought is the idea that 
the world is maya, a Sanskrit word which means many things. It means 
magic, illusion, art, and play. All the world is a stage, and in the Hindu 
idea of nature the ultimate reality of the universe is the self which they 
call brahman, or atman. That is what there is; the self—universal, 
eternal, boundless, indescribable—and everything that happens happens 
on the self. This is the same as saying, “It’s on me, the drinks tonight are 
on me,’ or as we say when we hear the radio, “It’s on the speaker” 
Everything you hear on the radio, whether it be flutes, drums, human 
voices, or traffic noises, are vibrations of the diaphragm in the speaker. 
However, the radio does not tell you that. The announcer does not come 
on every morning and say, “Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. The 
following sounds that you are going to hear are vibrations of the 
diaphragm in your speaker, and they are not really human voices or 
musical instruments, but just vibrations.” They never let you in on that, 
and in exactly the same way, the universe does not let you in on the truth 
that all sense experiences are vibrations of the self; not just your self, but 
the self, and all of us share this self in common because it is pretending 
to be all of us. In this way brahman, the ultimate principle, plays hide 
and seek eternally, or at least for unspeakably long periods of time. The 
Hindus measure time in what is called a kalpa; that is 4,320,000 years. 
Perhaps this figure is not meant to be taken literally, but for an 
unspeakably long time, the brahman, the self, pretends that it is lost, and 
is us. It gets mixed up in all of our adventures and all our troubles, and 
all our agonies and tragedies. Then, after the period of 4,320,000 years 
has elapsed, there is a catastrophe. The universe is destroyed in fire, and 
after that the brahman wakes up (as Brahma, the mythological creator of 


!” 


the universe) and says, “Well, good, crazy! What an adventure that was 
Then he wipes the sweat off his brow and says, “Shwooo, let’s rest a 
while” So, for another 4,320,000 years the Divine Self rests, and knows 
who It is. Then It says, “Well, this is rather boring. Let’s get going; let’s 
get mixed up again” 

Now it does this in a very strange way because the way the Hindus 
time it, the first of getting mixed up, or getting lost is beautiful. That is 
the longest period in which everything is right. Life is just glorious. Then 
there is the next period in which things get a little wonky. Something is 
vaguely out of order, but that does not last so long. Then the next period 
is when good and evil are equally balanced, and that is still shorter. And 
finally comes the shortest period when everything bad triumphs, and the 
whole universe blows up and we begin all over again. We are supposed to 
be living in that period now. It is what is called the Kali Yuga, the Age of 
Darkness, and it began on Friday, February the 23rd, 3123 B.c, and it has 
5,000 years to run. However, as it goes on, time gets faster, so do not 
worry. 


Now, there is a third theory of nature which is Chinese, and it is very 
interesting. The Chinese word for nature is tzu-jan, and this expression 
means “of itself, so,” or what happens of itself. We might say 
“spontaneity, but it almost means “automatic,” because automatic is 
what is self-moving, and we associate the word “automatic” with 
machinery. However tzu-jan, what-is-so-of-itself, is associated in the 
Chinese mind not with machinery but with biology. Your hair grows by 
itself; you do not have to think of how to grow it. Your heart beats by 
itself; you do not have to make up your mind how to beat it. This is what 
the Chinese mean by nature. A poem says, “Sitting quietly, doing 
nothing, spring comes, and grass grows of itself” Their greater principle 
of nature is called the Tao, pronounced “dow” in the Mandarin dialect, 
“tow” in the Shanghai dialect, “toe” in the Cantonese dialect, so take 
your choice. Tao means the course of nature, and Lao-tzu, who was a 
philosopher living a little later than 400 B.c.,, wrote a book about the Tao. 
He said, “The Tao which can be spoken is not the eternal Tao” In other 
words, you cannot describe it. He said the principle of the Tao is 
spontaneity, and that “the Great Tao flows everywhere, both to the left 
and to the right. It loves and nourishes all things but does not lord it over 
them. It accomplishes merits and lays no claim to them.” Of course there 
is a very great difference between the Chinese idea of Tao, as the 
informing principle of nature, and the Judeo-Christian idea of God as 
nature’s lord and master, because the Tao does not act as a boss. In the 


Chinese philosophy of nature, nature has no boss. There is no principle 
that forces things to behave the way they do, and so it is a completely 
democratic theory of nature. Correspondingly, most Westerners, 
whether they be Christians or non-Christians, do not trust nature. Of all 
things nature is the thing least to be trusted. You must manage it. You 
must watch out for it and it will always go wrong if you do not watch out, 
just as the goblins will get you if you do not watch out. So, we are always 
feeling that we absolutely cannot trust it because we are instilled with 
the idea of original sin. You cannot trust nature because it comes out 
with weeds and insects, and above all, you cannot trust human nature. 


Now, the Chinese would say, “If you cannot trust yourself you cannot 
trust anything, because if you cannot trust yourself can you trust your 
mistrust of yourself? Is that well-founded?” If you cannot trust yourself, 
you are totally mixed up. You haven't a leg to stand on, and you have no 
point of departure for anything. In this respect, the Taoist philosophy 
and the Confucian philosophy are in agreement. In Confucian 
philosophy, the fundamental virtue of a human being is called jen. It is a 
Chinese character that Confucius placed as the highest of all virtues, 
higher than righteousness, higher than benevolence, and it means 
approximately human-heartedness. Now, Confucius once said that 
“goody-goodies are the thieves of virtue” Virtue in Chinese is teh, and it 
means virtue not in the sense of moral propriety, but virtue in the sense 
of magic, as when we speak of the healing virtues of a certain plant. A 
man of true virtue is therefore a human-hearted man, and the meaning 
of this is that one should, above all, trust human nature in the full 
recognition that it is both good and bad, that it is both loving and selfish. 


Human beings are complex, and we do not really know ourselves at 
all. Consider your nervous system. Neurologists have not even begun to 
figure it out, and yet all of your conscious decisions are based on this 
thing that you do not understand. You are unbelievably more wise in 
your nature than you ever will be in your conscious thoughts, because 
behind your conscious thoughts lies your nervous system. If you say, 
“Well, my nervous system is unreliable. It is just a bunch of strange, 
weird, biological chances that have somehow become mixed up,’ then 
this very opinion that you are expressing is a function of that nervous 
system. You are saying that you are a total hoax and that you cannot trust 
yourself at all. Now the lesson of this is that one should above all trust 
human nature in the full recognition that it is both good and bad, that it 
is both loving and selfish. A man of true virtue, therefore, has a sense of 
what is called /i. Li is justice, but you cannot write it down. There is 


another word for justice, or law, in Chinese. In its Chinese character 
form, this word represents a cauldron for cooking sacrifices along with a 
knife. In the high and far-off times of Chinese history there was an 
emperor who scratched with a knife on the side of the cauldrons the laws 
of the state so that when the people brought their sacrifices of meat to be 
put in the cauldrons they could read them and understand what they 
were. However, the sages who advised this emperor said that was a very 
bad thing to do because the moment people see the law written down, 
they develop a litigious spirit. That is to say, they think out ways of 
wangling around it, and this is what we do all the time. The moment 
Congress passes a law, a tax law especially, all the lawyers get together 
and they try to fill it full of holes. They say, “Well, it did not define this 
and it did not say that.” So some of those Confucians wanted to put the 
language in order and to make all the words mean just so, but the Taoists 
laughed at them and said, “If you define the words, with what words are 
you going to define the words that define the words?” They said, 
therefore, that the emperor should not have written the laws down 
because a sense of justice is not something you can put in words. It is 
what our lawyers call “equity,” and if you talk to any lawyer in discussing 
various judges around town he will say, “Well, Judge Smith is pretty 
much a stickler for the letter of the law, but on the other hand Judge 
Jones has a sense of equity. He knows when the letter of the law just does 
not apply to a particular case. He has an innate sense of fair play and that 
is the man to be trusted as a judge.” Now this is what the Chinese mean 
by a judge who has the sense of real justice. It cannot be written down 
and it cannot be explained. Every case is individual, but what such a man 
has in his heart fundamentally is that he trusts both the good and bad of 
human nature. 


Nature, human nature included, is an organism; and an organism is a 
system of orderly anarchy. There is no boss in it but it gets along by being 
left alone and being allowed to do its stuff. That is what the Chinese 
Taoist philosophy calls wu-wei, which does not mean doing nothing. It 
means not interfering with the course of events and not acting against 
the grain. There is a second word in Chinese pronounced “lee,” and this 
is the time to introduce it. The first li meant justice, but the second Ji is a 
character which had the original meaning of the markings in jade, the 
grain in wood, and the fiber in muscle. It is usually translated as the 
reason or the principle of things, however the best translation of li is 
organic pattern. When you look at the clouds they are not symmetrical. 
They do not form fours and they do not come along in cubes, but you 


know at once that they are not a mess. A dirty old ashtray full of junk 
may be a mess but clouds do not look like that. When you look at the 
patterns of foam on water they never make an artistic mistake and they 
are not a mess. They are wiggly but in a way, orderly, although it is 
difficult for us to describe that kind of order. Now, take a look at 
yourselves. You are all wiggly. We think that we are pretty ordinary 
because there are a lot of us who look approximately the same. When we 
see a human being we think, “Well, that is pretty much in order.” It is 
kind of regular and okay, but we do not realize how wiggly we are. We 
are just like clouds, rocks, and stars. Look at the way the stars are 
arranged. Do you criticize the way the stars are arranged? Would you 
like them to form fours? Would you like them to be set out sort of like 
needlepoint on the canvas of the skies? During the eighteenth century 
when they built formal gardens of clipped hedges and made all the tulips 
stand together like soldiers, there were people who criticized the stars 
for being irregularly arranged, but today we do not feel that way. We love 
the way the stars are scattered, and they never make an aesthetic 
mistake. What about mountain ranges? Do you criticize the valleys for 
being low, and praise the peaks for being high? No. You just say, “It is 
great the way it is.” Now, to that kind of order the artist pays a tribute by 
painting a landscape. In every national park there is a place called 
“Inspiration Point,’ and people go there and say, “Oh! It’s just like a 
picture!” Nobody knew this four hundred years ago. It took the artists to 
paint landscapes before people realized how beautiful they are. 
Nowadays artists paint pictures of damp, stained walls and floors where 
people have dropped a lot of paint. One day people will walk into a room 
where there is a lot of paint scattered on the floor and they will say, “My 
goodness, it is just like a Jackson Pollock. Isn't it just like a picture?” It 
always takes the artist to show us the vision, but of course in the 
meantime, it is difficult to interpret these things. You may go to an 
exhibition of contemporary, nonobjective painting, and hear someone 
say, “That’s not what I call a picture.’ This is because it is against their 
prejudices. However, I say to people, “Now, excuse me, but wait a 
minute. Take a look at that again. That painting is a colored photograph 
of guess what?” Then they look at it in astonishment with entirely new 
eyes. What could that be a photograph of? Soon they begin to see that it 
might be a photograph taken through a microscope, perhaps of globules 
of germs floating in liquid. It might be anything, but there it is, and its 
beauty suddenly comes over them. Goodness knows whether that was 
what the artist intended, but this sort of real abstraction embodies a 


method of giving people a shock so they will see things in a new way. A 
GI once visited Picasso in Paris during the war and said, “I cannot 
understand your paintings. They are absurd. Life does not look like that.” 
Picasso replied, “Do you have a girlfriend?” He said, “Yes” “Have you a 
picture?” He said, “Yes.” “Show it to me’ So he drew out his billfold, and 
there was a little colored photograph of his girlfriend, and Picasso looked 
at it and said, “Is she so small as that?” 


Now then, the idea of li, of natural order, is like the patterns in 
seafoam, patterns in jade, the shapes of the clouds, the forms of trees and 
mountains. They are orderly, but we cannot put our finger on the order. 
We know it is orderly but we do not know why. The order of nature is in 
that way indefinable. When Saint Augustine was asked, “What is time?” 
he said, “I know what it is, but when you ask me I don’t” So in the same 
way the Chinese would say, “We know what the order of nature is, but if 
you ask us, we don’t.” The poet says, “Picking chrysanthemums along the 
eastern fence, gazing in silence at the southern hills, the birds fly home 
through the soft mountain air of dusk.’ In all these things there is a deep 
meaning, but when we are about to express it, we suddenly forget the 
words. That is li. Nature as a self-ordering principle, but it does not really 
know how it does it. Another poem says, “If you want to know where the 
flowers come from even the God of Spring doesn’t know’ This reveals a 
very remarkable attitude toward nature. If you translate this into politics 
it is high philosophical anarchy, and there is a lot to be said for anarchy 
as a political point of view. In other words, government is always a mess 
because the state opposes itself to the people. We live under a 
constitution where we are supposed to be governed by ourselves, but 
somebody once said, “Down with democracy, when we get it.” The state 
creates itself as a business in competition with all the other businesses, 
and it wins because it is the biggest one of the bunch. The Taoists said of 
the state that it should be as anonymous and unobtrusive as possible. 
Instead of going around in processions and being heralded with waving 
flags the emperor should be as unobtrusive as the head of the sanitation 
department. This is a man who goes around in a plain ordinary suit and 
really attends to his job. He does not have a police escort with sirens 
blowing and flags waving. He simply does his job. The feeling of Lao-tzu 
is that the emperor or the president should have the same kind of 
attitude. He should simply help the people and retire, not claiming any 
merits for his work, and withdraw behind the scenes. He should not 
strive for power, but simply help things along. “Govern a great state,’ 
Lao-tzu said, “as you would cook a small fish” Now, when you have a 


small fish in the frying pan do not keep tossing it around and fidgeting 
with a spatula, otherwise it will fall apart. Turn it gently and softly. 


Here is a conception of nature as something you must trust; both 
outside nature—the birds, the bees, the flowers, the mountains, the 
clouds—but also inside nature, human nature. Of course, nature is not 
completely trustworthy. It will sometimes let you down with a wallop, 
but that is the risk you take, the risk of life. What is the alternative? You 
might say, “I do not trust nature at all. It has got to be watched” 
However, that leads to the totalitarian state where everybody is his 
brother’s policeman and everybody is watching everybody else to report 
them to the authorities. A state where you cannot trust your own 
motivations is a state where you would have to have a psychoanalyst in 
charge of you all the time to be sure that you do not think dangerous or 
peculiar thoughts. You would report all peculiar thoughts to your analyst 
and your analyst would keep a record of them and report them to the 
government. Already everybody in this culture is busy keeping records 
of everything and it is much more important to record what happens 
than to experience the event as it actually happens. This is eating us up 
because it has become much more important that you have your books 
in order than it is to conduct your business in a good way. 


In universities it is much more important that the registrar’s records 
be correct than have the library well-stocked. After all your grades are all 
locked up in safes, protected from thievery and pilfering, because they 
are the most valuable property that the university has; the library can go 
to ruin. Any sensible person would imagine that the main functioning of 
a university is to teach students and to do research. Therefore the faculty 
should be the most important thing in the university, but on the 
contrary, the administration is the most important. These are the people 
who keep the records, and who make the game rules up. So the faculty 
are always being obstructed by the administration, forced into irrelevant 
meetings, and asked to do everything but scholarship. Do you know 
what scholarship means, or what a school means? The original meaning 
of schola is leisure. We spoke of a “scholar and a gentleman” because a 
gentleman was a person who had a private income and could afford to be 
a scholar. He did not have to earn a living and therefore he could study 
the classics and poetry. Today nothing is more busy than a school. They 
make you work, work, work because you have to get through on 
schedule. There are expedited courses, and you go to school to get a 
Ph.D. in order to earn a living. So, on the whole, this is a contradiction of 
scholarship. Scholarship is to study everything that is unimportant and 


not necessary for survival, including all the charming irrelevancies of life. 
The reason for this is that if you do not have room in your life for the 
playful, life is not worth living. All work and no play makes Jack a dull 
boy, but if the only reason Jack plays is so that he can work better 
afterwards, he is not really playing. He is playing because it is good for 
him, and that is not playing at all. To be able to be true scholars we have 
to cultivate an attitude in life in which we are not trying to get anything 
out of it. 


If you pick up a pebble on the beach and look at it, it is beautiful, but 
do not try to get a sermon out of it. Sermons-in-stones and God-in- 
everything be damned—just enjoy it! Do not feel that you have got to 
salve your conscience by saying that this is for the advancement of your 
aesthetic understanding. Enjoy the pebble. If you do that, you become 
healthy. You do not have to do anything but it is a great idea, and it is a 
great experience if you can learn what the Chinese call 
“purposelessness.” They think that nature is quite purposeless. However, 
when we say something is purposeless, it is a put-down. To us this means 
there is no future in it and it is a washout, but when the Chinese Taoists 
hear the word purposeless they think that is just great. It is like the waves 
washing against the shore, going on and on, forever with no meaning. A 
great Zen master said just before he died, “From the bathtub, to the 
bathtub, I have uttered stuff and nonsense” The bathtub in which the 
baby is washed at birth, the bathtub in which the corpse is washed before 
burial, all this time I have said much nonsense. The birds in the trees go 
twee, twee, twee. What is it all about? Everybody tries to say, “Ah, yes, it 
is a mating call—and quite purposeful. They are trying to get their mates 
by attracting them with a song” This argument is also used to explain 
why they have colors, and why butterflies have eye-like designs on them 
for self-protection. Of course, this is an engineering view of the universe, 
but why do we do that? We say, “Well, it is because the butterflies need 
to survive.” But why survive? What is that for? Well, to survive. However, 
human beings really are just a lot of tubes, and in a way all living 
creatures are just tubes. These tubes have to put things in one end and 
let them go out at the other. Then they become clever about it and they 
develop nerve ganglia on one end of the tube—the eating-end called a 
head. It has eyes and ears, and it has little organs and antennae that help 
you define things to put in one end so that you can let them out the 
other. Well, while you are doing this the stuff going through wears the 
tube out and, in order for the show to go on, the tubes have complicated 
ways of making other tubes which will go on doing the same thing, in at 


one end, out the other. And they say, “Well, that is terribly serious. That 
is awfully important. We have got to keep on doing this’ 


However, when the Chinese Taoists say nature is purposeless this is a 
compliment. It is much like the idea of the Japanese word yugen. They 
describe yugen as watching wild geese fly and being hidden in the 
clouds; as watching a ship vanish behind the distant island; as wandering 
on and on in a great forest with no thought of return. Haven't you done 
this? Haven’t you gone on a walk with no particular purpose in mind? 
You carry a stick with you and you occasionally hit at old stumps, and 
wander along and sometimes twiddle your thumbs. It is at that moment 
that you become a perfectly rational human being; you have learned 
purposelessness. All music is purposeless. When you dance do you aim 
to arrive at a particular place on the floor? Is that the idea of dancing? 
No, the aim of dancing is to dance. Now, here is the choice. Are you 
going to trust it or not? If you do trust it you may get let down, and this 
it is your self—your own nature and all nature around you. There are 
going to be mistakes, but if you do not trust it at all you are going to 
strangle yourself. You are going to surround yourself with rules and 
regulations and laws and prescriptions and policemen and guards—and 
guards to guard the guards. So, to live we must have faith. We must trust 
ourselves to the total unknown and to a nature which does not have a 
boss. A boss is part of a system of mistrust and so that is why Lao-tzu’s 
Tao loves and nourishes all things, but does not lord it over them. 


SYMBOLS AND MEANING 


CHAPTER THREE 


I, order to lay the foundation for this investigation we have to examine 


ideas that are basic to our common sense, for it is not only emotions that 
are powerful in human life. Psychoanalysis has, of course, examined the 
emotional bases of human opinions and beliefs, but one should also 
examine the intellectual bases of psychological principles, theories, or 
therapies. Ideas are very powerful. Everybody who speaks any language 
at all has, underneath the surface of the language or the figuring that he 
uses, certain basic assumptions which are usually unexamined, and these 
unexamined systems of belief are extremely influential in our lives. 


We will begin with one very pervasive idea that is built into our 
common sense, which is that the physical world consists of two aspects: 
respectively, form and matter. This notion was foisted on us by Aristotle 
and also by the Bible. It is said that God created man out of the dust of 
the earth, a figurine in His own image, and then breathed the breath of 
life into its nostrils so that this form of clay became a living being. So, 
underneath this myth lies the notion that everything material is made of 
some sort of basic stuff, in the same way clay is the basis of pots. For 
centuries, scientists and philosophers wanted to know, “What is that 
stuff? What are we made of?” A carpenter makes tables out of wood; 
however, I ask you: is a tree made of wood? Obviously not. A tree is 
wood, it is not made of it. Is a mountain made of rock? Obviously not, it 
is rock. In this sense our language contains innumerable ghosts. 
Supposing I were to say, “The lightning flashes.’ Surely the flashing is the 
same as the lightning. There is not one thing called “lightning” and 
another called “flashing.” The lightning is the flashing. It is raining. What 
is this it that is raining? The raining. I can make a noun out of a verb 
anytime by turning it into a gerund. However, we populate the world 


with ghosts which arise out of the structure of our language, and 
therefore from the structure of our thinking because we think in 
language, figuring, and numbers. So it is fascinating to find the hidden 
assumptions that underlie language and mathematics, and there is a 
basic assumption, that almost all of us have, that organisms are made of 
something, and it comes into our everyday speech again and again as a 
form and pattern of organization. It is as if there were some inert 
primordial and, of course, stupid stuff which had to be put into shape by 
an energy and an intelligence other than the stuff like the intelligence of 
the potter which shapes the clay. 


When our physicists started to find out what stuff was, they went 
into it again and again, and examined it with ever more minute 
instruments. First they started cutting up things with knives, and they 
cut them into smaller and smaller pieces. Finally the particle that they 
wanted to dissect was exactly the same width as the edge of the knife, 
and so they discovered the atom. In Greek atomas means the “non- 
cuttable” A: non; tomas: cut-table. Thus, the basic atom is what you 
cannot cut anymore because you have come down to the end. However, 
they were not satisfied with that, so they took an atom—in other words, 
a particle of something or other that was just the same width as the blade 
of the knife edge—and they looked at it under a microscope. They saw 
that it seemed to be composed of even smaller particles, and so they 
found a means of sorting those out. Eventually they found extraordinary 
means of investigating the properties of matter until they reached a 
point where they could not decide whether what they were looking at 
were particles or waves, so they called them “wavicles” and they thought 
they had come to certain ultimate wavicles called electrons. Then, 
unfortunately, everything fell apart, and they found protons, mesons, 
and many other extraordinary things. Of course, what they did not 
realize was that as you develop more and more powerful microscopic 
instruments, the universe becomes smaller and smaller in order to 
escape the investigation. In just the same way, when the telescopes 
become more and more powerful the galaxies have to recede in order to 
get away from the telescopes because what is happening in all these 
investigations is, through us and through our eyes and senses, the 
universe is looking at itself. When you try to turn around to see your 
own head, what happens? It runs away! You will never get at it. You 
cannot touch the tip of your finger with the tip of your finger. Shankara 
explained this principle beautifully in his commentary on the Kena 
Upanishad where he said, “That which is the knower—the ground of all 


knowledge—is never itself an object of knowledge, just as fire does not 
burn itself” So there is always that profound mystery and you are never 
going to be in absolute control of what goes on. As Van Dallieu put it, 
“The mystery of life is not a problem to be solved, but a reality to be 
experienced” 


The reason why I became a philosopher was that ever since I was a 
little boy I always felt that existence, as such, was weird. Here we are, and 
isn’t that odd? Of course it is odd, but what do you mean by odd? Well, it 
is what is different from even, and what is odd stands out. What is even 
lies flat, but you cannot see the outstanding—the odd—without the flat, 
or even, background. Each one of us is odd: strange, unique, particular, 
and different. How do we know what we mean by the word “odd,” except 
against the background of something even that is not differentiated, like 
space? So, at this point you begin to get a philosophical itch, to scratch 
your head and think about why this is so. After awhile you may realize 
that “Why?” is a meaningless question, and so you may ask: “How is it 
so?” Well, that leads you into science and other investigations. So you 
want to know, “What is it?” I mean, what is this happening, this thing 
called existence? If you ask that question long enough, it will suddenly 
hit you that if you could answer it, you would not know what terms to 
put the answer in. When we investigate the properties of nature, and we 
do find some answers, all the answers are in terms of particular 
structures, forms, patterns. These can be noted, and their behavior can 
be predicted, but we come back to the question “What are the forms 
made of?” or “What is it really?” We cannot think of any way in which we 
could answer this question, because in order to do so we would have to 
have a class of all classes. 


When you ask the question “What?” it is like saying: “Is you is or is 
you ain't?” Are you animal, vegetable, or mineral? Are you a Republican 
or a Democrat? Are you male or female? Are you a Christian or a Jew or 
a Hindu, or a what-have-you? We always classify in order to answer the 
question “What is it?” So, the physicists finally abandoned the quest for 
stuff, and they gave us a description of the universe entirely in terms of 
form: the pattern, not the stuff. People ask, “What is the work?” “What is 
the pattern made of? Surely, there must be an answer to that?” However, 
what happens is that when you magnify the view in the microscope all 
stuff turns into form and becomes articulate. From up here the carpet 
looks like some sort of stuff, but when you look at it under a microscope 
you will see the crystalline structure of the nylon, or whatever it is made 
of. Then people want to know, “What are the crystals made of?” Well, 


magnify it further and you will find molecules. Magnify it even more and 
you will find wavicles. Then they complain: “But the wavicles must be of 
something!” Of course they are not, and we find substance—or stuff— 
totally vanishes, and we are left with form. Sanskrit does not really have 
a word for “matter” Nama-rupa means “named form, or the form that 
matters. Let us put it in another way: everything is a matter of form, and 
this is fascinating. 


We ask, “Does it matter? What does that mean? Is it important?” In 
other words, does it measure up to anything? Now if we go back to the 
Indo-European roots of our language, matter comes from a Sanskrit 
root, matra, which means “to measure,’ to lay out the foundation of a 
building. So from this root matra if we go on into Sanskrit we come to 
the word maya, generally translated as illusion, although it also means 
magic or creative power. The word illusion comes from the Latin ludere, 
to play. “Let us pretend that we matter” Also from the root matra we 
have “meter. and that is also “to measure;” metere in Greek or mater in 
Latin, which means “mama” or “mother. The mother of Buddha was 
called Maya, and Mary (ma again) is the mother of Jesus—Ma, ma, ma. 
But ma is a matter of form or pattern, and remember the Chinese call 
the basic principle of nature li, the markings in jade, the fiber in muscle, 
and the grain in wood. 


What stuff we see is a pattern seen out of focus, where it becomes 
fuzzy like cotton or kapok. We say kapok is the stuffing of a cushion and 
that certainly seems to be stuff, but when we examine the kapok closely, 
we find structure. When you look at it closely that is what you will find, 
and there will never be anything else. Now this seems crazy because it 
completely flouts our common sense. Philosophers beat tables that are in 
front of them and say, “It is there, because . . . bang! So there must be 
something that is stuff, that is substantial” However, the only reason why 
you cannot pass your hand through a table is the table is moving too fast. 
It is like trying to put your finger through an electric fan, only it is going 
much faster than an electric fan. Anything solid is going so fast that 
there is no way to get your finger through it, that is all. You might say, 
“What is it that is going so fast?” Well, that question is based on a 
grammatical illusion that all verbs have to have subjects, and that a verb, 
or action, or event must be set into motion by a noun, that is to say, a 
non-event or thing. Now what is the difference between a thing and an 
event? I cannot, for the life of me, tell. We say, “This is a fist; which is a 
noun. Now, what happens to it when I open my hand? The fist has 
unaccountably disappeared, so I should have called this a “fisting,” and 


that a “handing,” Of course it may also be a “pointing.” So, we could 
devise a language such as that of the Neutka Indians, where there are no 
nouns and there are only verbs. The Chinese language is very close to 
that, and the superimposition of the idea of noun and verb on the 
Chinese language seems to be a Western invention. However, all those 
languages of Indo-European origin have nouns and verbs in them; they 
have agents and operations. Now here is one of the basic snags: when we 
divide the world into operations and agents, doings and doers, we ask 
such silly questions as, “Who knows?” “Who does it?” “What does it?” 
Actually, the “what” that is supposed to do it is the same as “the doing,’ 
and you can very easily see that the whole doing of the universe may be 
understood as a “process.”” Nobody is doing it. When you go back to 
doing it, you go back to the military analogy and the chain of command; 
to the boss who says “jump” and the employee who obeys. Of course, 
today we know that is a very crude and unsophisticated idea. 


So we have suddenly eliminated a “spook,’ and the spook was called 
“stuff” So, we are now more at ease with ourselves in a world of form, or 
nama-rupa, named forms. We can, of course, get rid of the names. We 
can go further and try the experiment of not calling the forms by any 
names, but merely observing the forms, although when we have got rid 
of the names we cannot call them “forms,” because even that is a name. 
Still, there is the bizazz going on, which Buddhists called tathata, and 
that means “suchness” or “thusness.’ Actually tathata is “da-da-da,’ 
because when a baby first talks it says “da:” “Da, da, da, da” Fathers 
flatter themselves thinking that it is saying “dada” or “daddy,’ but it is not, 
it is saying “da” So the Upanishads say, Dat vam asi: you are it. The basic 
“dat” does not mean anything. Da is like everything else, a musical 
phenomenon, and good music never refers to anything except the music 
itself. You do not ask Mr. Bach or Mr. Ravi Shankar, “What do you mean 
by this music? What is it intended to express?” Bad music always 
expresses something other than itself, like the 1812 Overture or the 
Sunken Cathedral. But good music never refers to anything other than 
the music. If you ask Bach, “What is your meaning?” he would say 
“Listen! That is the meaning.” 


LIMITS OF LANGUAGE 


CHAPTER FOUR 


Naor is like musical expression, which means exactly what it says. 


Giraffes are giraffing, trees are treeing, stars are starring, clouds are 
clouding, rain is raining, and people are peopling. If you do not 
understand, look at it again. We notice that all these suchnesses appear 
and disappear; they keep changing, they come and they go. But if you get 
hung up on your particular form, you think, “For some strange reason I 
must go on living as long as possible,’ and therefore you think you have 
an instinct to survive. Now the only thing anybody can agree about 
today, so far as the discussion of ethical and moral problems are 
concerned, is that we ought to survive. Therefore certain forms of 
conduct have survival value and certain forms do not. However, when 
you say to yourself, “I must go on living,’ you put yourself in a double 
bind because you submit to a process which is essentially spontaneous 
and then insist it must happen. The basic form of the double bind which 
is imposed upon all children is the requirement to do that which will be 
acceptable only if you do it voluntarily. So, when we say to ourselves, “I 
must go on,’ the reason we say this is because we are not living in the 
realization of eternal now. Instead we are always thinking that the 
satisfaction of life will be coming later. There is a song that goes: “There 
is a good time coming be it ever so far away, that one far off divinely sent 
to which all creation moves.’ Now, don't kid yourself! As the Hindus have 
taught us, in the course of time everything gets worse and eventually 
falls apart, and comes the Kali-Yuga and Shiva at the end, which is to say, 
only suckers put hope in the future. 

Traditionally there are three classes of people in the Western world: 
the aristocracy, the proletariat, and the bourgeoisie. The aristocrats live 
on the past because they come of noble family, and the proletarians live 


in the present because they have nothing else. The poor bourgeoisie live 
for the future and so they are the eternal suckers always open to a con 
game. When they find out that there really is not much of a future 
because you are going to die, they transpose the future into a spiritual 
dimension. They figure, “This material world is not the real world, but 
the spiritual world is the real world; and there will be somewhere, 
somehow, an eternal life for me.’ As the verse says, “A charge to keep I 
have, a God to glorify, a never-dying soul to save fitted for the sky” Now 
some might ask, “What are you going to do there?” Well, they do not 
have the faintest idea. If you ask theologians what they think is going to 
happen in Heaven, they just dry up. “Why, we are going to play harps!” 
The average person’s idea of Heaven is an absolute bore, like being in 
church forever. Children see this immediately because when they hear a 
hymn like “Weary of earth and laden with my sin I look to Heaven and 
long to enter in,’ they say, “Oh, God! Heaven is to be in church for always 
and always!” They think Hell is preferable because at least some 
excitement is going on. This is apparent in medieval art, and if you go to 
the Metropolitan Museum in New York you can see Jan Van Eyck’s 
painting of The Last Judgement with Heaven on top and Hell below. In 
Heaven everybody is looking like the cat that swallowed the canary, 
sitting in rows and looking very smug. God the Father is president and, 
oh dear, beneath this there is a winged skull like a bat and squirming 
nude bodies being eaten by snakes. There is something fantastic going 
on; yet Van Eyck had a ball painting it because it was the only way you 
could get away with painting nudes and sexy scenes at that time, which is 
one of the reasons why Hell naturally became much more interesting 
than Heaven. 


So, this hope for the future is a hoax, a perfect hoax. We say that 
maybe we will make spiritual progress, but in fact everybody puts it off. 
“Maybe if I work at yoga for ten or twenty years I will eventually make it 
to moksha or nirvana” Of course that is nothing more than a 
postponement because if you are not fully alive now, how do you think 
maybe someday you will be? Supposing I were to ask you, “What did you 
do yesterday?” You may reply, “What did I do yesterday? In fact, I have 
forgotten” Or a person will say, “Well, let me see now; let me get out my 
notebook. I got up at 7:30 and I brushed my teeth. Then I read the 
newspaper over a cup of coffee, looked at the clock and dressed, and 
then got in the car and drove downtown. I did this and that in the office 
and so on.’ You go on and on and suddenly you discover that what you 
have described has absolutely nothing to do with what happened. You 


have described a scraggly, skeletal, fleshless list of abstractions whereas, 
if you were actually aware of what went on, you could never describe it. 
You could never describe it because nature is multidimensional, and 
language is linear and scrawny. Therefore, if you identify the world as it 
is with the way the world is described, it is as if you were trying to eat 
dollar bills and expect a nutritious diet. A lot of people try to eat 
numbers. People play the stock market and they are doing nothing but 
eating numbers. They are always unhappy because they never get 
anything. Therefore, they always hope more is coming because they 
believe that if they eat enough dollar bills eventually something 
satisfactory will happen. So, by eating the abstractions all the time we 
want more and more and more. 


Confucius very wisely said, “A man who understands the Tao in the 
morning may die with content in the evening. This is so because when 
you gain understanding, you do not put your hope in time because time 
will not solve a thing. So when we enter into the practice of meditation, 
of yoga, we are doing something radically unlike other human activities. 
Of course, the way yoga is sold in the United States, like everything else, 
is that it is supposed to be good for you. It is not. It has nothing to do 
with anything that is good for you. It is the one activity which you do for 
its own sake and not for any other reason. Obviously it will not lead 
anywhere, because you cannot go to the place where you are now. Yoga is 
to be completely here and now. That is why the word yoke means “join,’ 
to get with it and be completely here and now. This is the real meaning of 
concentration, to be in your center. The Christian word for “sinning” in 
Greek is amatanene, which means “to miss the point.” The point is this: 
eternal life means to be here now, to come to your senses. 


Yoga is defined in Sanskrit in the Yoga sutra as yoga chitra briti 
derota. This is difficult to translate, but roughly means yoga is the 
stopping of, briti is turning like a wheel, and chitra is consciousness: 
“turnings in consciousness.” It is the attempt of the mind to catch hold of 
itself, which is what we call thinking or worrying, so you could say 
loosely that yoga is the cessation of thinking. It is not the cessation of 
awareness, but of symbolizing or trying to catch or clutch reality in 
terms of thoughts, symbols, descriptions, and definitions. We try to give 
up clutching, but it is not easy because we do it habitually. However, 
until there is silence of the mind, it is almost impossible to understand 
eternal life, that is to say, eternal now. This is a stage of having no 
conceptions, or in Sanskrit the stage of nirvikalpa, “not conceptual” So 
to understand nonverbal reality or nonconceived reality, called 


“suchness” or tathata, it is really very easy. In fact it is too easy, which is 
why it is difficult. But then when you are fully aware and not thinking, 
you will notice some amazing absences: there is no past. Incidentally, can 
you hear anything past? Can you hear anything future? They are just not 
there to the plain sense of one’s ears, and so in a way ears are easiest to 
begin with. Can you hear anyone listening to something else other than 
sound? Can you hear the listener? Of course not, because no sound is 
there. Then you become again as a child and simply forget all that you 
were ever told and contemplate on what is. It seems weird, but you then 
enter into the eternal state where there is no problem. After a while you 
go back and you collect your opinions again, and you think: “Well, that 
will not do. How can I be practical and be in that sort of state?” 


I remember in the Sermon on the Mount that Jesus had a lot to say 
about this. “Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow. They toil not, 
neither do they spin, and yet Solomon in all his glory was not clothed 
like one of these.’ Then Jesus said, more or less, “And if God so clothed 
the grass or the field which today is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, 
shall He not much more clothe you faceless ones? So do not worry about 
tomorrow saying, ‘What shall we eat? What shall we drink? Or how shall 
we clothe ourselves?’ All the rabble seek after these things and sufficient 
to the day is the worry of it’ Nobody ever preaches a sermon on that 
text, and I have heard lots of sermons but never one on that topic. 
Instead, people say, “Look, that’s all very well because Jesus was the 
boss’s son, and he knew that he was really in charge of the universe and 
had nothing to worry about. But we have to be practical” Well, what do 
you suppose the Gospel was? It was the good news, but it never got out! 
You, too, are the boss’s son: that was the gospel. 


If Jesus had lived in India they would not have put him to death, 
because everybody in India knows we are all God in disguise. So if he 
had said, “I and the Father are one,’ in India they would have said, 
“Hooray! You found out!” Lots of people in India know that perfectly 
well, but here? Uh! uh! That is a no-no! “Just who do you think you are? 
You own the place? You keep your position! You are just a critter’ This 
understanding is reflected in the family system, as well as in everything 
else in India. They have their own way of doing it because they have 
delayed action on it. When you get to be a certain age, and after you have 
studied long enough with a certain guru, then and only then may you 
realize this. But until then it is still a no-no. However, after you have put 
in the time they finally let you in. In our culture you have to wait until 
you are dead. 


Well, all of that is nonsense. The only place to begin is here and now, 
because here is where we are. So why do we put it off? A lot of people say, 
“Well, Iam not ready.” What do you mean you are not ready? What do 
you have to do to be ready? You might say “I am not good enough 
because I am neurotic, I am perhaps not old enough or not mature 
enough for such knowledge. I am still frightened of pain, and of course I 
would have to overcome that. I am still dependent on material things. I 
have to eat a lot, drink a lot, have sex, and all that kind of thing, and I 
think I had better get all that under control first” But what you really 
mean is you have a case of spiritual pride. You want to be able to 
congratulate yourself for having gone through the discipline which is 
rewarded with realization. That is like trying to quench fire with fire. You 
may think to yourself: “Wouldn't it be great to be a mystic?” Look at it 
this way: it would be wild to have no fear, no attachments, no hang-ups 
and to be as free as the air so that you can just wander out in the streets, 
give away all your clothes to the beggars, and let go of the whole thing. 
Wouldn't it be wild to have that kind of courage? But if you look into 
yourself honestly you will find that you are actually a quaking mess of 
sensitivity. This desire to be the great mystic is nothing more than a 
symptom of your quaking mess; it is a self-defense mechanism. 


You may think, “Wow! We will do yoga and get real tough” Well, that 
only means you are going to be increasingly insensitive, running away 
from the quaking mess and trying to escape. Yet you never can escape 
because you are stuck with it. There is nothing you can actually do to 
transform your own nature into unattached selflessness because you 
have a selfish reason for wanting to do it. Well, that is pretty depressing, 
isn’t it? Then you may say: “You mean to tell me that the only people who 
really get enlightened and liberated are those whom the grace of God 
somehow hits in an arbitrary way? And all I can do is sit around and 
wait?” Well, let us begin with that supposition. Let us suppose there is 
nothing we can do to change ourselves. Psychotherapy and religion are 
absolutely in vain; there is nothing you can do about it. It is like trying to 
lift yourself up by your own bootstraps. 


Now one might say, “That is terribly depressing. You mean, Alan 
Watts, you come here simply to tell us that there is nothing we can do? I 
mean, here we are all presumably assembled in a cultural, spiritual, and 
psychotherapeutic milieu where we are supposed to get better. Now you 
tell us there is nothing you can do about it. Well, give us our money 
back! We will go to somebody else who will be more encouraging!” But 
wait a minute; what does it mean that you cannot do anything about it? 


It is singing loud and clear: The reason you cannot do anything about it 
is because you do not exist, that is, as an ego, as a soul, as a separate will. 
It just is not so. When you understand that, you are liberated. As they 
say in Zen, “You cannot take hold of it nor can you get rid of it. In not 
being able to get it, you get it. When you are silent it speaks. When you 
speak it is silent.” However, do not misunderstand me, because this is not 
any kind of fatalism when I say “you” as you conceive yourself to be. Your 
ego or your image of yourself is not there and it does not exist. I am 
saying it is an abstraction. It is like the number “three.” Did you ever see 
three? Just plain, ordinary three? No, you did not, and nobody ever saw 
it. So it is a concept, or in Sanskrit a vilkalpa. There is the happening, the 
suchness, but it is not pushing you around because there is no you to be 
pushed around, like a billiard ball stuck on the end of the cue. There is 
the cue, and it goes this way and goes that way. They call a Buddha a 
tathagata, one who comes or goes thus, this way and that way. So this 
illusion of the persecuted ego who is pushed around by fate has 
altogether disappeared, and likewise the illusion of the ego who pushes 
fate around has also disappeared. There is simply a happening. So in this 
do you see what has happened? By dying to yourself, having become 
completely incompetent and finding that you do not exist, you are 
reborn and you become everything. In the words of Sir Edwin Arnold, 
“Forgoing self, the universe grows I” 


IMAGES OF GOD 


CHAPTER FIVE 


I imagine that most of you know the old story about the astronaut who 


went far out into space and was asked on his return whether he had been 
to Heaven and seen God, and he said, “Yes.” So they said to him “Well, 
what about God?” And he said, “She is black” Now although this is a 
very well-known and well-worn story, it is very profound. I once knew a 
monk who started out in life as pretty much an agnostic or an atheist, 
and then he began to read the writing of Annie Besant, the British 
theosophist who proclaimed the vital force, the élan vital. The more he 
read this kind of philosophy, the more he saw that these people were 
really talking about God. I have read a great deal of theological reasoning 
about the existence of God, and all of them start out on this line of 
reasoning. If you are intelligent and reasonable you cannot be the 
product of a mechanical and meaningless universe. Figs do not grow on 
thistles, grapes do not grow on thorns, and therefore you, as an 
expression of the universe and as an aperture through which the 
universe is observing itself, cannot be a mere fluke. If this world 
“peoples” as a tree brings forth fruit, then the universe itself, the energy 
which underlies it—the “ground of being” as Paul Tillich called it—must 
be intelligent. However, when you come to that conclusion you must be 
very careful, because you may make an unwarranted jump to the 
conclusion that that intelligence, that marvelous designing power which 
produces all this, is the biblical God. Be careful, because that God, 
contrary to His own commandments, is fashioned in the graven image of 
a paternal, authoritarian, beneficent tyrant of the ancient Near East. 

Now it is very easy to fall into that trap because it has been 
institutionalized in the Roman Catholic Church, in the Synagogue, and 
in the Protestant Church. It is all there, ready for you to accept, and by 


the pressure of social consensus it is very natural for us to assume that 
when somebody uses the word “god” it is that father figure which is 
intended. Even Jesus used the analogy “the Father” for his experience of 
God because there was no other one available to him in his culture, but 
these days we are in rebellion against the image of the authoritarian 
father. However, to reject the paternalistic image of God as an idol is not 
necessarily to be an atheist, although I have advocated something called 
“atheism in the name of God” as an experience, a contact, or a 
relationship with God that is the ground of your being and does not have 
to be embodied or expressed in any specific image. Now, theologians on 
the whole do not like this idea because, as I find in my discourse with 
them, they want to be a little bit hard-nosed about the nature of God. 
They want to say that indeed God has a very specific nature. Ethical 
monotheism insists that the governing power of this universe has some 
extremely definite opinions and rules to which our minds and acts must 
be conformed, and if you do not watch out you will go against the 
fundamental grain of the universe and be punished. In some old- 
fashioned way you will burn in the fires of Hell forever or, in more 
modern fashion, you will fail to be an authentic person. That is another 
way of talking about it, but there is a feeling in this that there is an 
authority behind the world and it is not you, it is something else. 
Therefore, this Jewish-Christian and indeed Muslim approach makes a 
lot of people feel rather estranged from the root and ground of being. 


There are a lot of people who never grow up and are always in awe of 
an image of grandfather. Now I am a grandfather; I have five 
grandchildren and so I am no longer in awe of grandfathers. I know I am 
just as stupid as my own grandfathers were, and therefore I am not about 
to bow down to an image of a god with a long white beard. Of course 
intelligent people do not really believe in that kind of a god. We think 
that God is spirit, that God is undefinable and infinite, but nevertheless 
the images of God have a far more powerful effect upon our emotions 
than our ideas. When people read the Bible and sing hymns, “Ancient of 
Days Who sittest on a throne in glory, immortal, invisible God, only wise 
and light inaccessible, hid from our eyes,’ they still envision that fellow 
up there with a beard. Of course this image is way in the back of the 
emotions, and so to balance our prejudice we should think first of all in 
contrary imagery, and the contrary imagery is “She is black.” Imagine 
instead of God the Father, God the Mother. Imagine that this is not a 
luminous being, blazing with light, but an infathomable darkness, such 
as is portrayed in Hindu mythology by Kali, the great Mother, who is 


represented in the most terrible imagery. Kali has a tongue hanging out 
drooling with blood. She has fanged teeth, with a scimitar in one hand 
and a severed head in the other, and she is trampling on the body of her 
husband who is Shiva. Furthermore, Shiva also represents the 
destructive aspect of a deity, wherein all things are dissolved so that they 
can be reborn again. So here is this bloodsucking, terrible mother as the 
image of the supreme reality behind this universe, and it is representative 
of the octopus, the spider, the awful-awfuls, and the creepy-crawlers at 
the end of the line of which we are all terrified. 


Let us suppose, just for the sake of argument, that as you sit here 
right now you are feeling fairly all right. You are not in a hospital and you 
do not have the screaming meemies. In fact, you have probably had 
dinner and are feeling pretty good. However, you know that you feel 
good because very far off in the background of your minds, you have the 
sensation of something absolutely ghastly that simply must not happen. 
So against that which is not happening and which does not necessarily 
have to happen, but by comparison with that, you feel pretty all right. 
Now that absolutely ghastly thing that must not happen at all is 
represented by Kali, and therefore at once we begin to wonder whether 
the presence of this Kali is not in a way very beneficent. How would you 
know that something was good unless you were able to contrast it with 
something not good at all? 


In pointing this out, I am not putting this forward as a final position. 
I am only putting it forward as a variation, as a way of beginning to look 
at a problem, and getting our minds out of their normal ruts, much in 
the same way if we say of the godhead, “She is black.” First of all the 
feminine “she” represents what is called philosophically “the negative 
principle” Now women in our culture today do not like to be associated 
with the negative because the negative has acquired very bad 
connotations. We say, “Accentuate the positive” Well, that is a purely 
male chauvinistic attitude. How would you know that you were 
outstanding unless by contrast there was something instanding? You 
cannot imagine the convex without the concave and you cannot 
appreciate the firm without the yielding. Therefore, the so-called 
negativity of the feminine principle is obviously life-giving and very 
important, but we live in a culture which does not notice it. You may see 
a painting, a drawing of a bird, and you do not notice the white paper 
underneath it. If you look at a printed book, you may think that the 
words are what is important and that the page does not matter. Yet, if 
you reconsider the whole thing, how could there be visible print without 


the page underlying it? What is called substance stands underneath; sub 
is underneath, stance stands. To be substantial is to be underlying, to be 
the support and the foundation of the world. It is of course the great role 
of the feminine to be the substance. Therefore the feminine is 
represented by space, which is of course black, and were it not for black 
and empty space there would be no possibility whatsoever of seeing the 
stars. Stars shine out of space, and certain very high-powered 
astronomers are beginning to realize that stars are a function of space. 


Now this idea of space is difficult because in our common sense we 
think that space is simply inert nothingness, and we do not realize that 
space is completely basic to everything. It is like your consciousness, and 
nobody can even imagine what consciousness is. It is the most illusive 
whatever-it-is that there is at all because it is the background of 
everything else that we know, and therefore we do not really pay much 
attention to it. We pay attention to the things within the field of 
consciousness, to the so-called things that are in the field of vision, and 
to the sounds that are in the field of hearing. But whatever it is that 
embraces all of that, we do not pay much attention to it, and in fact we 
cannot even think about it. It is like trying to look at your head: what do 
you find? You do not even find the black blob in the middle of things; 
you do not find anything. Yet that is that out of which you see, just as 
space is that out of which the stars shine. So, there is something very 
strange about all this which you cannot put your finger on, that which 
always escapes you and is completely illusive. Yet the black seems to be 
absolutely necessary for there to be anything whatsoever. 


Kali also is the principle of death. She carries a scimitar in one hand 
and a severed head in the other. Death is tremendously important to 
think about but we put it off, and it is swept under the carpet in our 
culture. In the hospital they try to keep you alive as long as possible in 
utter desperation, and they will not tell you that you are going to die. 
When relatives have to be informed that it is a hopeless case they are 
told not to tell the patient. So all the relatives come around with hollow 
grins and say, “Well, you will be all right in a month or so, and then we 
will go and have a holiday somewhere and sit by the sea and listen to the 
birds.” Of course the dying person knows that this is mockery. We have 
made death howl with all kinds of ghouls. We have invented dreadful 
afterlives, and the Christian version of Heaven is as abominable as the 
Christian version of Hell. After all, nobody wants to be in church forever. 
Children are absolutely horrified when they hear hymns which say, 
“Prostrate before thy throne to lie and gaze on thee” They cannot 


imagine what this imagery means. Now in a very subtle theological way I 
could wangle that statement around to make it extremely profound. To 
be prostrate at once and to gaze upward on the other hand is a 
coincidence of opposites, which is very deep. However, to a child it is 
just a crick in the neck, and that is the sort of imagery we have been 
brought up with. The common idea of what might happen after death is 
that you are going to be faced with your judge, the one who knows all 
about you—the Big Papa—who knows you were a naughty boy or a 
naughty girl from the beginning of things and is going to look right 
through to the core of your inauthentic existence. What kind of heebie- 
jeebies does this bring up? Perhaps you may believe in reincarnation and 
you think that your next life will be full of the rewards or the 
punishments for what you have done in this life. Although you may have 
gotten away with murder in this life, the most awful things are going to 
happen next time around, and so you look upon death as a catastrophe. 
Then there are other people who say, “Well, when you are dead you are 
dead, and nothing is going to happen at all. So what do you have to 
worry about?” Well, we do not quite like that idea because it spooks us. 
What would it be like to die, to go to sleep and never, never wake up? 
Well, there are a lot of things it is not going to be like. It is not going to 
be like being buried alive. It is not going to be like being in the darkness 
forever. It is going to be as if you never had existed at all, and not only 
you, but everything else as well. There never was anything, there is no 
one to regret it, and there is no problem. Well, think about that for 
awhile. It is kind of a weird feeling you get when you really think about 
that and imagine what it would be like to really just stop altogether. Of 
course you cannot even call it stopping because you cannot have 
stopping without starting, and so there never was any start. There is just 
no-thing and when you come to think of it, that is the way it was before 
you were born. If you go back in memory as far as you can go you come 
to the same place as you do when you go forward in your anticipation of 
the future. You may, ask what it is going to be like to be dead and this 
gives you the funny idea that this blankness is the necessary counterpart 
of what we call being. 


We all think we are alive. We assume we are really here, and that 
there really is something called “existence.” However, the existentialist 
shouts “Here we are!” Now, how could you experience that as a reality 
unless you had once been dead? What gives us any ghost of a notion that 
we are here except by contrast with the fact that we once were not, and 
later on will not be? Life is a cycle, much like the positive and negative 


poles in electricity. So this, then, is the value of the symbolism of “She is 
black” She is the womb principle, the receptive, the instanding, the void, 
and the dark, and so that is to come into the presence of the God who 
has no image. Behind the father-image, behind the mother-image, 
behind the image of light inaccessible, and behind the image of profound 
and abysmal darkness, there is something else which we cannot conceive 
at all. Saint Dionysius called it the “luminous darkness.’ Nargajuna called 
it sunyata, the void. Shankara called it brahman, that of which nothing at 
all can be said, neti-neti, beyond all conception whatsoever. However, 
this is not atheism in the formal sense of the word. On the contrary, this 
is a profoundly religious attitude because it corresponds practically to an 
attitude toward life of total trust in letting go. When we form images of 
God, they are all really exhibitions of our lack of faith. They are 
something to hold on to, and something to grasp. How firm is the 
foundation that lies underneath us, the Rock of Ages, or whatever you 
want to hold onto? However, when we do not grasp, we have the attitude 
of faith. If you let go of all the idols you will of course discover that what 
this unknown is, which is the foundation of the universe, is precisely you. 
Yet it is not the you you think you are. It is not your opinion of yourself, 
it is not your idea or image of yourself, and it is not the chronic sense of 
muscular strain which we usually call “I” Of course you cannot grasp it, 
but why would you need to? Even if you could, what would you do with 
it, or who would do what with it? You can never get at it because it is the 
profound central mystery. So the attitude of faith is to stop chasing it and 
stop grabbing it, because if that happens the most amazing things follow. 
However, all of these ideas of the spiritual, the godly, and this attitude 
that “We must follow the laws which have been laid down and we are 
bound to follow” are not the only way of being religious and of relating 
to the ineffable mystery that underlies ourselves and the world. 


SENSE OF NONSENSE 


CHAPTER SIX 


L is commonly said that the root of most human unhappiness is the 


sense that one’s life has no meaning. I suppose this is most frequently 
said in circles interested in psychotherapy because the feeling of 
meaninglessness is often equated with the existence of neurosis. So 
many activities into which one is encouraged to enter, including 
philosophies one is encouraged to believe and religions one is 
encouraged to join, are commended on the basis of the fact that they 
give life a meaning. It is very interesting to try and figure out what this 
idea itself means, or what is intended when it is said that life has to have 
a purpose. I remember so well as a child listening to sermons in church 
in which the preacher would constantly refer to God’s purpose “for you 
and for me.” Yet, I could never make out what it was because the 
reverend gentleman seemed to be evasive when asked, “What is the 
purpose of God for the world?” We used to sing a hymn that “God is 
working His purpose out as the year succeeds the year,’ and when one 
questioned this, the nearest clue one found was in the refrain of the 
hymn: “Nearer and nearer draws the time, the time that shall surely be, 
when the earth shall be filled with the glory of God, as the waters cover 
the sea.” Now of course, that raises the question, “What is the glory of 
God?” 

It becomes pretty obvious that when we talk about life having or not 
having a meaning, we are not using quite the ordinary sense of the word 
“meaning” as the attribute of a sign. We are not saying that we expect 
this natural universe to behave as if it were a collection of words, 
signifying something other than themselves, and it is not a point of view 
which would reduce the significance of our lives in the world merely to 
the status of signs. Obviously meaning is being used in some different 


sense than that, as Goethe’s famous lines at the end of Faust: “All that is 
mortal, or all that is perishable, is but a symbol” So the question arises, a 
symbol of what? What do we want to feel, or what would satisfy us as 
being the meaning behind this world? It is so often said that we do not 
follow our ideas and our desires through. Most of the things that we 
want very fervently are things that we have only half-glimpsed. Our 
ideals are very often suggestions or hints, and we do not really know 
exactly what we mean when we think about it. However, there is an 
obscure sense in which we feel that life ought to have significance, and to 
be a symbol in at least that sense if not so arid a symbol as just a mere 
sign. 

Perhaps it also may mean that life is meaningful. An individual feels 
that his life amounts to something when he belongs and fits in with the 
execution of some group enterprise and he feels he belongs in a plan. 
This seems to give people a sense of great satisfaction, but we have to 
pursue that question further. Why is it that a plan and that fellowship 
with other people gives the sense of meaning? Does it perhaps come to 
another sense of meaning in which life is felt to be meaningful when one 
is fully satisfying one’s biological urges, including the sense of hunger, 
the desire for love, and the need for self-expression in activity? But we 
have to push that inquiry further. What do our biological urges really 
point towards? Are they always projected towards a future? Are biology 
and its processes nothing but “going on towards going on towards going 
on”? 

However, there is a fourth and more theological sense of the meaning 
of life. In all theistic religions the meaning of life is God himself. In other 
words, all this world means a person, it means a heart, it means an 
intelligence, and the relationship of love between God and man is the 
meaning of the world. The site of God is the glory of God, and so on, but 
again here is something to be further pursued. What is it that we want in 
sharing love with a person, and even with a person in the sense of the 
Lord God? What is the content of it? What is it that we are really 
yearning after? If we go back to the first point, taking Goethe’s words 
that all that is transitory is but a symbol and that we want to feel that all 
things have significance, it does seem to me that there is a sense in which 
we often use the word “significance” where the word seems to be chosen 
quite naturally, and yet at the same time it is not quite the right word. 
When we say, for example, in reference to a musical composition, that 
we feel it to be significant, we do not mean that it expresses some 
particular kind of concretely realizable emotion, and certainly it is not 


imitating the noises of nature. Indeed, a musical program that 
deliberately sets out to express sadness or joy by simply imitating 
something else is not the kind of thing I mean. So often when one listens 
to the beautiful arabesque character of the Baroque composers, Bach or 
Vivaldi, it is felt to be significant not because it means something other 
than itself, but because it is so satisfying as it is. We use the word 
“significance” so often in moments when our impetuous seeking-for- 
fulfillment cools down, and we can give ourselves a little space to watch 
ordinary things. 

In those moments when our inner turmoil has really quieted, we find 
significance in things that we would not expect to find significant at all. 
This is, after all, the art of those modern photographers who have shown 
genius in turning the camera towards peeling paint on an old door, or 
sand and stones on a dirt road, showing us that if we look at it in a 
certain way these things are significant. However, we cannot say they are 
significant “of what” so much as significant “of themselves.” Perhaps 
significance then is the quality of a state of mind in which we notice that 
we are overlooking the significance of the world by our constant quest 
for it later. All this language is of course quite naturally vague and 
imprecise because, I think, “significance” is the wrong word to use 
although it comes so naturally to us. 


It was Clive Bell, the great aesthetician, who said that the 
characteristic of art, and especially the characteristic of aesthetic success 
in painting, was the creation of significant form. Again, this is a very 
vague, imprecise expression. However, it certainly is an attribute not 
only of those moments in which we are tranquil inside, but also of those 
moments of deep, spiritual experience that would be called moksha in 
Hinduism (meaning “release”) or satori in Zen. In those moments the 
significance of the world seems to be the world, and what is going on 
now. We do not look any further, because the scheme of things seems to 
justify itself at every moment of its unfoldment. I pointed out that this 
was particularly characteristic of music, of dancing, of belonging with 
one’s fellow man, and of the carrying out of some significant pattern of 
life which I mentioned as a second sense of the world being meaningful. 
The character of this feeling is again something that is fulfilled in itself. 
In singing the music with other people, we find that even though the 
pattern does not point to anything else outside itself we get the sense of 
meaning, and this is also obviously the case so often in the satisfaction of 
the biological urges. Does one live to eat or eat to live? I am not at all 
sure about this. Very often I am sure I live to eat because, although I do 


not like eating alone, sitting around a table and enjoying food with 
people is absolutely delightful. Generally when we do this we are not 
thinking that we have to eat because it is good for us, and that we have to 
“throw something down the hatch,’ as Henry Miller said, and swallow a 
dozen vitamins just because our system needs nourishment. 


I remember reading an article in Consumer Reports about bread. It 
seems there had been some correspondence in protest of the white bread 
one buys in the stores saying it is perfectly inedible and lacking in 
nutrition, and that it was much better to eat peasant-type bread like 
rough pumpernickel and loaves of that kind. The experts replied that our 
white bread is perfectly full of nutrients and there is nothing really the 
matter with it at all. Well, I felt that it is not a matter of the bread being 
deficient in the essential vitamins. Bread is not medicine, it is food, and 
one’s complaint against it is that it is bad cookery. It tastes of nothing. 
However, so often we do tend to look upon food for what it will do for 
us, rather than the delight of eating it. Yet, if the satisfaction of biological 
urges is to mean anything, surely the point of these urges is not mere 
survival. We might say the point of the individual is simply that he 
contributes to the welfare of the race, and the point of the race is that it 
“reproduces itself to reproduce itself to reproduce itself” and just to keep 
on going. But of course that is not really a point at all; that is just fatuous. 
Surely the human race keeps going because going on is great fun. If it is 
not and never will be, then there is obviously no point in going on from 
the most hedonistic standpoint. Then we come to the question, “What is 
fun?” or, in other words, “What is the joy of it?” Again we come to 
something that cannot very well be explained in the ordinary language of 
meaning in the sense of one thing leading to something else. This 
becomes preeminently true if we think of the question in theological 
language. In any of the theistic religions the meaning of life is God, but 
then what is God doing? What is the meaning of God? Why does He 
create the universe? What is the content of the love of God for His 
creation? Well, we have the frank answer of the Hindus that the godhead 
manifests the world because of lila, which is Sanskrit for “play.” Likewise, 
this is said in the Hebrew scriptures and in the Christian Old Testament 
in the Book of Proverbs where there is a marvelous speech by the divine 
wisdom, Sophia. In describing the function of the divine wisdom in the 
creation of the world we find that the world is seen as a manifestation of 
the wisdom of God. In producing men and animals and all the creatures 
of the earth, wisdom is playing, and it was the delight of wisdom to play 
before the presence of God. When it is likewise said in the scriptures 


that the Lord God created the world for His pleasure, this again means, 
in a sense, for play. Certainly this seems to be what the angels in Heaven 
are doing according to the traditional symbolic descriptions of Heaven 
when they are ringed around the presence of the Almighty, calling out 
“Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!” through all eternity. Well, “alleluia” may have 
meant something originally, but as it is used now it does not mean 
anything, except perhaps “whoopee!” It is an exclamation of nonsensical 
delight, and it was Dante in The Paradiso who described the song of the 
angels as the laughter of the universe. 


Now this sense of nonsense as the theme of the divine activity also 
comes across very strongly in the Book of Job. I always think that the 
Book of Job is the most profound book in the whole Bible, Old 
Testament and New Testament. Here is the problem of the righteous 
man who has suffered and all his friends try to rationalize it and say, 
“Well, you must have suffered because you really had a secret sin after 
all, and you deserve the punishment of God” So after they had their say, 
the Lord God appeared and said, “Who is this that darkeneth counsel 
with words without knowledge?” He then proceeded to ask Job and his 
friends a series of absolutely unanswerable conundrums, pointing out all 
the apparent irrationality and nonsense of His creation. For example, He 
said, “Why do I send rain upon the desert where no man is?” Most 
commentators on the Book of Job end with the remark that, “This poses 
the problem of suffering and the problem of evil, but does not really 
resolve it.” Yet in the end Job himself seems to be satisfied. He somehow 
surrenders to the apparent unreasonableness of the Lord God, and this is 
not, I think, because Job is beaten down and becomes unduly impressed 
with the royal, monarchical, and paternalistic authority of the deity and 
does not dare to answer back. Instead, he realizes that somehow these 
very questions are the answer. Of all the commentators on the Book of 
Job, I think the person who came closest to this point was G. K. 
Chesterton. He once made the glorious remark that it is one thing to 
look with amazement at a gorgon or a griffin, a creature who does not 
exist, but it is quite another thing to look at a hippopotamus, a creature 
who does exist, but looks as if he does not. In other words, when you see 
this strange world with its weird forms like hippopotami, do not take 
them for granted. Stones and trees and water and clouds and stars are as 
weird as any hippopotamus, or any imagination of fabulous beasts of 
gorgons and griffins. They are just plain improbable, and it is in this 
sense that they are the “alleluia,’ as it were, or the nonsense song of the 
universe. 


Why do we love nonsense? Why do we love Lewis Carroll with his 
“Twas brillig, and the slithy toves did gyre and gimble in the wabe, all 
mimsy were the borogoves, and the mome raths outgrabe. .. ’? Why is it 
that all those old English songs are full of “Fal-de-riddle-eye-do” and 
“Hey-nonny-nonny” and all those babbling choruses? Why is it that 
when we get “hep” with jazz we just go “Boody-boody-boop-de-boo” and 
so on, and enjoy ourselves swinging with it? It is this participation in the 
essential glorious nonsense that is at the heart of the world, not 
necessarily going anywhere. It seems that only in moments of unusual 
insight and illumination that we get the point of this, and find that the 
true meaning of life is no meaning, that its purpose is no purpose, and 
that its sense is non-sense. Still, we want to use the word “significant?” Is 
this significant nonsense? Is this a kind of nonsense that is not just 
chaos, that is not just blathering balderdash, but rather has in it rhythm, 
fascinating complexity, and a kind of artistry? It is in this kind of 
meaninglessness that we come to the profoundest meaning. 


COINCIDENCE 
OF 
OPPOSITES 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


It is really very unorthodox and unacademic to start a discussion 
with a group of psychologists on the subject of metaphysics, but it is 
essential that we do so. A lot of people say that their approach to life is 
scientific, as distinct from metaphysical, and that metaphysics is bosh. 
However, everybody, by virtue of being a human being, is willy-nilly a 
metaphysician. Everybody starts from certain fundamental assumptions 
as to what the good life is, what they want, or what their axioms for 
living are. Now I find that psychologists generally tend to be blind to 
these fundamental assumptions. Perhaps it is truer of psychiatrists than 
of psychologists, but there is a tendency to feel that they are scientists. In 
fact they tend to bend over backwards to have a scientific status because 
that is fashionable in our age. However, it is amusing that psychoanalysts 
have pointed out to many philosophers that their philosophical ideas are 
capable of being shown to have a psychoanalytic reference. The 
philosopher is very grateful to the psychoanalyst for revealing to him his 
unconscious and its emotional contents, but the psychoanalyst must in 
turn await a revelation from the philosopher as to his philosophical 
unconscious and the unexamined assumptions which lie within it. 


So if I may start by insulting your intelligence with what is called the 
most elementary lesson, I would like to talk about the thing that we 
should have learned before we learned “1-2-3” and “A-B-C,’ but 
somehow was overlooked. This lesson is quite simply that anything we 
experience through our senses, whether sound, light, or touch, is a 
vibration. Now, a vibration has two aspects: one called “on,’ and the 
other called “off” Vibrations seem to be propagated in waves, and every 


wave system has crests and troughs. So life is a system of now-you-see-it, 
now-you-don't, and these two aspects always go together. For example, 
sound is not pure sound; it is a rapid alternation of sound and silence, 
and that is simply the way things are. However, one must remember that 
the crest and the trough of a wave are inseparable. Nobody has ever seen 
crests without troughs or troughs without crests. Just as you do not 
encounter in life people with fronts but no backs, you do not encounter a 
coin that has heads but no tails. Although the heads and the tails, the 
fronts and the backs, the positives and the negatives are different, they 
are at the same time one. Fundamentally, one has to get used to the 
notion that different things can be inseparable, and that what is explicitly 
two can at the same time be implicitly one. However, if you forget that, 
very funny things happen. We forget that black and white are 
inseparable, and that existence is constituted equivalently by being and 
non-being. We then become scared, and feel we have to play a game 
called “Uh-oh, Black Might Win” And once we get into the fear that the 
negative side might win, we are compelled to play the game called “But 
White Must Win,’ and from that start all our troubles. 


The human awareness is a very odd mechanism, although I do not 
think “mechanism” is quite the right word, but it will do for the moment. 
We have as a species specialized in a certain kind of awareness which we 
call conscious attention, and by this we have the faculty of examining the 
details of life very closely. We can restrict our gaze in a way that 
corresponds somewhat to the central field of vision in the eyes. We have 
central vision and we have peripheral vision. Central vision is that which 
we use for reading and for all sorts of close work, much like using a 
spotlight. However, peripheral vision is more like using a floodlight. 
Civilized human beings have learned to specialize in concentrated 
attention. Even if a person’s attention span is short, they are, as it were, 
wavering their spotlight over many fields. The price which we pay for 
specialization in conscious attention is ignorance of everything outside 
its field. I would rather say “ignore-ance,’ than ignorance, because if you 
concentrate on a figure, you tend to ignore the background and you tend, 
therefore, to see the world in a disintegrated aspect. You take separate 
things and events seriously, imagining that these really do exist, when 
actually they have the same kind of existence as an _ individual’s 
interpretation of a Rorschach blot; they are what you make out of it. 

In fact our physical world is a system of inseparable differences. 
Everything exists with everything else, but we contrive not to notice that 
because what we notice is what we consider noteworthy, and we notice it 


in terms of notations, numbers, words, and images. What is notable, 
noteworthy, notated, and noticed is what appears to us to be significant, 
and the rest is ignored as insignificant. As a result we select from the 
total input to our senses only a very small fraction of our perception, and 
this causes us to believe that we are separate beings, isolated by the 
boundary of the epidermis from the rest of the world. Now, this is also 
the mechanism involved in not noticing that black and white go together, 
and in not noticing that every inside has an outside. The inside, what 
goes on inside your skin, is inseparable from what goes on outside your 
skin. For example, in the science of ecology one learns that a human 
being is not an organism in an environment, but is an organism/ 
environment, that is to say, a unified field of behavior. If you describe 
carefully the behavior of any organism you cannot do so without at the 
same time describing the behavior of the environment, and by that you 
know that what you are describing is the behavior of a unified field. 
However, you must be very careful indeed not to fall into old Newtonian 
assumptions about the billiard ball nature of the universe. The organism 
is not the puppet of the environment being pushed around by it, nor on 
the other hand is the environment the puppet of the organism being 
pushed around by the organism. The relationship between them is, to 
use John Dewey’s word, “transactional, a transaction being a situation 
like buying and selling in which there is no buying unless somebody sells, 
and no selling unless somebody buys. So that is the fundamental 
relationship between ourselves and the world. Such people as B. F. 
Skinner, who did not update their philosophy and interpreted life in 
terms of Newtonian mechanics, saw the organism as something 
determined by the total environment. They did not see, in a more 
modern way of talking about it, that this is simply describing a unified 
field of behavior, which is nothing more than what any mystic ever said. 
In the modern, academic, and scientific environment, mysticism is a 
dirty word, but if a mystic is one who is sensibly or even sensuously 
aware of his inseparability as an individual from the total existing 
universe, he is simply a person who has become sensible—aware through 
his senses—of the way ecologists see the world. When I am in academic 
circles I do not talk about mystical experiences, instead I talk about 
ecological awareness, yet this is simply two ways of describing the same 
thing. 

The next aspect of our metaphysical introduction must be about 
games. I think there are really four questions that all philosophers have 
discussed from the beginning of recorded time. The first is: Who started 


it? The second is: Are we going to make it? The third is: Where are we 
going to put it? And the fourth is: Who is going to clean up? When you 
think these questions over it poses a fifth question: Is it serious? And that 
is the one I want to discuss. Is existence serious, as when you say to the 
doctor after he has looked at your X-ray, “Is it serious?” Now, what does 
that mean? It means, “Am I in danger of not continuing to survive?” 
However, the real question is “Ought I to continue to survive?” In other 
words, “Must I survive?” If life is serious, then of course I must survive. If 
it is not serious, it really does not matter whether I do or not. Now, in 
Western culture it is practically a basic assumption that existence is 
serious, and this is particularly true among people who call themselves 
existentialists. When they talk about a person who exists authentically 
they mean that he takes his life seriously and other people’s lives 
seriously. However, the poet and essayist, G. K. Chesterton, once 
observed that “angels fly because they take themselves lightly” And if I 
may venture into mythology, if the angels take themselves lightly, how 
much more would the lord of the angels? But of course we have been 
brought up in a mythological context where the Lord God definitely does 
take Himself seriously and is indeed, the serious person. So, when we go 
into church, laughter is discouraged in the same way as it is discouraged 
in court. This is a serious matter and everybody has to have the right 
expression on their faces because this is the great authority figure. This is 
Grandpa, and we do not realize that he has a twinkle in his eye. So the 
basis of it all is this: If we say, “You must survive” or “I must survive,’ and 
“Life is earnest and I have got to go on,’ then your life is a drag and not a 
game. 


Now it is my contention and my basic metaphysical axiom that 
existence—the physical universe—is basically playful. There is no 
necessity for it whatsoever. It is not going anywhere; that is to say, it does 
not have some destination at which it ought to arrive. It is best 
understood by analogy with music because music as an art form is 
essentially playful. We say, “You play the piano.” You do not work the 
piano. Why? For instance, music differs from travel because when you 
travel you are trying to get somewhere and, being a very compulsive and 
purposive culture, we are busy going everywhere faster and faster in an 
attempt to eliminate the distance between places. With modern jet travel 
you can arrive anywhere almost instantaneously, and what happens as a 
result is that the two ends of your journey become the same place. So 
you eliminate the distance and you eliminate the journey, and you forget 
that the fun of the journey is to travel, not to obliterate travel. In music, 


though, one does not make the end of a composition the point of the 
composition. If that were so, the best conductors would be those who 
played fastest, and there would be composers who wrote only finales. 
People would go to a concert just to hear one crashing chord because 
that is the end. The same is true of dancing because the point of dancing 
is to dance. 


However, we do not understand this because it is not something 
brought by our education into our everyday conduct. We have a system 
of schooling which gives a completely different impression. Everything 
we do is graded, and we put the child into the corridor at one end of this 
grade system, with a kind of “Come on, kitty-kitty-kitty” So you go to 
kindergarten, and that is a great thing, because when you finish that you 
will get into first grade; then “Come on!” First grade leads to second 
grade, and so on. When you get out of grade school you go on to high 
school, and the whole thing is “revving up,’ and coming closer. Then you 
go on to college, and then by Jove, you get into graduate school, and 
when you are through with graduate school you go out to join the world. 
You get into some racket in which you are selling insurance and 
everyone has their quota to make, and you are going to make it. All the 
time that great thing is coming and coming, and it is the success you are 
working toward. Then one day when you wake up, and you are forty 
years old, you say, “My God, I have arrived! I am there.” However, you do 
not feel very different from what you always felt, and there is a slight let- 
down because you feel there was a hoax. Of course there was a hoax, a 
dreadful hoax, because they made you miss everything by expectation. 
People live to retire and they put those savings away, but then when they 
are sixty-five they do not have any energy left to enjoy it, and they end up 
in a senior citizens’ community. 


We have simply cheated ourselves the whole way down the line. We 
thought of life by analogy—as a journey or a pilgrimage—which had a 
serious purpose at the end. The thing was to get to that end, success, or 
whatever it is, or maybe Heaven after you are dead, but we missed the 
point along the whole way. It was a musical thing, and you were 
supposed to sing or dance while the music was being played. Instead you 
had to do “that thing” and you did not let it happen. So this is why the 
human being sometimes becomes an organism for self-frustration. 
Alfred Korzybski called man a “time binder,’ which means that he is the 
animal peculiarly aware of the time sequence. As a result of this he is 
able to do some very remarkable things. He can predict: he studies what 
has happened in the past, and he says the chances are so-and-so of that 


happening again. Well, to be able to predict is very useful because that 
has survival value, but at the same time it creates anxiety. You pay for the 
increased survivability gained in prediction by knowing that in the end 
you will not succeed. Everyone is going to fall apart by one way or 
another; it might happen tomorrow, it might happen fifty years from 
now, but it all comes apart in the end. So people get worried about that 
and they become anxious, and what they gain on the roundabout, they 
lose on the swings. 


On the other hand, if you see that existence is musical in nature, you 
will understand my basic metaphysical assumption that life is not 
serious. It is a play of all kinds of patterns and we can look upon different 
creatures as we look at different games. There is the human game, the 
tree game, the grass game, et cetera. All down the line there are all these 
different things doing their dance. If you were in a flying saucer from 
some other planet, and you came and tried to make out what kind of 
organism was living on this world from about ten-thousand feet late at 
night, you would see on the surface of the earth great ganglia with 
tentacles going out all over the place. Early in the morning you would see 
little blobs of luminous particles going into the middle of them. Then in 
the late afternoon or early evening it would spit them all out again. You 
might say, “Well, this thing breathes, and it does it in a special rhythm. It 
goes in-and-out, in-and-out, and in-and-out, once every twenty-four 
hours. Then it rests a day and does not spit so much, it just spits in a 
different way. There is a kind of irregularity, and then it starts spitting the 
same way all over again” They would say, “Well, that is very interesting, 
but that is just the kind of thing we have. It is something that goes this 
way, and then goes that way.” 


Now, although it has distinctive patterns, existence is something that 
is spontaneous. The Chinese word for nature is tzu-jan, that which 
happens of itself. Your hair grows by itself, your heart beats by itself, and 
your breath happens pretty much by itself. Your glands secrete the 
essences by themselves and you do not have voluntary control over these 
things, and so we say they happen spontaneously. So, when you go to 
bed and try to go to sleep you interfere with the spontaneous process of 
going to sleep. If you try to breathe real hard you will find you get balled- 
up in your breathing. So if you are to be human, you just have to trust 
yourself to go to sleep, to digest your food, and to have bowel 
movements. Of course if something goes seriously wrong and you need a 
surgeon that is another matter, but by and large the healthy human being 
does not from the start of life need surgical interference. One lets it 


happen by itself, and so with the whole picture that is fundamental to it. 
You have to let go and let it happen, because if you don’t then you are 
constantly going to be trying to do what happens easily only if you do not 
try. When you think a bit about what people really want to do with their 
time, and you ask what they do when they are not being pushed around 
or somebody is telling them what to do, you find they like to make 
rhythms. They listen to music and they dance or they sing, or perhaps 
they do something of a rhythmic nature like playing cards, bowling, or 
raising their elbows. Given the chance, everybody wants to spend their 
time swinging. 


SEEING THROUGH THE 
NET 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


) ( e are living in an age when there has been an enormous 


proliferation of techniques for subjecting every kind of natural process 
outside the human skin, and now increasingly inside the human skin, to 
some form of rational control. As we appear to succeed in controlling 
nature it also becomes apparent that we are failing, and the process has 
become of such a high degree of complexity that we begin to feel that we 
are standing in our own way. Everybody complains that the state of 
affairs in the modern world is so complicated that nobody can 
understand it, and yet nobody really knows what to do. For example, if 
you want to run a small business there are enormous legal requirements, 
and you need so much help to do the paperwork that you can hardly run 
the business at all. You may be trying to run a hospital, but you have to 
spend so much time keeping records and writing things down on paper 
that you have no time to practice medicine. You may be trying to run a 
university but the requirements, the recording, and the endless red tape 
of the registrar’s office is such that the actual work of research and 
teaching is seriously hampered. 


In this society individuals increasingly feel themselves obstructed by 
their own cautiousness. Now, I am a philosopher who has for many years 
been interested in the mutual fructification of Eastern cultures and 
Western cultures. For years I have been studying Oriental ideas, not in 
the spirit of saying to the West, “You ought to be converted to Oriental 
ideas,’ but rather in the spirit of saying, “You do not understand the basic 
assumptions of your own culture if your own culture is the only culture 
you know.’ Everybody operates on certain basic assumptions, but very 


few people know what those assumptions are. You may often encounter 
the sort of character who is typical of an American businessman, and he 
says, “Well, I am a practical businessman. I believe in producing results 
and getting things done, and all this high-falutin’ logic and nonsense is of 
no concern to me” Now I know that the basic practical assumptions, the 
metaphysics of that man, can be defined as a school of philosophy 
known as pragmatism. However, it is a bad example of pragmatism 
because he has never thought it through. It is very difficult to get down 
exactly to your basic assumptions and ask, “What do you mean by 
consistency? What do you mean by rationality? What do you mean by 
the good life?” The only way of finding out what you mean by these 
things is by contrasting the way you look at something to the way it is 
looked at in another culture. 


Therefore, to gain perspective we have to find cultures which are in 
some ways as sophisticated as our own but at the same time as different 
from our own as possible. For this purpose I always thought that the 
Chinese culture is optimal, as well as the culture of India, and that by 
studying the ideas of these people and understanding their life goals we 
could become more aware of our own. In keeping with the old principle 
of triangulation, you cannot establish the position of a particular object 
unless you observe it from two particularly different points of view, and 
thereby calculate its actual distance from you. So, by looking at what we 
are pleased to call the reality of the physical world from the basic 
standpoints of different cultures, I think we are in a better position to 
know where we are than if we only have one single line of sight. 
Therefore, this has been my interest and my background, and arising out 
of this there has come a further question which I would call “the 
problems of human ecology.” How is man to be best related to his 
environment, especially in circumstances where we are in possession of 
an extremely powerful technology and have the capacity to change our 
environment far more than anyone else has ever been able to do so? Are 
we going to end up best related to it not by civilizing the world but by 
urbanizing it? In other words, are we going to foul our own nest as a 
result of technology? 


Now all of this really comes down to the basic question: “What are 
you going to do if you are God?” If, in other words, you find yourself in 
charge of the world through technological powers, instead of leaving 
evolution to what we used to call in the nineteenth century “the blind 
processes of nature,’ what are you going to do? We are not going to leave 
evolution to the blind forces of nature anymore. We are going to direct it 


ourselves, because we are developing increasing control over genetic 
systems, over the nervous system, and over all kinds of systems. A simple 
question then arises: “What do you want to do with it?” Most people do 
not know, and they have never even seriously confronted the question of 
what they want. If you ask a group of students to sit down and write a 
solid paper of twenty pages on “Your Idea of Heaven,’ or what they 
would really like to see if they could make it happen, it starts them really 
thinking and they soon realize that a lot of the things they thought they 
would want are not really what they want at all. Supposing, just for the 
sake of illustration, you had the power to dream every night any dream 
you wanted to dream. Now you could, of course, arrange for one night of 
dreams to be seventy-five years of subjective time, or any number of 
years of subjective time. What would you do? Naturally you would start 
out by fulfilling every wish. At first you would have the most magnificent 
food and sexual partners and everything you could possibly imagine in 
that direction. Then, when you got tired of that after several nights, you 
would switch a bit and you would soon find yourself involved in 
adventures, like that of a fairy-tale princess being saved from a dragon by 
a gallant knight, or you might be the gallant knight who is doing the 
rescuing. You would figure out fantastic mathematical conceptions, 
contemplate great works of art, and create all sorts of magnificent things. 
Finally you would say, “Now, tonight what we are going to do is we are 
going to forget this dream is a dream, and we are going to be really 
shocked” When you awoke from that one you would say, “Now that was 
an adventure!” Thereafter you would think of more and more ways to get 
involved while letting go of control, knowing that you would always 
come back to “center” in the end. However, while you were involved in 
the dream you would not know you were actually going to come back to 
center, and eventually you would be dreaming a dream in which you 
found yourselves sitting around in this room listening to me talking. You 
would be completely involved with the particular life problems which 
you have, and maybe that is what you are doing right now. 


However, there is a difficulty in this which is the issue of control. It 
comes down to the question: “Are you wise enough to play at being 
God?” In order to understand what that question means we have to go 
back again to metaphysical assumptions underlying our common sense. 
Whether you are a Jew, a Christian, an agnostic, or an atheist you are not 
uninfluenced by the whole tradition of Western culture. The models of 
the universe which our culture has employed influence our very 
language, and the structure of our thought, indeed the very constitution 


of our logic, is seen in the architecture of today’s computers. The 
Western model of the universe is political, being derived from 
engineering or architecture. All Western thought is based on the idea 
that the universe is a construct, and even when we get rid of the idea of 
the constructor or the personal god we continue to think of the world in 
terms of it being a machine. We see the world in terms of Newtonian 
mechanics, and later in terms of what we call quantum mechanics, 
although I find it rather difficult to understand how quantum theory is in 
any sense “mechanics.” It is much more like “organics,’ which is a 
different concept. However that may be, the Newtonian concept has 
percolated into the very roots of our common sense. Instead of seeing 
the world as something alive, the world is viewed as a construct, an 
artifact, and therefore one must come to understand the operations of a 
machine by analysis of its parts. By separating them into their original 
bits we have “bitted” the cosmos, and we see everything going on in 
terms of bits of information. We have found that this is an extremely 
fruitful enterprise in that it enables us to think we control what is 
happening. After all, the whole of Western technology is the result of 
“bitting”” If you want to eat a chicken you cannot eat the whole chicken at 
once. You have to bite it and reduce it to bits. You do not get a cut-up 
fryer out of an egg because it does not come that way. 


Now, we do not know the origins of all this, and it probably goes back 
many thousands of years. The way we develop the art of thinking, which 
is essentially calculus, is that the universe as it comes in nature (the 
physical universe) is something like a Rorschach blot. It is all wiggles. We 
who live in cities are not really used to this because we build everything 
in straight lines, rectangles, and so on. Wherever you see this sort of 
hard, geometric shape you know human beings have been around 
because they are always trying to straighten things out. However, nature 
itself includes clouds, water, the outlines of continents, mountains, and 
biological existences, and all of them wiggle. Wiggly things are to human 
consciousness a little bit of a nuisance because we always want to figure 
them out. Therefore, it is as if some ancient fisherman one day held up 
his net and looked at the world through it, and then he said: “My, just 
think of that. There I can see the view, and the peak of that mountain is 
one-two-three-four-five-six holes across, and the base is one-two-three- 
four-five holes down. I’ve got its number” So the lines of celestial and 
terrestrial latitude and longitude and indeed the whole idea of a matrix— 
of looking at things through graph paper printed on cellophane—is basic 
to the idea of measurement. This is the way we calculate and break down 


the wiggliness of the world into comprehensible, countable, geometrical 
units, thereby figuring it and constructing it in those terms. This 
procedure is so successful up to a point that we can of course come to 
imagine that the physical world really is discreet, discontinuous, full of 
points, and is in fact a mechanism. However, I just want to suggest the 
possibility that this way of seeing the world may be the prejudice of a 
certain personality type. 


In the history of philosophy, poetry, and art we find the interaction of 
two personality types which I call “prickles” and “goo.” The prickly 
people are advocates of intellectual porcupinism. They want a rigor with 
very precise statistics and they have a certain clipped attitude in their 
voices. This is very well known in academic circles where certain people 
always tend to be a little edgy like that. They accuse other people of 
being disgustingly vague, miasmic, and mystical. However, the vague, 
miasmic, and mystical people accuse the prickly people of being mere 
skeletons with no flesh on their bones. They say, “You just rattle. You are 
not really a human being. You know the words but you don’t know the 
music.” So therefore, if you belong to the prickly type, you hope that the 
ultimate constituent of matter is particles. If you belong to the gooey 
type you hope it is waves. If you are prickly you are a classicist; and if you 
are gooey you are a romanticist. Going back into medieval philosophy, if 
you are prickly you are a nominalist; if you are gooey you are a realist, 
and so it goes. Yet we know very well that this natural universe is neither 
prickles nor goo exclusively. It is gooey prickles and prickly goo, 
depending on your level of magnification. If you have focused your 
magnification on something so that the focus is clear, then you have a 
prickly point of view, allowing you to see structure and shape clearly 
outlined and sharply defined. If you turn the dial a little out of focus, 
then you have goo. We are always playing with the two views because it 
embodies the question of “Is the world basically stuff, like matter, or is it 
basically structure?” Of course, we find out today that in science we no 
longer seriously consider the idea of matter being some sort of stuff 
anymore. 


Suppose you were to describe “stuff” What terms would you use to 
describe it? You always have to describe it in terms of structure, in terms 
of something which is countable and can be designated as a pattern. No 
matter where we look we never get to any basic stuff and it seems to me 
that this way of thinking is based on a form of consciousness which we 
could best call “scanning” The very capacity to divide experiences into 
bits is somehow related to a physical facility which corresponds to the 


sweeping of a radar beam, or a spotlight, over the environment. The 
advantage of the spotlight is it gives you intensely concentrated light on 
restricted areas. A floodlight, by comparison, has less intensity. However, 
if this room were in total darkness, and you used the spotlight with a 
very thin beam and you scanned the room with it, you would have to 
retain in memory all the areas over which it passed and then, by an 
additive process, you would make out the contours of the room. Now it 
seems to me that this is something in which civilized man, both in the 
East and in the West, has specialized. This is a method of paying 
attention to things which we call “noticing,” and therefore it is highly 
selective. It picks out features in the environment which we say are 
noteworthy and which we therefore register with a notation, be it the 
notation of words, the notation of numbers, or a notation such as algebra 
or music. We notice those things, and only those things, for which we 
have notation. Very often a child will point at something and say to its 
parents, “What is that?” They are not clear what the child is pointing to 
because the child has pointed to something which we do not consider to 
be a “thing” The child has pointed to an area of funny pattern on a dirty 
wall, and has noticed a figure on it. However, the child does not have a 
word for it and asks, “What is that?” The adult says, “Oh, that’s just a 
mess,’ because to us it does not count as a thing. Through this you come 
to ask the question: “What do you mean by a thing?” Now, it is very 
fascinating to ask children this question because we find that they do not 
know because it is one of the unexamined suppositions of the culture. 
“What do you mean by an event?” Well, everybody knows what an event 
is but nobody can say, because a thing is a “think.” It is a unit of thought 
just like an inch is a unit of measurement. So we “thing” the world, 
which is to say that in order to measure a curve you have to reduce it toa 
series of points and apply the calculus. So, in exactly the same way, in 
order to discuss or talk about the universe you have to reduce it to 
things. But each thing, or “think,” is one grasp of the spotlight. We 
reduce the infinite wiggliness of the world to grasps, or bits, and we are 
getting back to the idea of biting one’s own teeth, of grasping one’s own 
thoughts. So we thereby describe the world in terms of things, just as 
that fisherman could describe his view by the number of net-holes over 
and through which the view was showing, and this has been the 
immensely and apparently successful enterprise of all technological 
culture, superbly emphasized by ourselves. 


However, the problem that arises is very obviously one of over- 
specialization. Everybody knows this is prevalent in the science of 


medicine. On the one hand you may have a specialist who really 
understands the function of the gallbladder and has studied gallbladders 
ad infinitum. However, whenever he looks at a human being he sees 
them in terms of their gallbladder. So, if he operates on the gallbladder, 
he may do so very knowledgeably since he is well-educated about that 
particular area of the organism, but he does not foresee the 
unpredictable effects of this operation in other connected areas. The 
human being’s gallbladder is not a “thing” that can be extracted in the 
same way that a spark plug can be extracted and replaced with a new 
one. The system is not the same because there is a fundamental 
difference between a mechanism and an organism which can be 
described operationally. A mechanism is assembled; you add this bit to 
that bit, that bit to this bit. However, an organism grows from within, 
you do not see little bits coming from all directions to join each other, 
finally making up a shape. It is more like watching a photographic plate 
developing. Suddenly the area you are watching seems to organize itself 
and develop from the relatively simple and gooey to the relatively 
structured and prickly. So then, if we are trying to control and 
understand the world through the scanning system of conscious 
attention which takes in everything a bit at a time, and if that is the only 
method we rely on, we are going to run into a problem. Everything is 
going to appear increasingly to be too complicated to manage. For 
example, let us take the problem facing the electronics industry with 
catalogs of products that are being produced over the world. Who has 
read all the catalogs? How do you know if something you are working on 
is patented or not? Who else has developed a similar product? Has 
anybody had time to read all the catalogs? Well, of course nobody has 
because they are just voluminous, and it is exactly the same in almost 
any other field. There is an information explosion much like the 
population explosion, and how on earth are you going to scan all that 
information? Of course, you can get computers to help you in this 
direction but by Parkinson’s Law the sooner you become more efficient 
in doing this, the more this will stimulate cataloging so that you will have 
to have more efficient computers still to assimilate all the information. 
You may get ahead, but only for a short time. 


We end up wondering if perhaps there were some other way of 
understanding things. Let us go back from the spotlight to the floodlight, 
to the extraordinary capacity of the human nervous system to 
comprehend situations instantaneously without analysis, that is to say 
without verbal or numerical symbolism of the situation in order to 


understand it. We rely heavily upon abstract representation, yet we have 
this curious ability of pattern recognition which the mechanical systems 
have only in a very primitive way. Computers are able to recognize 
figures and letters written in almost anyone’s handwriting provided their 
handwriting is a fairly normal grade-school style. However, a computer 
has a terrible time trying to recognize the letter “A” when it is printed in 
sanserif, gothic, longhand, or whatever kind of “A” you may actually 
write. The human recognizes this pattern instantly but the computer is at 
a disadvantage. It seems to lack a kind of capacity I would call “field 
organization” because it is terribly punctive and digital, much like a 
newspaper photograph which, when you look at it under a magnifying 
glass, is all dots. The problem is that in developing technology we have 
left out of consideration our strongest suit, which is the organization of 
the brain itself. We are in a situation where the brain is still not really 
understood by even the most competent neurologists. It puzzles them 
because they cannot give a model of the brain in numerical or verbal 
language. Now, you are that. You are this thing which you yourself 
cannot figure out. But in the same way that I cannot bite my own teeth, 
the I who is attempting to bite my teeth with my teeth by the sheer 
complexity of structure is far more evolved than any system that can be 
imagined. This is, in a way, slightly akin to the “girdle theorem” by which 
you cannot have a system of logic which defines its own axioms. The 
axioms of any given system must always be defined in terms of a higher 
system. However, you are the most complex thing that has yet been 
encountered in the cosmos, and so you cannot figure you out. 


Now let us suppose that we are going to try to do the impossible and 
become, as it were, completely transparent to ourselves. What happens 
when we entirely understand the organization or the mechanics of our 
own brains? Well, you are again back in the situation of God, and when 
you are God what are you going to do? If you are God you know what 
you are going to do: you are going to say to yourself, “Get lost” What you 
want is a surprise, and when you have figured everything out there will 
be no more surprises, and then you will be completely bored. But on the 
other hand, a person who is really functioning completely is a person 
who trusts his own brains and permits his brain to operate at a more 
optimal level. In other words, even though he knows how to think things 
out he makes his best discoveries without thinking. In the processes of 
creative invention if you have a problem you think it over but you may 
not find any answer to it because the punctive or digital system of 
thinking is at the same time too simple and too clumsy to deal with it. 


The problem is more complex, and there are more variables than can be 
kept in mind at one time, so you might say, “I will sleep on it.” Now this is 
very similar to research done at the Institute of Advanced Studies at 
Princeton, or at the Institute of Behavioral Sciences at Stanford, where 
they pay people to goof off, which is an excellent idea. You have a 
blackboard on which you fiddle around, and you look out of the window, 
and your brain eventually hands you the solution to the problem. You 
recognize it immediately because you have the technical knowledge and 
so you know that it is a solution. Then naturally you go back and check it 
and you work it out in the bit-by-bit form of thinking to see how it 
comes out in those terms. If it does work out, everybody will agree with 
you and say, “Yes, that is the answer.’ However, if it does not come out in 
those terms they will not agree with you because you have not subjected 
it to the socially acceptable traditional form of analyzing knowledge. 


Now, here is the problem. It takes an awfully long time to check these 
solutions out because it takes even longer to arrive at the solution which 
you have come to spontaneously by a purely calculated process. Most of 
the situations in life are such that they do not wait for us to make up our 
minds, and so an enormous amount of carefully worked-out scientific 
knowledge becomes trivial. It is all very well and very finely worked out, 
but it arrives much too late because life comes at you from all sides, from 
all over everywhere at once. 


Now I am not saying this to put down all this marvelous work of 
calculation which has been brought to immense electronic and technical 
sophistication. Actually, computer scientists are the first people to 
understand the limitations of their own kind of knowledge, but they are 
going to have to tell the politicians about this because politicians do not 
understand. They think that this kind of knowledge is the answer to 
everything and yet I think most of us know it is not which, I repeat, is 
not something against technology. When you walk you put your right 
foot forward, and that is fine, but then you must put your left foot 
forward. The great technological enterprise has been putting the right 
foot forward but now you must bring up the left foot, that is to say, to 
bring up a new respect for the organic type of organization which is 
incomprehensible to technological thinking but which always underlies 
it. Of course that by itself does not work because after you bring the left 
foot up you have again got to bring up the right foot, the analytic 
perspective. After goo comes prickles, and after prickles comes goo. 


I think our danger at the present time is such that we are so heady, so 


delighted with the results of prickles, that we have to allow a little bit of 
goo back into the system. What we have to do is to work out a way of 
making the brain itself more efficient, and this is one thing that civilized 
education has neglected. Lynn White used to say that the academic 
world today only values three kinds of intelligence: verbal intelligence, 
mnemonic intelligence (in other words, remembering), and 
computational intelligence. He said it entirely neglects kinesthetic 
intelligence, social intelligence, and at least seven other kinds of 
intelligence. However, it is the extraordinary capacity of the neural 
organization to engage in pattern recognition and in instantly solving 
certain complex problems without knowing how it does it. The trouble is 
that when you do something in this way, you do not know how to do it, 
and it is in a certain sense a non-repeatable experiment. In other words, 
you cannot explain to someone else how to put it together, but you can 
do it just like you can open and close your hand without any knowledge 
of physiology. You do it every time. You do not know how you do it, you 
just do it. We have an enormous potential in this kind of intelligence 
now that we know how to do all sorts of things, but to the extent that we 
are academically minded we will not allow ourselves to follow through 
because we cannot explain it. For example, there is a way of cooling a 
blazing furnace that is very simple, but engineers say it is theoretically 
impossible and so it cannot happen in the same way that bees that 
cannot fly by the laws of aerodynamics still somehow are able to do it. 
So, the rather practical issue I come to is this: if technology relies 
exclusively on linear thinking it is going to destroy the environment. It is 
going to become too complicated to handle and man is going to be like 
the dinosaur which had to have a brain in its head and a brain in its 
rump because it was so big. There is the story of the caveman who kept a 
dinosaur, and when he went to bed at night he would clump it on the tail 
with a club, and it would scream at eight o’clock in the morning and 
wake him up. It seems to me we are getting into that kind of saurian 
situation with our technology, and if we follow it, it is going to lead us to 
extinction. 

So, are we going to foul things up by insisting on using linear 
information as the dominant tool of controlling the world? Or can we 
master all that we have done and still use the linear input and analysis 
but with a fundamental trust in our power to assimilate multiple inputs, 
although we really do not know how we do it? My point is that although 
you cannot find an absolute which you can pin down, there always 
remains in any human operation the basic central thing which you 


cannot understand because it is you, just as teeth cannot bite themselves. 
Now, the assumption of Judeo-Christian culture is that man in his nature 
is sinful, and therefore cannot be trusted. On the other hand, the 
assumption of ancient Chinese culture is that man in his essential nature 
is good, and therefore has to be trusted. They say to us, “If you cannot 
trust your own basic nature you cannot really rely on the idea that you 
are untrustworthy, and therefore you are hopelessly fouled up.’ Now this 
position has amazing political consequences. If we come to a different 
assumption and say, “No, we human beings are fallible, basically selfish, 
and really fundamentally evil, we therefore need law and order and a 
control system to put us in order’ We thereby project these control 
systems onto the church or the police, or onto somebody who is really 
ourselves disguised. All of this is very much like the convention of 
daylight savings time. Everybody could simply get up an hour earlier, but 
instead of doing that we alter the clock because a clock is a kind of 
authority, and we say “Well, the clock says it is time for you to get up” 
The Native Americans laugh at the “palefaces” because they say, “The 
paleface does not know when he is hungry until he looks at his watch” 
So in this way we become clock-dominated, and the abstract system 
takes over from the physical, organic situation. As a result, we have run 
into a cultural situation where we have confused the symbol with the 
physical reality, the money with the wealth, the menu with the dinner, 
and as a result we are starving from eating menus. 


én meditation 


‘The Classic Text on Rinzai 
Zen Training—by One of 
the Foremost Masters of 

© Twentieth-Century Zen 


Albert Low 


ISBN 0-8048-3247-1 


ISBN 0-8048-3211-0 


JERRY BRAZA, PH.D. 


Fecqwoad by Thc Nhat Ha 
‘Neb Pee Pee Nominee 


ISBN 0-8048-31 13-0 ISBN 0-8048-3 174-2 


ISBN 0-8048-3 186-6 ISBN 0-8048-1255-1 


