Myth and Ritual 
in Christianity 
DY Alan W. We 


AN EVERGREEN BOOK (E-212)—: 


MYTH AND RITUAL 


IN CHRISTIANITY 
By Alan W. Watts 


Here is a study of Christian teachings and traditions 
as myths demonstrating the inner meaning of the uni- 
verse and of human life. Professor Watts cautiously 
approaches his subject not on the grounds of classical 
theology or logical analysis, but rather of depth psychol- 
ogy and symbolism. He suggests that Jung's theory of 
the collective unconscious may help explain the per- 
sistence of certain religious concepts in widely separate 
times and places. 

Professor Watts fully describes Christian mythology 
as found in the liturgy, Holy Scripture, the Apostle and 
Nicene creeds, and the Divine office. He delineates the 
growth and significance of the Christian “myth” and 
relates it to Hebraic and other religious traditions. Then 
he interprets these myths in the terms of philosophia 
perennis, ora mystical ‘subconsci ‘ious arrival at truth com- 
mon to all people and all tinies. Above all, Professor 
Watts attempts to demonstrate that the “Christ-story is 
not primarily an event which happened some two thou- 
sand years ago but something perennial, both in all time 
and beyond all time.” Final emphasis is placed upon the 
meaning of Christian myth today and its potential use 
for good in a time when science seems to be suppressing 
human emotions and the wonder of living. 

ALAN W. WATTS is the dean of the American 
Academy of Asian Studies at San Francisco. He is an 
acknewledged authority on comparative philosophy and 
psychology. Among his better known writings are The 
Legacy of Asia, The Wisdom of Insecurity, Behold the 
Spirit, and The Spirit of Zen. 


Cover design by Roy Kuhiman 


GROVE PRESS, INC., 64 University Place, New York 3, N.Y. 


Myth and Man 


MYTH AND RITUAL IN 
CHRISTIANITY 


By The Same Author 


THE SPIRIT OF ZEN 

THE LEGACY OF ASIA 

THE MEANING OF HAPPINESS 

THE THEOLOGICA MYSTICA OF ST. DIONYSIUS 
BEHOLD THE SPIRIT 

ZEN 

EASTER—ITS STORY AND MEANING 
THE SUPREME IDENTITY 

THE WISDOM OF INSECURITY 

THE WAY OF ZEN 

NATURE, MAN AND WOMAN 


MYTH AND RITUAL 
IN 
CHRISTIANITY 


ALAN W. WATTS 


GROVE PRESS, INC. 
NEW YORK 


ALL RIGHTs RESERVED 
First published January 1954 


This edition is published by arrangement with 
Vancuarp Press 


First Evergrecn Edition 1960 


Grove Press and Evergreen Books 
are published by Barney Rosset at Grove Press, Inc. 
64 University Place, New York, N.Y. 


MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


AD 
AAT+RHP:+RCA 
SACERDOTES IN ECCLESIA DEI 
* 


MEMENTOTE MOMENTUM 
IMMEMORA BILE 


Vil. 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE 


PROLOGUE 


. In the Beginning 

. God and Satan 

. Advent 

. Christmas and Epiphany 
. The Passion 


. From Easter to Pentecost 


The Four Last Things 
GLOSSARY 


INDEX 


Fig. 


ty 


15. 


16. 


17. 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


Line Drawings and Woodcuts 


. THE CREATION OF THE ANIMALS 


- ENGRAVED GEM FROM AN EARLY CHRISTIAN RING 


DESIGN FROM AN ENGRAVED GEM IN THE BRITISH 
MUSEUM 


- GLORIFIED MADONNA 


- THE ANNUNCIATION 


- THE NATIVITY 


THE ANGEL AND TITIE SHEPHERDS OF BETIILEHEM 


» THE CRUCIFIXION 


» THE CRUCIFIXION 


» TRIPLE CANDLE FOR HOLY SATURDAY 


- THE RESURRECTION 


» THE ASCENSION 


+ TYPICAL GROUND-PLAN OF A CHURCII 


+» MONSTRANCE FOR BENEDICTION AND EXPOSITION 


OF THE SACRAMENT 


THE “SPINAL-TREE” OF KUNDALINI YOGA SYM¢ 
BOLISM 


CROSS FROM TIIE CEMETERY OF ST. AGNES IN 
ROME 


BUDDIIIST WHEEL OF THE LAW 


vill 


Page 
49 


79 


83 
101 


117 


121 
123 
155 
163 
173 
183 
187 


197 


198 


198 


199 


199 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


Photogravure Plates 
Facing Page 


I. THE CREATOR MEASURING THE WORLD 38 
2. THE CREATION OF THE WORLD 39 
3. THE TREE OF JESSE $4 
4. THE ELEVATION OF THE HOST AT HIGH MASS $$ 
5. THE GREAT CROSS OF THE LATERAN 214 
6. THE LAST JUDGEMENT 215 
7. THE DAMNATION OF THE LOST 230 
8. CORONATION OF THE VIRGIN 231 
Note 


All the drawings in this book were executed by che author. 


Acknowledgements 


Thanks are due to the following sources for supplying photographic material: 

Alinan, Florence (2 and 5); British Museum, London (3); Albertina Collec- 

tion, Vienna (6); W. F. Mansell, London (7); Kunstmuseum, Basel (8). 

Plate 4, ftom The Celebration of Mass by Father J. B. O’Connell, is reproduced 

by permission of Messrs. Burns, Oates and Washbourne, and the Abbot of 
Prinknash Abbey. 


PREFACE 


OnE of the special delights of my childhood was to go and see 
the cases of illuminated manuscripts in the British Museum, 
and to walk, as every child can, right into their pages—losing 
myself in an enchanted world of gold, vermilion and cobalt 
arabesques, of palaces, gardens, landscapes and skies whose 
colours were indwelt with light as if their sun shone not above 
but in them. Most marvelous of all were the many manuscripts 
mysteriously entitled “Books of Hours”, since I did not know 
how one kept hours in a book. Their title-pages and richly 
ornamented initials showed scenes of times and seasons— 
ploughing in springtime, formal gardens bright in summer 
with heraldic roses, autumn harvesting, and logging in winter 
snow under clear, cold skics seen through a filigree screen of 
black trees. I could only assume that these books were some 
ancient device for marking the passage of time, and they 
associated themselves in my mind with sundials in old court- 
yards upon hot afternoons, with the whirring and booming of 
clocks in towers, with astrolabes engraved with the mysterious 
signs of the Zodiac, and—above all—with the slow, cyclic 
swecp of the sun, moon and stars over my head. 

I could see that these books were somchow connected with 
the wonderful recurrence of interesting scasons with strange 
names—Advent, Christmas, Epiphany, Lent, Easter, Whit- 
sun, Trinity, Michaelmas—names which marked the rotation 
of the calendar, and lent a kind of form and music to the 
simple succession of days. Under all this was a fascination 
with umce itself, with the fact that the seasons and the heavenly 
bodies went on and yet round, and that men observed their 
changes with a ceremony of signs and numbers and bells. 
I had no sense of the passage of time as a running out of life 
wherein everything gets later and later, until too late. I had no 

I 


2 Mytly and Ritual in Christianity 


fecling of it as a going on and on in an ever upward flight to 
some ultimate consummation. | simply marveled at the way 
in which it went round, again and again for ever, so that the 
marking of time seemed to be the proper and wholly absorbing 
ritual with which one watched over cternity. 

Of course the “Books of Hours” contained, not the mysteri- 
ous hours of time themselves, but the so-called Day Hours of 
the Breviary, the seasonal ritual of the Work of God whereby, 
day after day and year after ycar, the Catholic Church relives 
the life of Time’s redeemer and creator. And this cyclic 
re-enactment is the surest sign that the Christ-story is not 
primarily an event which happened some two thousand ycars 
ago, but something perennial, both in all time and beyond all 
time. As the changing miracle of the scasons brightens the 
mere march of days, so Time itself is delivered from mere 
inanity by being lived sub specie aeternitatis, under the shape 
of eternity. 

Inso far, then, as the inner life of Christianity—the contempla- 
tion of God—is not just the reverent remembering of a past 
history, but the recurrent celebration and reliving of a timeless 
truth, it is possible for us to discuss the Christian story as 
something much more profound than mere facts which once 
happened, to give it not only the status of history but also the 
tremendous dignity of myth, which is “once upon a time” in 
the sense that it is behind all time. 

Yet, in a relatively short book, such a discussion presents a 
formidable problem of selection, because it is a subject for 
which our materials and sources are almost too rich and too 
vast. Thus in the following approach to the Christian story, 
every reader will discover that important aspects of the theme 
have been Ieft out or inadequately treated. For the problem 
is not merely that the materials are so multitudinous; it is also 
that many of them are so familiar. There is, for example, no 
point in retelling Bible storics which everyone knows already, 
or, at least, can casily refer to in the inimitable language of the 


Preface 3 


Bible itself. There is an immense quantity of material, such as 
the Graal legends and the miraculous lives of the saints, which 
might have been included in a book of this kind but which 
would have blurred the clear outline of the essential narrative 
upon which Christianity is founded. 

In order to discuss that narrative in such a way as to present 
it clearly without merely rewriting the relevant parts of the 
Bible, and, at the same time, to bring out its profound mytho- 
logical significance, it seemed best to describe it in terms of 
liturgy rather than history. For the most part, then, this book 
will assume that the reader has a general knowledge of the 
Old and New Testament narratives, and, like a Missal or 
Book of Hours, will present Christianity as the ritual reliving 
of the Christ-story through the seasonal cycle of the ecclesi- 
astical year. This has the special advantage of being the form 
in which Christianity is actually lived, today as yesterday, 
enabling us to study it as a living organism rather than a dead 
fossil. Furthermore, it is the perfect form in which to discuss 
Christianity as a process for the “redemption of time”, the 
dimension of life which is so strangely problematic for Western 
man. 

Even with these limitations upon the material to be used, the 
subject is endless. It is not only that Christian liturgy and ritual 
have been so richly embellished through the centuries with art 
and architecture, poetry and symbolism. It is also that cach 
single element, each symbol, each image, cach figure of speech 
and action which the liturgy employs is connected with such a 
wealth of associations, of history, and of mythological parallels, 
that at every step one is tempted to go off on fascinating 
digressions which would interfere with the orderly unfolding 
of the main story. This accounts for a rather considerable use 
of footnotes in the following pages, and I trust that the reader 
will take them, not as an annoying apparatus of pedantry, but 
as hints of the marvelous complexity of branches, twigs, and 
leaves which spring from a peculiarly fertile Tree of Life. 


4 Myt* and Ritual in Christianity 


Because my subject is not a muscum picce but a living 
symbolism which lies at the roots of our present civilization, 
and is inseparably bound up with our whole philosophy of 
life, I cannot possibly treat its mythological aspects from a 
purely “folk-lorist” or anthropological point of view. “Chris- 
tian mythology” cannot be studied without bringing in its 
many implications of a theological, metaphysical, and 
psychological character, so that I do not feel it necessary to 
apologize for the fact that a book devoted to a particular form 
of myth and ritual has also the aspect of a philosophical essay. 


ALAN W. WatTTs 


American Academy of Asian Studies, 
San Francisco, 1953 


PROLOGUE 


A BOOK on Christian Mythology has not, I believe, been 
written before. There are some sound reasons for this omission, 
for the subject is one of extreme delicacy and complexity, not 
because of the actual material, but because the whole problem 
is, in a very special way, “touchy”. There are extreme differ- 
ences of violently held opinion about Christianity itself—both 
as to what it is, and as to whether or not it is a “good thing”. 
Similarly, there are rather wide differences as to the nature and 
value of Mythology, which has only quite recently become a 
subject of serious study. But when one takes the two together, 
one is doing something best expressed by the colloquialism 
“sticking one’s neck out”—and sticking it out very far. 

To begin with, what is Christianity? On this matter there 
is no common agreement. Docs it consist of the teaching of 
Jesus, or of the teachings of the Church about Jesus, or of both, 
and, if so, whose versions of the teachings of Jesus, and which 
Church? There is simply no way of making a decision on these 
questions so as to please everyone. Furthermore, because all 
Western peoples are so closely involved with the Christian 


5 


6 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


tradition, it is quite impossible to be “scientifically objective” 
about it, for we do not stand at a convenient “cultural distance” 
from Christianity. If one attempts to be objective, one is 
automatically pigeon-holed with the “liberals” as distinct from 
the “orthodox”, and thus gets into a rut in the very effort to 
get out of one. 

Therefore, in order to get into the subject at all without 
volumes of preliminary argumentation, a decision must be 
made, and it will of necessity be somewhat arbitrary. This book 
starts, then, from the avowedly arbitrary position that 
“Christianity” is contained in the teachings and traditions of 
the Catholic Church, both Roman and Eastern Orthodox. 
Perhaps this decision is not quite arbitrary, for the author is 
neither a Christian nor a Catholic in any “party” sense of these 
words. The basis for the decision is twofold. On the one hand, 
the Catholic tradition is both the largest and the oldest 
Christian tradition, and seems to have had the greatest cultural 
influence. On the other hand, it is the richest in mythological 
content. 

This brings us to the second problem: what is Mythology? 
To use this word in its popular sense, and to put it in the same 
phrase as the word “Christianity” is to invite immediate 
protest from almost every varicty of Christian orthodoxy. For 
the majority of Catholics and Protestants will insist that 
everything really important in Christianity is not myth, but 
history and fact. The orthodoxies do, of course, debate a 
number of minor, and a smaller number of major, points of 
factual truth. Protestants, for example, do not agree that the 
Assumption of the Virgin Mary is an historical event, and 
Catholics will not insist on the historicity of all the legends 
about the Wood of the Cross. But debates of this nature will 
not concern us here, for in this book we are going to treat of the 
entire body of Catholic tradition without making any dis- 
tinctions as between fact and fancy. In the sense of the word 
taken by this book, the whole tradition is “mythological”. 


Prologue 7 


For the word “myth” is not to be used here as meaning 
“untrue” or “unhistorical”. Myth is to be defined as a complex 
of stories—some no doubt fact, and some fantasy—which, for 
various reasons, human beings regard as demonstrations of the 
inner meaning of the universe and of human life. Myth is quite 
different from philosophy in the sense of abstract concepts, for 
the form of myth is always concrete—consisting of vivid, 
sensually intelligible, narratives, images, rites, ceremonies, and 
symbols. A great deal of myth may therefore be based on 
historical events, but not all such events acquire the mythic 
character. No once has based any type of cult or religion upon 
the undoubted fact that Dr. Samuel Johnson drank immoderate 
quantitics of tea. For this fact is regarded as unedifying and 
trivial, despite its actually infinite consequences, and despite 
the philosophical position that any and every fact embodies the 
entire mystery of the universe. 


Alles Vergingliche 
Ist nur cin Gleichnis. 


Even such a momentous fact as the discovery of printing by 
Gutenberg has acquired no mythological significance, for it 
lacks those special qualities which fire the imagination, which 
demand of the human mind that it recognize a revelation of 
the meaning behind the world. 

This definition of myth is probably clear enough, even 
though many specialists in mythology may not altogether agree 
with it. The problem is much less clear when we come to 
consider how and why certain events, legends, or symbols 
acquire the status of myth. Still deeper is the problem of what, 
if anything, these myths “really mean”. I do not believe that 
we are anywhere ncar to a full understanding of the processes 
governing the formation of myth, of the rationale whereby the 
human mind selects some narratives as mythic in significance 
and others as simply historical or merely inconsequential. 
These processes are very largely unconscious. Only quite rarely 


8 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


do people, upon hearing or witnessing a narrative, say, “This 
is obviously mythical because it clearly symbolizes our 
philosophical views about the meaning of the universe.” 
For many people who have myths have nothing very much in 
the way of philosophical views. 

Moreover, many stories which become mythical bear no 
label which marks them as such. It is otherwise with the 
Christian stories, for the priests and prophets who first uttered 
them said, “Thus saith the Lord”, and felt sincerely that they 
were not inventing idle tales but were in receipt of divine 
revelations—and there is no doubt that Jesus himself actually 
claimed some type of divine origin or affinity. But a great 
number of hero and fairy tales bear no such obvious stamp. 
In gencral, however, it would be safe to say that they are 
received as mythical because their events have a miraculous or 
“numinous” quality which marks them as special, queer, out 
of the ordinary, and therefore representative of the powers or 
Power behind the world. 

But it is not at all casy to say why, at certain times, certain 
of these uncommon narratives, certain images and symbols, 
seem to embody the “world-feeling” of immense numbers of 
people and to exercise such a compulsive and moving quality 
that men have the sense that life itself depends on their repetition 
and re-enactment. Why, for instance, was the mind of Western 
man captured by the Christemyth rather than the story of 
Mithras? How is it that myths lose their power, and that, after 
flourishing for centuries in Egypt and passing over into 
Roman civilization, the myth of Isis and Osiris did not live on 
in Western Europe? How is it, however, that the myth which 
becomes dominant retains some of the characteristics of the 
myth that wanes, that there are certain important resemblances 
between Osiris and Christ, Isis and the Virgin Mother? 

This, of course, is inseparably bound up with the problem 
of what myths “really mean”—this is, if they do mean some- 
thing and are not just “natural growths” like flowers and fish. 


Prologue 9 


Perhaps myths come out of the human mund in the same way 
that hair comes out of the human head. Now there have been 
many fashions of opinion among those who claim to interpret 
myths scientifically. Anthropologists of the cra and school of 
Sir James Frazer inclined to the view that the significance of 
myths was either astronomical, vegetative, or sexual—a view 
that still carries a great deal of weight. Myths were held to be 
naive explanations of the behaviour of the heavenly bodies, of 
the mysterious forces governing the growth of plants, crops, 
and cattle, or of the entrancing powers behind sexual love and 
generation. With the development of more sophisticated 
theological and philosophical ideas, these explanations under- 
went transformations which frequently involved a change of 
the mystery being explained—as the mind of man conceived 
the powers in question to be more than the sun, the crops, and 
the feeling of love themselves. In other words, the actual stories 
remained, but their meanings as well as the names of their 
central characters were changed to fit more mature ways of 
thinking. 

While this theory probably accounts for some myths, there 
are several ways in which it is unsatisfactory. The older 
generation of anthropologists were always apt to see “early” or 
“primitive” man in terms of the assumption that intelligence 
began with the Greeks and reached a fulfilment in Western 
Europe—in comparison with which all other cultures were 
in relative darkness and superstition. They therefore invented 
an idea of “primitive man” as a being whose total intelligence 
was supposed to consist in some rudimentary fumblings 
towards the kind of wisdom monopolized by Western 
civilization. Hardly dreaming that there are other—and highly 
developed—types of intelligence and wisdom, as well as 
different life-goals, than those contemplated by Western man, 
these anthropologists found only what their prejudices enabled 
them to see. Their premise was that their own culture as the 
“atest” in time represented the height of evolution. Earlier 


10 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


cultures must therefore be elementary forms of “modern” 
culture, and their degree of civilization and intelligence had to 
be estimated by the degree to which their values approximated 
to modern values. 

Thus we still speak of certain peoples as “primitive” and 
“backward” because they do not care to rush about the earth 
at immense speeds, to accumulate more possessions than they 
can possibly enjoy, to annihilate all peace and silence of the 
mind with an incessant stream of verbiage from newspaper or 
radio, or to live like sardines in the din and the fumes of great 
cities. It seems to have escaped our imagination that evolution 
and progress have occurred in quite other directions than these. 
In short, these so-called early and primitive cultures were not 
so stupid as we like to think, and their mythologies may have 
had purposes quite other than attempts to solve the special 
problems in which our own science is interested. 

We should therefore consider two other theories of myth, 
the first of which derives from the researches of the Swiss 
psychologist Carl Gustav Jung. Stated simply, his theory is 
that myth originates in dream and spontaneous fantasy, rather 
than in any deliberate attempt to explain anything. This is 
based on the discovery that the dreams and free fantasies of 
thousands of modern patients contain the same motifs, patterns, 
and images as ancient mythologies, and that very frequently 
they arise without any previous knowledge of these ancient 
materials. For this Jung has an explanation which is much 
more simple and direct than his terminology suggests at first 
acquaintance. His theory of the origination of myth in the 
Collective Unconscious sounds highly speculative and 
“mystical”, for which reason it is unpopular among lovers of 
scientific objectivity. 

For the Collective Unconscious is not some kind of trans- 
cendental ghost permeating all human beings. Consider the 
human body. At all times and in all places it assumes the same 
general shape and structure, and it does not surprise us in the 


Prologue II 


least that men born today in New York have the same bone- 
formation as men born four thousand years ago in Mohenjo- 
daro. Furthermore, the bone-formation, as well as the complex 
structure of respiration, circulation, digestion, and the entire 
nervous-system, was not designed by us consciously. It just 
grows, and we have only the vaguest notions of how it grows. 
And the physical structure of a physio-chemist grows ncither 
more nor less efficiently than that of an illiterate peasant. Thus 
the material form of man is collective in the sense of common 
to all men, since men—by definition—are creatures which have 
just this form. The process by which this form develops is 
unconscious—and thus the Collective Unconscious is simply 
a name for this process which is both unconscious and common 
to all men. 

Extreme differences in the human form arc largely the result 
of some conscious interference with this process, as when 
Ubangi women stretch their lips around wooden disks. But 
when one leaves the shaping of the body to the unconscious 
process, a body grown in Africa remains in all general respects 
just like a body grown in America. Assuming that thoughts, 
feelings, ideas, and images arc either parts of the human body, 
or functions thereof, or at least activities shaped by the same 
process—one would expect to find the same collective or 
common character when thoughts and images are allowed to 
develop without conscious interference, as in dreams and 
spontancous fantasy. This would give us an explanation both 
reasonable and simple for the fact that myths “dreamed up” 
five thousand years ago in Chaldea are in essential respects 
like those found three thousand years later in Mexico or today 
in London or Los Angeles.! 

If Jung’s theory is correct, docs it tell us anything about the 
significance of myth? Jung believes that he has very strong 


1 One can account in the same way for the common character of logical 
thinking. It is evident to both a Greek philosopher and an Indian pandit that 
two and two make four because the structure of the brain is common to both. 


12 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


evidence for the fact that dreams and fantasies are symptoms 
of the directions being taken by unconscious psychological 
processes. In other words, they enable a psychiatrist to diagnose 
a psychological condition of health or discase in the same way 
that fecling the pulse, making a blood-count, or taking a 
urinalysis enables a physician to test the general health of the 
body. From this comes a further idea of immense importance. 

So far as bodily health is concerned, we estimate “health” by 
a collective or normal standard. That is to say, a man is healthy 
if his unconscious physical processes work without spccial 
interference, enabling him to survive without undue pain to the 
greatest age which seems attainable by any large number of 
human beings. Furthermore, the healing work of a physician 
is usually a matter of helping unconscious processes of the body 
to accomplish a resistance to discase in which they are already 
engaged—with immense ingenuity. Not unreasonably, Jung 
has transposed this into psychological terms. He believes that 
the psychiatrist heals most cffectively when he helps mental 
processes which are similarly unconscious, formative, healing, 
and common to all men. This has led him to trust and respect 
the “wisdom” of the psychological Unconscious, just as 
physicians trust the ingenious wisdom of the body. 

What is particularly interesting for our purposes, however, is 
his contention that the dreams and fantasies of psychologically 
healthy people tend to resemble the general form of those great 
collective myths which underlic the spiritual and religious 
traditions of the race. For example, he finds that in the final 
stages of psychological healing patients will dream or produce 
in fantasy the image of a quartered circle or mandala under 
an enormous varicty of particular forms. Strangely enough, 
mythological traditions as widely different as the Christian 
and the Buddhist use types of this circle or mandala image to 
represent their different notions of fulfilment—famous instances 
of the Christian mandala being the rose-windows in Gothic 
cathedrals and the vision of God in Dante’s Paradiso. 


Prologue 13 


The general implication of Jung’s theory is, then, that the 
great collective myths in some way represent the healing and 
formative work of man’s unconscious psychological processes, 
which he must learn to trust, respect, and aid in his conscious 
thought and action. With a few changes in terminology, there 
is nothing in this theory which should be objectionable to a 
Christian of almost any variety. I have stated the theory in its 
most “physical” form, but since no one has now any very clear 
notions as to what physical or material things are, or whether 
such words mean anything at all, it would not be stretching 
things too far to equate the “wisdom” of the Unconscious with 
the inspiration of the Holy Spirit—always provided that we are 
not too cocksure as to what the Holy Spirit may have in mind. 
“For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways 
my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than 
the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my 
thoughts than your thoughts.” (Isa. 55: 8-9.) 

Jung’s theory of myth is useful and highly suggestive so far 
as it gocs, particularly in its explanation of the way in which 
myths are actually formed. Yet it leaves something to be desired 
in its actual interpretation of the symbols of myth, for the final 
“meaning” which emerges is a life-theory, a psychological 
philosophy, which is Jung’s own personal hypothesis, despite 
the fact that it contains a number of universal and time- 
honoured elements. I feel that a still deeper light has been 
thrown upon the whole nature of myth by one of the most 
learned and universal-minded scholars of our time—the late 
Ananda Coomaraswamy, for many years curator of the 
Boston Museum of Fine Arts. 

Coomaraswamy represented an increasingly growing school 
of mythological and anthropological thought which has 
outgrown the provincialism of the nineteenth century, and has 
ceased to equate wisdom, progress, and culture with the peculiar 
abnormalitics and agitations of the modern West. Since 
homo sapiens has probably inhabited this carth for something 


14 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


like a million years, it is rather rash to suppose that culture is a 
relatively recent phenomenon. Ananda Coomaraswamy has 
ably shown that extremely sophisticated and profound cultures 
have existed quite apart from the special types of apparatus 
which we think essential—such as writing, building in brick 
or stone, or the employment of machinery. Obviously, such 
cultures will neither pursue nor attain the life-goals which 
we consider important, but will have other goals out of 
all relation to the peculiar desires and “goods” of modern 
man.} 

Indeed, modern man confesses—in effect—that he has no 
life-goal. Progress, as he conceives it, is not towards anything 
save more progress, so that his life is dedicated to the ever 
more frantic pursuit of a “tomorrow which never comes”. 
Coomaraswamy has pointed out that in this respect our culture 
is historically abnormal, and the greater part of his work was a 
vast documentation of the fact that in almost every other 
culture there has existed a unanimous, common, and perennial 
philosophy of man’s nature and destiny—differing from place 
to place only in terminology and points of emphasis and 
technique. This was not philosophy in the current sense of 
“speculative theory”; it was the love of a wisdom which 
consisted, not in thoughts and words, but in a state of knowing 
and being. In such cultures this philosoplia perennis occupied a 
central and honoured position, even when any deep interest 
in it was confined to a minority.” 

Today we have come to identify philosophy with “thought” 
—that is, with a vast confusion of verbal opinions—to the 
extent that we mistake the traditional philosophics of other 
cultures for the same sort of speculations. Thus we are hardly 

1 Sce especially his Am I My Brother's Keeper (New York, 1947), published 
the same year in London with the atle The Bughear of Literacy. 

® This is Coomaraswamy’s view, which I would modify to the point of saying 
that the philosopbia perennts certainly exists within our culture, in however an 


unhonoured position, but that we are not at a sufficient historical distance from 
our own time to determine its actual influence. 


Prologue I$ 


aware of the extreme peculiarity of our own position, and find 
it difficult to recognize the plain fact that there has otherwise 
been a single philosophical consensus of universal extent. 
It has been held by men who report the same insights and 
teach the same essential doctrine whether living today or six 
thousand years ago, whether from New Mexico in the Far 
West or from Japan in the Far East. To the degree that we 
realize its existence at all, we call it “metaphysics” or 
“mysticism”, but both the insight on which it is founded and 
the doctrine or the symbols in which it is expressed are so 
generally misunderstood that “it would hardly be an exaggera- 
tion to say that a faithful account of it might well be given in 
the form of a categorical denial of most of the statements that 
have been made about it’? both by its contemporary critics and 
by many of its present-day enthusiasts. For amongst both 
the opinion prevails that “mysticism” is a retreat from the 
realities of life into a purely subjective frame of mind which 
is declared to be more real than the plain evidence of our 
senses. 

By way of “categorical denial” I might begin by saying that 
a traditional “metaphysic” of this kind involves a far more 
acute awareness of the plain evidence of the senses than is usual, 
and that, so far from retreating into a subjective and private 
world of its own, its entire concern is to transcend subjectivity, 
so that man may “wake up” to the world which is concrete and 
actual, as distinct from that which is purely abstract and 
conceptual. Those who undertake this task unanimously 
report a vision of the world startlingly different from that of the 
average socially conditioned man—a vision in whose light the 
business of living and dying, working and eating, ceases to be 
a problem. It goes on, yes, but it ceases to be the frantic and 
frustrating pursuit of an ever-receding goal, because of the 
discovery that time—as ordinarily undcrstood—is an illusion. 


1 T adapt some words which Coomaraswamy used with specific reference to 
Hinduism, in his Hinduism and Buddbism (New York, 1943), p. 8. 


16 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


Once is delivered from the mania of pursuing a future which 
one docs not have. 

Yet another consequence of this acute awareness of the real 
world is the discovery that what has been felt to be one’s “self” 
or “ego” is also an abstraction without reality—a discovery in 
which the “mystic” oddly joins hands with the scientist who 
“has never been able to detect any organ called the soul”. That 
which takes the place of the conventional world of time and 
space, oneself and others, is properly described by negations— 
“unborn, unoriginated, uncreated, unformed”—becausc its 
nature is neither verbal nor conceptual. In bricf, the “scers” of 
this reality are the “disenchanted” and “disillusioned”—those 
who are able to employ thoughts, ideas, and words without 
being spell-bound and hypnotized by their magic.! 

Before indicating the connexion of their doctrine with myth, 
I must bricfly summarize its general principles, realizing, 
however, that the form in which they must for the moment be 
stated is not that best suited for their comprehension at the 
present day. The world of conventional, everyday experience 
appears as a multitude of separate things extended in space and 
succeeding one another in time. Their existence is always 
realized by contrast or opposition. That is to say, we realize or 


' The doctrine of these “knowers of the real” constitutes the central core of 
three of the great historical religion-philosophies of Asia—Hinduism, Budd- 
hism, and Taoism. In Islam it appears in a sectarian form as the teaching of the 
Sufis. In Judaism it is found chiefly as the Holy Kabala—a corpus of teaching 
contained in an carly mediaeval work called the Zohar, descending, perhaps, 
from Philo Alexandracus. In the traditions of Greece it appears, somewhat 
diluted and confused with other clements, in a line of doctrine which runs from 
the Orphic mysteries, through Plato, to the Neoplatonists of Alexandria—in 
particular Plotinus, Proclus, and the Christian Clement. In Christianity itself 
it exercised a far-reaching influence from the Syrian monk known as Dionysius 
the Arcopagite in the sixth century, through John Scotus Erigena, St. Albert 
the Great, Meister Eckhart, and John of Ruysbrocck, to Nicolas of Cusa in the 
fifteenth century. In the Near East and the West, that is to say, in Judaism, 
Christianity, and Islam, the doctrine has almost always been “at odds” with an 
official orthodoxy bitterly opposed to its universalism, because of an immature 
compulsion to believe in the exclusive perfection of one’s own “party-religion”. 


Prologue 7 


isolate the experience of light by contrast with darkness, 
pleasure with pain, life with death, good with evil, subject with 
object. Opposition, duality, is therefore the inevitable condition 
of this world, however much we may struggle to overcome it, 
to hold to the pleasant and the good and to reject the painful 
and the evil—an effort which is of necessity 4 vicious circle, 
since without pain pleasure is meaningless. However, this 
world of opposites is conventional and “seeming”; it is not the 
teal world. For reality is neither multiple, temporal, spatial, 
nor dual. Figuratively speaking, it is the One rather than the 
Many. But it appears to be the Many by a process variously 
described as manifestation, creation by the Word, sacrificial 
dismemberment, art, play, or illusion—to name but a few of the 
terms by which the doctrine accounts for the existence of the 
conventional world. 

In sum then, the manifold world of things proceeds from the 
Once and returns to the One, though in actuality it is never at 
any time other than the Once save in play, “art”, or seeming. 
Its coming from and returning to the One, its Alpha and 
Omega, appears to be a temporal process because the “art” by 
which it is manifested involves the convention of time. So long 
as the human mind is enchanted by this “art”, it takes the 
convention for the reality and, in consequence, becomes 
involved in the tormenting vicious circle of wrestling with the 
opposites, of the pursuit of pleasure and the flight from pain. 
But one may be liberated or saved from this everlasting 
(circular) torment by disenchantment, by seeing through the 
illusion. 

Coomaraswamy has shown that this doctrine is communi 
cated in two ways. Once is by the morc-or-less direct statement 
of its principles such as I have just given, and such as one finds 
in the explicit teachings of the “mystical” tradition. The other 
way is by figurative statement or myth. In some cases myth may 
have originated in parable or allegory, that is to say by the 
deliberate composition of “tales of instruction” by teachers of 


18 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


the traditional doctrine. But probably in many more cases 
the origination of myth is unconscious and spontaneous, in the 
manner suggested by Jung, but represents the same truth as 
the doctrine—because it springs from a submerged level of the 
mind which has never actually been “taken in” by the illusion 
of the conventional world. This may seem to be a fantastic 
hypothesis, but surely it is no less fantastic than the common 
psychoanalytic practice of healing neuroses by following the 
hints and directions contained in the “wisdom” of dreams. 
If, as Jung maintains, the dream is the symptom of unconscious 
but formative processes of the mind which work towards 
“wholeness” as certain bodily processes work towards health, 
it should not surprise us that myth “represents” what is also 
taught in the doctrine of disenchantment—for it could well be 
that freedom from illusion is the proper health of the mind. 
The human body is often wiser than the sophisticated doctor, 
and we might well expect the still more amazing organism of 
brain and nerves to be wiser than the conventional philosopher 
and theologian.! 

Thus while Jung does not go quite so faras Coomaraswamy 
in equating the content of myth with that philosophia perennis 
which has had its honoured place in almost every culture save 
our own, his theory of the formation of mythical symbols 
provides us with a reasonable explanation of the process 
whereby a wisdom of this type could be divined by the 
unschooled and unsophisticated folk-mind from which those 
symbols emerge. Indeed, there are ways in which the symbols 
express their truth more adequately than the more formal and 
exact language of the doctrine, for the truth in question is not 
an idea but a reality-of-expcricnce so fundamental and alive 

1 Ic is really the most astonishing bybris to suppose that the highest wisdom is 
consututed by the standpoint of conscious reason, for we hardly begin to under- 
stand the neural processes without which the very simplest act of reasoning is 
impossible. The entire possibility of logical and scientific thought rests upon a 


structure which was formed unconsciously, which we do not understand, and 
cannot manufacture. Should the finger accuse the hand of clumsiness ? 


Prologue 19 


that we cannot “pin it down” and know “about it” in exact 
terms. 


An expression that stands for a known thing always 
remains mercly a sign and is never a symbol. . . . Every 
psychic product, in so far as it is the best possible expres- 
sion at the moment for a fact as yet unknown or only 
relatively known, may be regarded as a symbol, provided 
also that we are prepared to accept the expression as 
designating something that is only divined and not yet 
clearly conscious.! 


Coomaraswamy makes the same point in a slightly different 
way: 

It is one of the prime errors of historical and rational 
analysis to suppose that the “truth” and “original form” 
of a legend can be separated from its miraculous elements. 
It is in the marvels themselves that the truth inheres: 
“Wonder—for this is no other than the very beginning of 
philosophy,” Plato, Theatetus 1550, and in the same way 
Aristotle, who adds, “So that the lover of myths, which 
are a compact of wonders, is by the same token a lover 
of wisdom” (Metaphysics 982 B). Myth embodies the 
nearest approach to absolute truth that can be stated in 
words.” 


In this sense the “absolute truth” is not the end-result of rational 
speculation, but the most central and fundamental, and thus 
the most real, state of our own being, which is “only divined 
and not yet clearly conscious”. 

In a book devoted to a special mythology, as distinct from 
Mythology in general, there is not space to give any complete 
argument as to the mers of these two theories—for which the 
reader must resort to the works of Jung and Coomaraswamy 


1 Jung, Psychological Types (London and New York, 1933), p. 602. 
® Hinduism and Buddbism (New York, 1943), p. 33, 0.21. 


20 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


quoted in the course of this book.! The argument about 
the nature of Mythology must now be brought to the same 
rather arbitrary conclusion as the argument about the nature 
of Christianity—if this book is ever to begin. For it will be 
impossible in the field of so inexact a science either to please 
or to convince everybody, and, if pursued rigorously, the 
whole endeavour will resemble the race between Achilles and 
the tortoise. The Achilles of scientific scholarship will never 
catch up with the tortoise of the subject, because it must ever 
stop to split hairs, and to split split hairs ad infinitum. 

An entirely different solution to the problem of this book 
would be to explain the Christian and Catholic mythology 
in the terms provided by the official doctrine of the Church. 
I am well aware that a strong argument can be made for this 
course, for the work of modern Catholic apologists such as 
von Hiigel, Gilson, and Maritain is of the highest intellectual 
respectability. Yet this course has some overwhelming 
defects which, I think, will appear sufficiently in the course 
of this book so that at this point we need only summarize 
them. 

The first is that the Church’s official doctrine confuses its 
own position by trying to include within the myth, the dogma, 
statements which define the myth—as that the events described 
therein are historical or metaphysical facts, or that this myth 
is the only true myth. Now a statement which attempts to 


1 Tc is my great regret that at the time of writing this book I was unable to 
consult Jung’s recent magnum opus on the symbolism of Christianity, the 
384-page volume Aion, lately published in German. Neither have I been able 
to obtain access to nearly as many of the obscure writings of Coomaraswamy 
as I could have wished. Helen Ladd’s marvelous bibliography of his works in 
Ars Islamica, vol. 9, 1942, lists no less than 494 books, articles, and reviews from 
his hand, excluding many more written in the few years before his death. Bur 
the problems which confront anyone wishing to make an exhaustive study of 
his researches are considerable, since he had a “squirrel-like” tendency to bury 
the best of his knowledge in elaborate footnotes in articles contributed to the 
most obscure journals—often published in far-off lands. 


Prologue 21 


state something about itself is always a meaningless vicious 
circle—like trying to think about thought A while you 
are thinking thought A! It is thus that, on the authority of 
the Church or the Bible, one believes that this is the only 
true authority. 

The second is that what I have called the philosophia perennis 
does not have this defect, since the authority of its exponents is 
always corroborated by others, who speak from the standpoints 
of entirely different cultures and traditions. The Christian who 
maintains that, say, the doctrines of the Vedanta or of Mahayana 
Buddhism are inferior to his own, must not forget that he bases 
his judgement upon standards which he has acquired from 
Christianity—so that his conclusion is foregone or, more 
plainly, prejudiced. It would seem that in the present state of 
our knowledge of other spiritual traditions than the Christian, 
there is no further excuse for religious provincialism. This 
knowledge is now so extensive that it is becoming hard to see 
how anyone can be considered theologically competent, in the 
academic sense, unless thoroughly well versed in traditions 
outside the Christian alone. 

The third, and perhaps most important, defect, is that the 
official doctrines betray a strange anxiety to prove the literal 
factuality of the myth as a basis for belief. But this believing in 
the myth, this anxious clinging to it as fact and certainty, 
utterly destroys its value and power. A God conceptually 
defined, a Christ believed in as a factual rock, is at once 
changed from a creative image to a dead idol. The anxiety to 
believe is the very opposite of faith, of self-surrender to the 
truth—whatever it is or may turn out to be. In the philosophia 
perennis there never was any question of belicf—of the fervent 
wish that truth be consoling—not because there is no wish to be 
consoled, but because of the clear understanding that the 
human being has emotions and desires of a nature so contra- 
dictory that they cannot be consoled by any truth! Further- 
more, the truth with which it is concerned is out of all 


22 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


relation to any beliefs or cherished ideas, since it is quite 
impossible to express it—save mythically or figuratively—in 
any positive statement. This truth is one which mythology 
divines but docs not define, and any attempt to understand 
it by treating its statements as if they were of a precise, 
historical, or scientific character is—if ever there was one— 
a sin against the light.! 

There are two—rather understandable—reasons why con- 
temporary theologians, both Catholic and Protestant, close 
their minds to any interpretation of Christianity in the light of 
the philosophia perennis. One is the fear of a syncretism, of the 
growth of a “new religion” which will be a hodge-podge of 
the “best clements” of the existing traditions, a development 
which has indeed been advocated by people of theosophical 
inclinations. But because the essential features of the philosophia 
perennis are complete in every great tradition, an arbitrary 
syncretism of the “best elements” of all would undoubtedly 
leave out certain vital aspects of doctrine and symbol. By and 
large, a mythical tradition is not deliberately constructed; like 
every living thing, it grows—and an artificial syncretism would, 
in comparison, be a lifeless and rigid affair. 

The other reason is a fear of the supposed “individualism” 
and “acosmism”’ of anything connected with mysticism. This 
is almost a case of the pot calling the kettle black, for what 
could be more individualistic than the claim of official 
Christianity to be the sole truth, or even the best version of the 
truth? The fact that such claims are made by a group makes 
them no less individualistic than when they are made by a 
single person. Such claims are, furthermore, as remote from the 
mind of any “seer of the Real” as anything could be, for it is 
transparently clear to him that his individuality is merely 
conventional, and that it is precisely to the degree that he is no 
more an individual that he enjoys knowledge of Reality. As 


1 To give the phrase its literal and proper meaning—to miss the point when 
it is luminously clear. 


Prologue 23 


for “acosmism”’—the notion that the whole conventional 
world is valueless and false—the philosoplia perennis says no 
more than that “my kingdom is not of this world”. The point 
is that conventions attain the value of art and beauty only when 
they are seen to be conventions, and are employed from a higher 
standpoint which is “not of this world”. The conventions of 
time, space, multiplicity, and duality are false wntil they are seen 
to be conventional, whereafter they are “redeemed” and attain 
the full dignity of art.t 

In the pages that follow, our main object will be to describe 
one of the most incomparably beautiful myths that has ever 
flowered from the mind of man, or from the unconscious 
processes which shape it and which are in some sense more than 
man. We shall not be concerned with how much of the myth 
is woven out of historical facts, and how much out of fiction— 
seeing that we have defined myth as any narrative, factual or 
fanciful, which is taken to signify the inner meaning of life. 
This is, furthermore, to be a description and not a history of 
Christian Mythology, which would require a work to itself, 
since our aim is to show what this Aower is, and not how it 
might have been put together. After description, we shall 
attempt an interpretation of the myth along the general lines of 
the philosophia perennis, in order to bring out the truly catholic or 
universal character of the symbols, and to share the delight 
of discovering a fountain of wisdom in a realm where so 
many have long ceased to expect anything but a desert of 
platitudes. 

Anyone who has studied Christianity by present-day 
methods employed in universities and theological schools 
must accustom himself to a rather unusual perspective in 
approaching Christianity as a coherent myth. Today, 


1 And one might note that the truc artist does not rebel against the limitations 
of his media, but rejoices in the possibilities of how much can be expressed 
with such limitations. The conventions and limitations of art are not abolished, 
but only changed, when all their possibilities have been exhausted. 


24 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


Christianity is almost invariably studied as an_ historical 
development out of Hebrew and Greek origins. If we were to 
follow this method, we would have to approach Christian 
Mythology through preliminary chapters on Babylonian, 
Egyptian, Hebrew, Assyrian, Persian, Graeco-Roman, Celtic, 
and Teutonic Mythology. But this kind of historical perspec- 
tive was not the world-view of the Patristic and Scholastic 
ages, during which the Christian Myth came to full flower. 
I wish to describe the myth more or less as it would have 
appeared to a man living in the golden age of its power, say, 
the end of the thirteenth century. 

For such a man, the centre of history was the appearance of 
Christ, and all history was read in terms of Christ. That is to 
say, the Old Testament was read backwards, and regarded as 
a prefiguring of the Incarnation and the Church. The story 
of the Creation and the Fall of Man was read and understood 
in terms, not of primitive Hebrew mythology, but of the highly 
developed dogma of the Holy Trinity and of the Angelology 
and Cosmology of St. Dionysius pseudo-Areopagite, St. 
Augustine, and St. Thomas.1. Anyone who has visited the 
great mediaeval cathedrals of Europe or studied the pages of 
the illuminated manuscripts will have noticed an entire 
absence of historical realism in the mediaeval mind. The 
patriarchs and prophets as well as the figures of the New 
Testament wear the clothes and live in the dwellings character- 
istic of Western Europe between 900 and 1400. Incidents 
from the Old and New Testaments are juxtaposed according 
to the theory of “types”, wherein the Tree of Knowledge stands 
opposite the Tree of the Cross, the Exodus opposite the 
Resurrection, the assumptions of Enoch and Elijah opposite 
the Ascension, and so forth. All this goes to show that the 
primary interest of the mediaeval mind was not so much the 


1For example, Genesis does not say that the serpent who tempted Eve was 
the fallen angel Lucifer or Satan, nor that the angelic world was created before 
our world, 


Prologue 25 


history as the symbolism of the Christian story. The Feasts of 
the Church in which the faithful relived the events of this 
story were not mere historical commemorations, but rather 
ways of participating in the rhythm, the very actuality, of the 
divine life. Of this life the historical events were the earthly 
manifestations, the doing of the will of God on earth as it is— 
per omnia saecula saeculoram—through all the ages of ages in 
heaven. 

A similar shift of perspective must apply to the ordering and 
interpretation of the sources of the Christian Myth. A modern 
Protestant would base everything on the Bible, but for a 
Catholic the primary source of Christian revelation is “Christ- 
in-the-Church”, or rather the Holy Spirit himself informing 
and inspiring the living Body of Christ. This gives rise to the 
Catholic principle lex orandi lex credendi—the law of worship 
is the law of belief. Lex orandi, the law of worship, is not mere 
liturgical rule; it is the state of the Church i# worship, which 
is to say, in the very act of union with God here and now. 
Thus the Church, in this authoritative position, promulgates, 
first, the Liturgy. This includes primarily the Mass and the 
Six other Sacraments, all of which are held to have been 
instituted by Christ himself and thus to embody the earliest 
and most basic law of the Christian life. Second in order come 
the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, and the 
Apocrypha, considered to have been written or approved by 
the Church in such a way that the authority of scripture derives 
from the Church, and not vice versa. Third in order come the 
Apostles’ and the Nicene Creeds, being the Church’s official 
summary of the essential points taught in both scripture and 
tradition. Fourth in order comes another part of the Liturgy, 
the Divine Office, contained in the Breviary and consisting of 
the day-to-day worship of the Church outside the Mass 
itself—composed of the Psalms with their seasonal antiphons, 
the official hymns of the Church, and various lections from the 
scriptures and the writings of the Fathers. 


26 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


These sources, with the special perspective involved in 
their hierarchical arrangement, give the basic structure of the 
Christian Myth, and as the bare branches of a tree are filled in 
with innumerable leaves and fowers, this structure is enfoliated 
with the vast wealth of symbolism in art and ceremonial, of 
legend, hagiography, and tradition, to make—as a veritable 
Tree of Life—one of the most complete and beautiful myths 
of all time. 


Ww 


CHAPTER I 


In the Beginning 


In the beginning was the Word, 
And the Word was with God, 
And God was the Word. 


He was in the beginning with God. 


1 Jobn 1: 1-2. “In the beginning”, is en arché or in principio, the same as the 
“once upon a time” which begins all folktales. Mythology is the representation 
of the supernatural, the unthinkable and unknowable, in terms of sensible 
images having spatial and temporal dimensions, apart from which the mind 
cannot think at all. God is perforce represented as having existed from an 
everlasting past, from beginningless time. But it is a useful reminder of the 
relativity of all mythological images to make the following transposition of 
terms: Refer all references to the beginning of time to that which underlies time, so 
that God is not merely first in a series of events but the grownd or field in which the 
series takes place—not in time but beyond time. Similarly, all references to God 
or heaven as above may be translated within—i.e. at the very centre of things, 
since “the kingdom of heaven is within you”. For the myth is the outward and 
visible sign of the inward and spiritual fact—that ts, of the unconscious origin of 
consciousness, of that which sees and knows, but docs not become its own 
object of sight or knowledge. Myth portrays or divines that which we cannot 


27 


28 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


From all eternity there had always existed One whose secret 
and unuttcrable Name was yuvii—the Tetragrammaton of 
four Hebrew letters—meaning 1 AM.! There was never any 
time when 1 AM was not; he was not created by anyone, and 
before anything else had been created by him he existed alone 
through endless ages of ages, for which reason he was also 
known by the name Ancient of Days. In appearance he was 
pure light—not, however, the created light of the sun, moon, 
and stars—but Shckinah, the Light of Glory. Because man 
was subsequently created in the image of 1 AM, the appearance 
of his Glory was always considered as having the human form. 


His head and his hair were white like wool, 
as white as snow; 

and his eyes were as a flame of fire; 

and his feet like unto fine brass, as if 
they burned in a furnace; 

and his voice as the sound of many waters. 


And he had in his right hand seven stars; 
and out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword; 
and his countenance was as the sun when it 

shines in its strength.* 


comprehend because it is what we are. Hence God is 1 AM, or Ens—pure Being. 
Such a transposition of terms is, however, still mythological, for the notions of 
underlying and within are just as much borrowed from sensual, time-and-space 
imagery a$ beginning and above. Thus the philosopher should remember that 
all so-called metaphysical concepts (a contradiction in terms!) are strictly 
mythological. 

' Exodus 3: 14. The Hebrew yiuviu, perhaps pronounced Yahveh, was for 
centurics translated 1 am, though modern scholars suggest that “I Will Be” is 
more accurate. Lut since we are dealing with Cathohe and not early Hebrew 
mythology, we retain the sense in which the Christian mind has always 
understood it. 

? Revelation 1: 14-16. All quotations ftom the Bible are based primarily upon 
the Authorized (“King James”) Version because of the beauty of its language. 
However, at points where the translation is seriously inaccurate or where the 
language is so archaic as to mislead the modern reader, | have made minor 
altcrations. 


In the Beginning 29 


This One, then, Adonai, the Lord, El-Elyon, the Most High 
God, Sabaoth, the Lord of Hosts, had lived for always and 
always before the time when the worlds were first created. 
Before there were even any heavens or lights of the day and 
night, before all spirits and angels, the incalculable centuries 
and aeons of his life go back for ever and ever, shortened no 
whit by the fact that a thousand years in our time are but a 
day in his.? 

One might imagine that a life stretching through so unthink- 
able an abyss of time would have been intolerably dull and 
lonely. Yet dull it was not—by any means—for the whole 
infinity of space was, as it still is for those who have eyes to sec, 
filled with his radiance—in comparison with which the fire in 
diamonds and opals, the clarity of the sapphire sky, the splen- 
dour of sunset, and the light of all stars is just a dim and tawdry 
glitter. Nor was it lonely. For in some deeply mysterious 
manner, this One and Only 1 am was three Persons, whom 
we shall discern if we look more intently into his image, 
and understand the symbolism of the two-edged sword which 
comes out of his mouth, and the seven stars which he holds 
in his hand. 

The sword which comes out of his mouth is his Word, for 
“the Word of God is a sharp two-edged sword, piercing to the 
division of soul and spirit”.? The seven stars in his hand arc his 
sevenfold Spirit. In God, however, the Word and the Spirit 
are not mere effluences. They are Persons; and they are as much 


1 The very simile of a thousand years being a day in the sight of God is 
suggestive of the idea—not that time passes faxter for God than for man-—but 
that from the divine standpoint all the aeons of time are one “timeless Moment”. 
It is a universal feature of the philosopbia perennis that what we experience as the 
succession of time is an abstraction rather than a reality, and that the real state of 
the universe is eternal or timeless—a “moment” without past or future. Hebrew 
literature is very vague as to numbers, and uses the expression “a thousand” to 
mean any enormous number, or simply the principle of numerosity. Thus “a 
thousand days” may be taken as “all days”, so that to God—i.e. in reality—all 
days are one day. 

2 Flebrews 4: 12. 


30 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


persons and as much God himself as the white-haired Ancient 
of Days whom we must learn to recognize as but once of three 
Persons, namely, the Father. The other two are the Word, 
or the Son, and the Holy Spirit. 

These three Persons were, then, the one God, and all three 
had existed together from all eternity, no one coming into being 
before or after the others. For always and always the Son was 
being generated or begotten by the Father, and for always and 
always the Holy Spirit was proceeding from the Father and 
the Son. Thus from ume without beginning, 1 AM was “the 
Holy, Blessed (ic. Happy), and Glorious Trinity, three 
Persons and one God”. For this reason, God was not lonely 
since he combined within himself not one Person but three, 
and so constituted a community rather than an individual. 

In these most remote beginnings it is difficult for us to make 
out the proper image of the Trinity, since we are speaking of a 
time when God the Son had not yet become Jesus the Christ, 
and when the Holy Spirit had not yet descended in the form 
of the fiery dove. It is most important to remember that the 
“only-begotten Son of God” was not originally Jesus the Son 
of Mary, and that before his Incarnation the Son was simply 
the Word (Logos) and the Wisdom (Sophia) of God—that 
is, the creative Power by which the world was to be made. 
To God the Son as the Divine Wisdom, the Church has 
applied the famous passage Dominus possedit me from the Book 
of Proverbs: 


The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, 
before his works of old. 

I was set up from everlasting, 

from the beginning, ere ever the earth was. 

When there were no depths, I was brought forth; 
When there were no fountains abounding with water. 
Before the mountains were settled, 


before the hills was I brought forth... . 


In the Beginning 31 


When he prepared the heavens, I was there; 

when he set a compass upon the face of the deep; 
when he established the clouds above; 

when he strengthened the fountains of the deep... . 
Then I was by him, as one brought up with him; 
and I was daily his delight, 

playing always before him.? 


Throughout all those endless ages before the world began, the 
Son was the object of the Father’s love and delight, and the 
Holy Spirit was the Love that passed between them—so that 
the Divine Life was an eternal cycle or play of love. Deus est 
caritas, God is love—but love implies relationship, and this 
relationship is constituted by the Father as the Lover, the Son 
as the Beloved, and the Holy Spirit as the very Love.” 

To form some image of the preemundane Trinity we must 
look through the eyes of those icon-painters of the Eastern 
Orthodox Church who have represented it in the form of three 
“angels” or winged Beings, and who show God the Son, not 
as Jesus, but as Sophia—a Being enthroned, crowned and 
winged, holding a sceptre, and seated in the midst of an 
aureole of three concentric circles blazing with stars. Or 
perhaps we may think of it, with Dante, as the radiance of an 

1 Proverbs 8: 22-31. 

2 One of the arcana, or rather obscure mysteries, of Christian mythology is the 
fact that the Son as Wisdom, Sophia, is feminine and that the Church also 
applies the above passage from Proverbs tc the Virgin Mary, since it is used as 
the Epistle on the Feast of the Immaculate Conception. The great cathedral of 
Constantinople, Hagia Sophia, is of course dedicated to God the Son under 
this aspect. We shall have more to say of this hidden feminine side of the 
Godhead when we come to consider the cult of the Virgin Mother. 

3 The Trinity represented by three “angels” is based on the story in Genesis 18 
of the appearance of God to Abraham in the form of “three men”. A famous 
icon of this type was painted by Rublev (¢. 1410) and is now in the Tretyakov 
Gallery in Moscow. A splendid fiftcenth-century icon of Holy Wisdom, as 
described above, is in the Carnegie Institute at Pittsburgh, the work of the 


Novgorod School. See Russian Icons: The Collection of George R. Habn 
(Piusburgh, 1944), Item 28, and plate. 


a2 Mytly and Ritual in Christianity 


eye wherein there somehow circulate three irises or rainbow 
rings, the whole “painted with the effigy of man”—pinta della 
nostra effige.) 

Even before the creation of the spiritual and material 
universes, which revealed the extraordinary power and wisdom 
of the Triune God, his own inner life was so complete that 
absolutely nothing was lacking to him. He was neither lonely, 
nor bored. Because he had never at any time been created, he 
could never cease to be, for he was Being itself—1 aM. Thus it 
was never necessary for him to labour in order to live. He 
neither suffered, ailed, nor died. He was under no constraint 
whatsoever to do anything or create anything, because there 
never had been nor could be any action more perfect nor any 
object more wonderful than his own existence—which was, 
furthermore, possessed of the most remarkable properties. 

For God did not fill the immeasurable immensity of space by 
mere largeness. He was neither large nor small, but so filled 
space that all of him was in every place—except that it was 
only after the world had been made that anyone realized there 
were places. This did not mean that God multiplied himself 
in such a way that one of him was everywhere. There was still 
just one God, but somehow that entire one was—all of him— 
simultaneously at every point in space. Rather the same thing 
was true of the way in which he lived in time, for he had a way 
of knowing past and future happenings which required 
neither memory nor foresight. This was the ability to see the 
past and the future as if they were happening in the present, so 
that as well as being able to be in all places at oice, God was 
able to know all times at once. 

Because of this marvelous relation to space and time, he was 
all-knowing in the most comprehensive way imaginable. 
Even before he began to create the world, he was totally and 
clearly aware of every single, minute hair on the wings of every 
moth that would ever exist. He was as conscious of every leaf 


1 Paradiso xxxiii. 


In the Beginning 33 


momentarily fluttering in the wind as if he were conscious of 
nothing else—his mind completely concentrated on every last 
detail of all things and all events, and on all of them at once— 
and this without the slightest effort. Thus he was able, with 
perfect case, to have in mind not only the details of things but 
also the combinations of details, the constellations of events, 
their larger relationships and inner meanings, and so understood 
the unbelievable network of cause-and-effect which connects, 
for example, the cracking of a seed-pod with the explosion of 
a star a million years later. 

An even stranger characteristic of his all-knowledge was 
that although he knew everything that would ever happen, 
this was not at all the same thing as determining everything 
that would happen. He knew beyond every shadow of doubt 
all the future deeds of angels and men, but this did not mean 
that he himself had fore-ordained those deeds. They were to be 
done quite freely and responsibly by the individuals concerned, 
and yet he knew exactly what they would do.? 

Marvelous as were these properties of power and knowledge, 
the Triune God possessed three other attributes at which 
the Christian tradition has wondered still more—probably 
because they are still more difficult to explain. They are known 


1 Froma strictly metaphysical standpoint, God does not fore-ordain anything, 
since for him there is no future. Thus one must be careful of how the myth is 
interpreted at this point. Catholic theology, as distinct from mythology, insists 
that free-will is the property of the created individual, and is exercised inde- 
pendently of the will of God. It should be apparent, however, that the concept of 
individual frec-will is meaningless, since unmotivated, uncaused, spontancous 
action would be something possible only for the First Cause. If, then, the gift of 
free-will to creatures means anything, it means—as every metaphysical doctrine 
insists—that God gives himself to creatures, so that free-will is not the property 
of any creature in so far as he is an individual, but only in so far as the actual 
reality of his being, his true Self, is God and acts as God. To the extent, then, 
that creatures act frecly they are performing what are essentially the actions of 
God. God himself is therefore the true actor, playing the many parts of the 
world-drama. But the drama is “play”, not “reality”, and “art” or “sceming” 
rather than “truth”, as is indicated in the passage quoted above from Proverbs 8, 
where the Divine Wisdom is described as “playing”. 


34 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


respectively as holiness, love, and justice. The first is quite the 
hardest to understand because it is connected in the human 
mind with the fear of the unknown. For we are afraid when 
confronted with something which altogether surpasses our 
expericnce and comprehension, so that we have not the 
slightest idea how to deal with it. This fear is not necessarily 
negative—not just panic or terror; it is rather the feeling of awe, 
of strangeness, of “the creeps” which come over us in the 
presence of supernatural events and visitations. It is said, then, 
that the holiness of God inspires this kind of awesome fear in 
the saints and angels, giving them a shudder which is at the 
same time a thrill beyond the most ravishing of sensual 
pleasures. This is, perhaps, the only way of describing holiness, 
since it is of the essence of this quality that we do not know 
what it is, but only what it makes us feel. 

Love, as we have seen, was always the predominant 
relationship between the three Persons of the Trinity, and, 
when the world had been created, it remained the basic 
attitude of God to each one of his creatures. Love is said to be 
the unreserved pouring out, or giving away, of oneself for the 
good of another. It is that of which shekinab, the divine 
radiance, is primarily the symbol—for as the sun gives its light 
without reservation, and without asking anything in return, 
so God “makcth his sun to shine upon the evil and upon the 
good, and sendcth his rain upon the just and upon the unjust”. 
It was by love, then, that God created the worlds, for when he 
gave to other things the power of life and existence, he gave 
them himself. It is for this reason that Dante speaks of God as 
“the love which moves the sun and other stars”. But this love 
is on no account to be confused with anything sentimental or 
doting, because it is inseparable from the awe-inspiring 
quality of holiness, so that “it is a terrible thing to fall into the 
hands of the living God”—in other words, just to be alive. 
Thus the love of God inspires a fear, which, if one docs not 
fice from it, becomes a rapture enabling the mind to perccive 


In the Beginning 35 


it as light and splendour. But if this fear becomes panic, if one 
runs from it, the same radiance becomes the fire which is never 
quenched and the worm that dieth not, so that the damned 
who writhe in Hell are burned by the same fire which delights 
the angels in Heaven. 

And then, from beginningless time, God was also justice. 
At root, justice is the quality of order, though of an order 
dictated by love. Despite the infinite ages of his existence and 
the inscrutable complexity of his works, God was never fickle 
or capricious, for “with him there is neither variableness nor 
shadow of turning”. He would never contradict himself; he 
might always be relied upon to be completely consistent, so 
that a single, comprehensive, and perfectly logical law charac- 
terized all his works. It was by this law of justice that he was 
subsequently to govern all events whatsoever, so that, for 
always and always, every effect should have a sufficient cause, 
and facts—however complicated—should never be self, 
contradictory. By no amount of power or ingenuity could the 
justice of God ever be sct aside; one might intend, and even 
try, to break his law—just as one may try endlessly and fruit 
lessly to jump out of one’s own skin or to draw a square circle. 

Such, then, was the “image and likeness” of the Origin from 
which, in time, all created things were to spring. The tradition 
insists that there was, however, no necessity for God to create 
anything apart from himself because the inner life of the 
Trinity comprised all perfection, lacking nothing. But the 
superabundancc of the divine love was so overflowing that the 
time came when, quite gratuitously and in total freedom from 
any constraint, the Holy Trinity created, out of nothing, a vast 
world of spirits. These were not, as it might seem, a multitude 
of sparks shaken loose from the central fire; they were not in 
any sense fragments cf God. From beginningless time they 
were not. And then, by the sudden command of the Word, 
they appeared—circle upon circle, sphere upon sphere of lesser 
lights about the Light—points of substantialized nothingness, 


36 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


reflecting in a million ways the central radiance of the Trinity 
as if they had been great clouds of crystal fragments swirling 
about the sun. 

From the moment of their appearance these spirits—the 
angels—were startled out of everlasting sleep into the lightning- 
shock of a direct, unshielded vision of the Glory. To be able 
to bear the exquisite pleasure-pain of this awakening, they at 
once protected their eyes with their golden and faming wings— 
wings upon which they soared and danced and circled through 
and all about the Light which gave them birth. At the same 
instant, all the nine choirs or spheres into which they were 
divided, burst into the exultant hymn which they have never 
ceased singing to this day. 

“Thou art surrounded by thousands of Archangels and 
tens of thousands of Angels, by the Cherubim and Seraphim 
that are six-winged, full of eyes, and soar aloft on their wings, 
singing, crying, shouting, and saying— 

“Agios! Agios! Agios! Kyrie Sabaoth! 
Holy! Holy! Holy! Lord of Hosts! 
Heaven and earth are full of Thy Glory! 
Hosanna in the Highest!”? 


Now a real angel is not to be confused with the simpering 
creatures which a decadent Christian art now shows in 
Church windows and upon Christmas cards. Angels are not 
blonde girls with silver wings, Aoating around in white 
nighties—for “he maketh his angels spirits, and his ministers 
a flame of fire”. The angels are, on the contrary, spirited and 
fiery, and belong to an order of creatures where there is neither 
male nor female.2 They are not, as some have wrongly 
supposed, the kind of spirits which men become when they 
die; they are a special and separate order of creatures, immortal 

1 Divine Liturgy of St. Joln Chrysostom. Preface and Trisagion. 

? According to Dom Albert Hammenstede, O.S.B., the noted Benedictine 


liturgist of Maria Laach, angels are not to be associated with harps and silver 
trumpets—the proper musical instrument for an angel being the combone! 


In the Beginning 37 


from the moment of their creation, and having the double 
function of enjoying and praising the glory of God, on the 
one hand, and of ministering between God and the material 
universe, on the other. 

When the angels were created they were divided into nine 
orders, or choirs, the names of which—in descending rank— 
are as follows: 

. Cherubim 

. Seraphim 

. Thrones 

. Dominions 
. Authorities 
. Powers 

. Principalities 
. Archangels 
. Angels 


oN AUN Aa wY Dh & 


Ke) 


The Cherubim and Seraphim are respectively the spirits of 
divine knowledge and love. The Cherubim are represented 
as heads only, having two wings—a symbolism appropriate 
to beings preoccupied with the knowledge of God. The 
Seraphim, the fiery spirits of love, are six-winged—two wings 
covering their faces, two covering their feet, and two for 
Aight—and each carries a hexapteryx or fan in the right hand. 
The Thrones, who actually constitute the Throne upon which 
the All-Highest takes his seat, are shown as winged wheels. 


The appearance of the wheels and their work was 
like unto the colour of a beryl: and the four had one 
likeness: and their appearance and their work was 
as it were a wheel in the middle of a wheel. When 
they went, they went upon their four sides: and they 
turned not when they went. As for their rings, they 
were so high that they were dreadful; and their rings 
were full of cyes round about those four. 

1 Ezekiel 1: 16-18. 


38 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


All the members of this first group of three, the highest order 
of angels, are said to be “full of eyes, before and behind”, and 
sometimes the heads of the Cherubim are described as having 
four forms—one like a bull, one like a lion, one like an cagle, 
and one like a man. These are, of course, the four “fixed-signs” 
of the Zodiac—Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius—which 
later became the symbols of the Four Evangelists. 

Tradition has little to say about the next group of three, 
the Dominions, Authorities, and Powers—perhaps because 
their function, being mixed, is not so clear, for they stand mid- 
way between those angels concerned with the contemplation 
of God and those concerned with ministration to the material 
world. They are to be represented as clothed in green tunicles 
or dalmatics, the ecclesiastical vestments proper to Deacons 
when serving at the altar, beneath which they wear the white 
alb or chlamys fowing down to the feet, and gathered at the 
waist with a gold cincture. In their right hands they hold 
golden staves, and in the left seals inscribed with the X cross 
—the Signaculum Dei or “Seal of God”. 

The third and lowest group consists of the Principalities, 
Archangels, and Angels, represented chiefly as warriors 
equipped with such instruments as spears, axcs, and swords, 
as well as instruments of skill and art such as measuring-rods, 
harps, trumpets, and pipes. As we have said, these angels have 
the special duties of ministering between God and the material 
universe. They are the protectors and guardians of the laws of 
nature, of planets, nations, socicties, institutions, and individual 
men—personifications of the omnipresent power of God, 
directing and ordering every detail of the world. 


1 Scorpio is interchangeable, in astrological symbolism, with the Eagle or 
Phoenix, because of the myth which associates both with death and resurrection 
through fire. The Cherubim are the spiritual prototypes of the Gospel writers, 
Evangelists, because it is through them that men receive the knowledge of Christ, 
as the Cherubim are concerned with the knowledge of God. In Greck, the word 
“angel” has the meaning of “messenger”, and thus the Gospel is the good (€3) 
angel or message (4/-eA0s). 


¢ 


parca a et 


I. THE CREATOR MEASURING THE WORLD 
(From a French “Bible moralisée”. Probably Rheims, thirteenth century.) 
God is represented in the form of the Christ, who, as the Second Person of the 
Trinity, is the Logos “by whom all things were made”. He is shown in the 
act of “setting his compass upon the face of the deep”, since it is by division 
and measurement (maya) that distinct “things” are recognized in the 
continuum of life. 


2. THE CREATION OF THE WORLD 


This remarkable Christian mandala is a thirteenth-century mosaic upon the 
vault of the atrium in St. Mark’s, Venice. Reading anti-clockwise, the 
subjects are as follows: Inmost ring, (1) The Spirit upon the face of the 
Waters, (2) the Separation of Day and Night, (3) the Creation of the 
Firmament, (4) the Division of the Waters, (5) the Trees of Life and 
Knowledge. Middle ring, (1) Creation of the luminaries, (2) of fish and 
birds, (3) of plants and herbs, (4) of Adam from the dust, (5) the Sabbath, 
(6) the Spirit breathed into Adam, (7) Adam brought into Eden where the 
Four Rivers, represented as men, flow from the Two Trees. Outer ring, 
(1) Adam’s Dominion over Nature, (2) the Creation of Eve, (3) the Naming 
of Woman, (4) Adam and Eve in the Garden, (5) the Temptation and 
Eating of the Fruit, (6) they hide their nakedness with leaves, (7) they hide 
ftom God, (8) who discovers them, (9) rebukes them, (10) gives them 
clothes, and (11) expells them from Eden. 


In the Beginning 39 


The Principalities are rather remote, in the sense that they 
govern such vast spheres as natural laws and great arcas of 
the universe. The Christian tradition names only four of the 
Archangels—Michacl, Gabricl, Raphael, and Uriel—and the 
general function of the Archangels may be surmised from 
the respective duties of these four. Michael is the messenger of 
divine judgement, and Gabriel of divine mercy. In the Last 
Days at the end of the world, Michael is destined to vanquish 
the Devil and to drive him down to the bottomless pit of fire. 
And at the final judgement of the living and the dead, it is 
Michael who holds the terrible scales in which the souls are 
to be weighed. Gabriel is the messenger of good news, and was 
thus the Archangel of the Annunciation, who came to the 
Virgin Mary with the news that she was to be the mother of 
Christ. Raphael is the angel of healing, the dispenser of divine 
mercy to the sick, while Uriel, the Fire of God, is the minister 
of prophecy and of the interpretation of God’s will to the 
minds of men.! 

The Angels—the gencric name for the whole company of 
spirits being used in particular for the lowest choir—are 
specially charged with the protection of individual men, each 
human being having, at birth, a guardian angel assigned to 
him as minister of divine guidance and guard against the 
powers of darkness. As the guardian angel is the bearer of 
divine love and wisdom to each man, so in turn he is the 
bearer of the individual’s prayers to God. 

The angels of every order are winged to designate their 
spiritual nature, as well as the instantaneous manner in which 
they discharge all their activitics. For an angel is where it 
thinks, and thus any number of angels can stand on the point 
of a pin becat:se any number of angels can think of the point 


1 Jewish tradition preserves the names of three other Archangels, making 
seven altogether. These are Chamuel, the Seer of God, Jophiel, the Beauty of 
God, and Zadkiel, the Justice of God. The names of all seven are Hebrew in 
form, the final -el being the general Hebrew word for a god, a divine being, or of 
something belonging to God. 


40 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


of that pin. As thought can move faster than light, jumping 
instantaneously from earth to the utmost nebulae, so likewise 
the angels can move from heaven to earth, and from end to end 
of the universe in almost no time at all. Furthermore, angelic 
thought is said to be many times faster than human thought 
because it does not require the cumbersome instrumentality of 
material images, which take time and effort to form within 
the mind.? 

In the beginning, in that first moment of created time in 
which the angelic choirs were made, the whole of God’s 
creation was perfect in every respect. Because the realm of 
spirits was, however, finite and created it was naturally not 
as perfect as God himself, yet it was nonetheless as perfect, as 
godlike, as finite things could possibly be. And in so far as it 
was godlike, every created spirit was endowed with that most 
divine of all properties—autonomy, the power of self-direction 
without compulsion, otherwise known as the freedom of will. 
Lacking this power, created spirits would have been incapable 
of the one thing which their Creator wanted them to have, the 
one thing which so intimately constituted his own essence—the 
capacity of love. For love exists only when it is given freely, 
without any duress. 

In allowing creatures to possess the divine property of 
freedom, God was well aware that he had undertaken an 
immense risk. For if one is free to love, one is also free to hate. 


1 The traditional sources of information about the angels are principally 
as follows: The Vision of Ezekiel in Ezekiel 1, various parts of Revelation, the 
Book of Tobit (Raphael), Esdras 2 (Uriel), an eleventh-century work entitled 
the Hermeneia by the Greek monk Panselinos, and, most important of all, the 
Celestial Hierarchies of the sixthecentury Syrian monk known as St. Dionysius 
the Arcopagite, in Migne’s Patrologia Graeca, vol. iii. Angels, as their name 
indicates, are the “messengers” between God and men, though, at the same 
time, their function is also the contemplation of the Beatific Vision of God 
himself. In other words, the angels are the “insights” that come into conscious- 
ness suddenly, giving intimations of hitherto unsuspected levels of reality. “An 
angel told me” means that I did not think it out by myself, but rather chat it 
came to me all of a sudden. 


In the Beginning 41 


As soon as freedom is granted, there remains no guarantee of 
the way in which it may be used. Anything can happen—save 
the one thing which is impossible by definition, the overthrow 
of God himself, without whom even freedom cannot be 
exercised. The God who lent this dangerous gift to his angels 
knew, by his vision of the future, exactly how they would 
use it. He knew that the gift would be abused to the limit. He 
understood vividly, to the last hideous detail, the enormities of 
wickedness which the bestowal of this gift was to involve. 
But he knew also that, in spite of the worst that was to happen, 
the final end which he had in mind would be so splendid as 
to make the risk entirely justified. 

Now among the angels which God had created, there was 
one so surpassingly beautiful that he was named Lucifer, the 
Bearer of Light. He is generally thought to have been an 
Archangel, but some suppose that he must have been much 
higher in rank—perhaps one of the Cherubim or Scraphim 
who reflect the immediate and most intense glory of the divine 
radiance. Since an angel is, like God, aware of himself, one of 
the first things that Lucifer noticed was the unbelievable 
grandeur of the being which God had given him. He realized 
that it would really be impossible for the Almighty to create 
anything more excellent—that he, Lucifer, was really the 
crowning triumph of God’s handiwork. 

He looked again into the heart of the Holy Trinity, and as 
his gaze went deeper and deeper into that abyss of light he 
began to share the divine vision of the future. And there, to his 
complete amazement, he saw that God was preparing a far 
higher place in heaven, an honour more glorious than the rank 
of Cherub and Scraph, for creatures who—by comparison 
with angels—were coarse and crude in the extreme. He saw 
that he was to be outclassed in the hierarchy of heaven by 
beings with fleshly and hairy bodies—almost animals. He saw 
that, of all things, a woman was to be his Queen, Far worse than 
this, he saw that Logos-Sophia, God the Son himself was to 


42 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


become man, and to set one of those “vile bodies” upon the 
very Throne of Heaven. 

At all this Lucifer was at once infamed with a mystery 
called Malice. Out of his own heart, by his own choice, by the 
free and unconstrained exercise of his own will, he preferred 
his own angelic glory to that of the Divine Purpose—which 
was to “corrupt itself” with humanity. With all the wisdom 
and foreknowledge possible to an angel, Lucifer could sce at 
once what his malice would involve. He could see, beyond any 
power of mortal imagination, thc everlasting damnation which 
must inevitably follow from rebellion against God. He 
realized quite clearly that such rebellion was, as it were, to 
throw himself with all his might, for ever and ever, against a 
wall of adamant. Nevertheless, he considered it more noble to 
rebel and rebel for ever than to surrender the pride of his angelic 
dignity, and to pay homage to a Body less luminous and 
spiritual than his own. He was convinced that God’s wisdom 
had gone astray, that the Creator had forgotten himself, and 
he determined to have no part in such lése majesté, such an 
undignified aberration in the otherwise beautiful scheme of 
creation. Certainly he would have to submit to the utmost 
wrath, to complete rejection from That which was, after all, 
the Being of his being. But one thing he need not surrender, 
the one thing which God had given him as his very own, for 
all eternity—his own will. 

Along with Lucifer, there were many other angels who felt 
the same way—according to one authority 7,405,998 of them— 
and all together, with Lucifer at their head, they turned their 
backs upon the Beatific Vision, flying and falling from the 
Godhead towards that ever-receding twilight where Being 
borders upon Nothing, to the Outer Darkness. It was thus 
that they put themselves in the service of Nothing rather than 
the service of Being, and so became the nihilists who were to 
do their utmost to frustrate the creative handiwork of God, 
and most especially to corrupt the Aeshly humanity which he 


In the Beginning 43 


intended to honour. In this manner a whole host of the angels 
became devils, and their prince became Satan, the Adversary, 
and Beelzebub, the Lord of Flies. 

Yet because God was infinite, because the shekinah reached 
out for ever and ever, the devils found no escape from his light. 
Turning from it they found it facing them. Above and below, 
and around on every side, they rushed towards darkness and 
found—always—the inescapable Light, the hated Love which 
began to burn them like a raging fire, so that the only escape 
lay inwards, to the solitary, isolated sanctuary of their own 
wills. Therefore this place of isolation and solitary confinement, 
where the light of God torments and gives no gladness, 
became the place of Satan’s dominion, the Kingdom of Hell. 
Here he ruled over his own angelic hierarchy with its Powers, 
Principalities, Archangels, and Angels of Night—Mephisto- 
pheles, Ashtaroth, Abaddon, Mammon, Asmodcus, and 
Belphegor.? 

Something must be said here as to the true nature of angelic 
evil, since most people are not aware of any greater evils than 
lust, cruelty, murder, drunkenness, greed, and sloth. From the 
angelic point of view these “sins of the flesh” are as far from 
real evil as conventional goodness is removed from true 
sanctity or holiness. Wery few human beings have the courage, 
the persistence, the very asceticism necessary for the perfect 
service of Satan—which requires that one perform miracles of 
darkness, as the saints perform miracles of light. From this 
standpoint, characters such as Jenghiz Khan, the Marquis de 
Sade, Heinrich Himmler, and Jack the Ripper are mere 
blunderers. The truc Satanist must always have the outward 
aspect of an angel of light, and will never, under any circum- 
stances, resort to the cruder, violent types of evil. He must be 
so clever that only an expert in holiness can discern him, for in 

1 Anyone wishing to acquaint himself further with the hicrarchy of Hell 


might consult de Givry’s [Witchcraft, Magic and Alchemy (London, 1931), 
esp. Chapters 1, 2, and 10. 


44 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


this way he may far more effectively mislead the sons of men 
and please his infernal Master, whose supreme craft lies in 
Deception, and subtle confusion of the truth. 

In some ways the Devil is the most significant character in 
this whole story, for nowhere but in Catholic Christianity do 
we find a real Power of Darkness. The Satan of Judaism and 
Islam is rather an angel ministering the wrath of God; the 
Asuras of Hinduism and Buddhism are simply dark aspects 
of the divine, which is in itself beyond good and evil. One of 
the special distinctions of Christianity is that it takes evil more 
seriously than any other religion. While not allowing the 
Principle of Evil the rank of equal and opposite to the Principle 
of Good, as in pure dualism, it insists that evil is in no sense 
whatsoever of divine origin. It takes its rise exclusively from 
the finite, created world, but at the same time constitutes an 
appalling danger of eternal consequence—which God permits 
but does not condone. The true Christian is, therefore, 
unccasingly on his guard against this dread reality, and, for all 
his faith in God, walks through life with the sense that living 
is a real adventure because it contains a real danger of infinite 
subtlety and horror. “Brethren, be sober, be vigilant, for your 
Adversary the Devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about secking 
whom he may devour; whom resist, steadfast in the faith.” 
These are the opening words of Compline, the regular prayer 
ofthe Church which, day after day, brings the work of worship 
to its close for the night. 

A Christianity without the Devil is, then, lacking in 
something which is of the essence of the Christian conscious- 
ness. It is true that in the Middle Ages the Devil of popular 
mystery plays became a sort of buffoon, and that as time went 
on his horns and cloven feet, borrowed from Pan, provoked 
more mirth than terror. But in a more serious mood the 
Christian mind conceives Lucifer not as an ugly old goatyman 
but as an angel of dark beauty and deceptive glory—a super- 
natural, psychic enuty which plots against our welfare with 


In the Beginning 45 


a cleverness far beyond the range of the most intricate human 
intellect. Against this Power no amount of purely human 
effort or good-will is of the slightest avail, for the most heroic 
man-made holiness is so easily netted in its own pride, and 
confused by its self-interested motivation. Against the wiles of 
an archangel the only protection is the Grace of God. 

This conception, so marvelously peculiar and sinister, brings 
into sharp contrast the Christian sense of the goodness of God. 
For what the Christian consciousness sees in all the trappings 
of glory, of shekinab, of the blinding radiance of the Trinity, 
is not so much beauty, or even truth, as goodness. Beauty has 
seemed a deceptive attribute, shared alike by God and Satan, 
who also knows the truth—and trembles. What belongs 
essentially and exclusively to God is inflexible righteousness, 
and historical Christianity simply has not tolerated any notion 
of God as an Absolute “beyond good and evil”. Thus the 
Being of being, the Ultimate Reality, has—for the Christian 
mentality—a definite character, a specific and particular will, 
such that goodness does not exist merely in relation to evil 
but is, from everlasting, the very essence of God. As we shall 
see, this conception is as monstrous and sinister, in its own 
way, as that of the Devil. It represents the crucial point at 
which historical Christianity is “aberrant” among the great 
traditional doctrines of the world, though the aberration is not 
so much from any defect of the myth as from the minds of those 
who have been its official interpreters.! 

1 To the extent that myth is a figurative expression not only of the very 
foundations of human life, but also of unconscious contents of a more super- 
ficial character, the orthodox conception of the Devil has its own particular 
significance, which will be discussed in the following chapter. See further, 
A. K. Coomaraswamy’s article “Who is Satan and Where is Hell?” in 
Review of Religion, xii, 1 (New York, 1947), pp. 76-87, in the course of which 
he observes, “For anyone who holds that ‘God made the world’, the question, 
Why did he permit the existence in it of any evil, or that of the Evil One in 
whom all evil is personified, is altogether meaningless; one might as well 


enquire why he did not make a world without dimensions or one without 
temporal succession.” 


46 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


We must now imagine the purely spiritual light of the 
Trinity, surrounded by its nine choirs of bright angels, 
Aloating over an abyss of dark and formless water—the symbol 
of the prima materia, the clemental substance out of which 
everything was to be formed. 


In the beginning God created the heaven and the 
earth, 

And the earth was without form, and void; and 
darkness was upon the face of the deep. 

And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the 


waters! 


For the “heaven and earth” which God first created was a 
formless mass. Before he made anything else he made matter— 
materia, matrix, mater—as the maternal womb of the universe, 
for it is a gencral principle in mythology that material is the 
feminine component and spirit the masculine, their respective 
symbols being water or carth and air or fire. In the Christian 
myth every new creation is from water and the Spirit, for out 
of this conjunction the world is made, the Christ is born, and 
man is recreated through Baptism. The sacred texts make this 
symbolism peculiarly vivid: 


The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the 


waters.} 


Who for us men and for our salvation came down 
from heaven, and was incarnate by the Holy Spirit 
of the Virgin Mary.” 


Except a man be born of water and the Spirit, he 
cannot enter into the kingdom of God.* 


O God, whose Spirit in the very beginning of the 
world moved over the waters, that even then the 


1 Genesis 1: 1-2. 2 The Nicene Creed. 1 John 3: 5. 


In the Beginning 47 


nature of water might receive the virtue of sancti- 
fication. .. . By a secret mixture of thy divine virtuc 
render this water fruitful for the regeneration of 
men, to the end that those who have been sanctified 
in the immaculate womb of this divine font, being born 
again a new creature may come forth a heavenly 
offspring. 


In the beginning the Spirit conceived, the waters gave birth, 
and the world which was born from their conjunction was the 
first material image of the Word, of God the Son, the Logos 
who was the ideal pattern after which the creation was 
modeled. After the world had been corrupted by Satan, the 
Spirit conceived again, and that which was born from the 
immaculate womb of the Virgin Mother Mary, Star of the Sca, 
was the Word himself in human Aesh. Yet again the Spirit 
conceives, and that which is born again from “the immaculate 
womb of this divine font” is a man christened, a member of the 
Body of Christ, an alter Christus—for “to them gave he power 
to become the sons of God”.? 

The story goes on to tell us that when God had created 
Prima Materia, Chaos, the Earth Mother, he formed the 
universe from her in six days—days, it may be, by divine 
reckoning, which are periods of “a thousand years” in the 
Hebrew tradition, and 4,320,000 years in the Hindu. 

On the first day, he created light, material light which must 
be distinguished from the spiritual and uncreated light of the 


1 Prayer for the Blessing of the Font, from the Liturgy of Holy Saturday 
in the Roman Missal. 

2In the same way the texts of Mahayana Buddhism describe the world of 
things as the waves raised on an ocean by the wind. Cf. Bribadaranyaka 
Upanisload, iii. 6, its asked, “Since all this world is woven, warp and woof, on 
water, upon what is water woven, warp and woof?” And the answer, “On 
wind”. So also Chandogya Upanishad, vii. 10. 1, “It is just water made solid that 
is this earth, this atmosphere, this sky, that is gods and men, animals and birds.” 
The significance of this symbolism will be discussed in ch. HI, when we come 
to consider the role of the Virgin Mary. 


48 Myths and Ritual in Christianity 


Trinity, as well as from the supernatural light of the angels. 
At the same time he divided light from darkness and day from 
night.} 

On the second day, he created the firmament of Heaven, 
the colossal dome (or sphere) of brass within the midst of the 
waters of chaos, so that it divided the upper waters from the 
nether waters—the waters above the firmament from those 
below.” 

On the third day, he created the carth in the very centre of 
the firmament, and divided it from the waters so that the 
former became the dry land, and the latter the oceans. And on 
the under-side of the carth at the Antipodes he created the 
seven-storcy mountain of Purgatory. Within the earth, like a 
vast funnel reaching down to its very centre, he created the pit 
of Hell, surrounded with its nine rings of “pockets” or valleys, 
corresponding to the nine orders of the heavenly choirs above. 
Into the very depth of this pit he cast Lucifer and his angels, 
and some say that the mountain of Purgatory was made when 
the earth itself shrank from the falling Devil.? On the same 
day, he created all trees, plants, flowers, and grasses to bear 
fruit for men and beasts, and herbs for the healing of diseases. 

1 The important symbol of division, of God setting his compass (dividers) 
upon the face of the deep, is discussed below, ch. IIT. 

2 Water has a dual role in mythology, for sometimes it is the fountain of life 
and at other times “the depths” into which one should dread to fall. Thus to fall 
into the “nether waters” 1s to regress to a pre-human state, to be swamped by 
unconscious contents and to lose all rational control. For there are two ways of 
becoming egovless ot unvself-ish: to descend into the lower waters so that one is 
not even an cgo, and to ascend into the upper waters by the increase of con- 
sciousness, thus outgrowing the illusion of individual isolation. 

3 The Mediaeval picture of the universe is not quite that of Genesis. In the 
former the firmament was spherical, since it was known that the earth is a globe, 
but in the latter it is a dome, and the dry land of the earth is divided from the 
nether waters. The brazen firmament is the Hebrew-Christian equivalent of the 
World Egg, originally laid by the Divine Bird upon the primaeval waters, 
as in the Egyptian, Orphic, and Hindu mythologies. It is of interest that the 
Devil lics at the very centre of the created universc—indicative, perhaps, of the 


feeling that the individual ego is the true centre of man, since, as we shall 
sce, “Teness” is what the Devil primarily represents. 


In the Beginning 49 


FIC. I THE CREATION OF THE ANIMALS 


Woodcut from 
the Meditations of Turrecremata, Rome 1473 


On the fourth day, he created the sun, moon, and stars, and 
set them within seven crystal spheres, within the firmament 
and around the earth. In the first sphere he set the Moon, as a 
light for the night, in the second Mercury, in the third Venus, 
in the fourth the Sun, as a light for the day, in the fifth Mars, 
in the sixth Jupiter, and in the seventh Saturn. And round and 
about the outside of the seventh sphere he set the stars of the 
Zodiac, so that on this day the Sun lay under the Sign of 
the Ram, where it lies also at Easter, when the world was 
redeemed by the Sacrifice of the Lamb of God. 

On the fifth day, he created all fish and birds. 

On the sixth day, he created the beasts of the carth, and, 
finally, Adam—the man. He formed Adam from the dust and 
clay of the carth; he made him in his own image, and breathed 
the breath of his own divine life into his nostrils so that the 


$0 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


man became a living soul.!. He made Adam the ruler of the 
earth, the head of nature, commanding all beasts, birds, fish, 
and plants to be subservient to him. Once by one, God brought 
all those creatures into Adam's presence, and to cach one 
Adam gave a name. 

On the seventh day, Saturday, the Sabbath, God rested, and 
rejoiced in the knowledge that everything which he had made 
was good. According to Clement of Alexandria, the six days 
of creation and the seventh of rest are to be understood as a kind 
of simultaneous radiation from a centre. 


There proceed from God, the heart of the world, 
indefinite extensions—upwards and downwards, to right 
and left, backward and forward. Looking in these six 
directions, as at a constant number, he completes the 
creation of the world, of which he is the beginning and 
end, In him the six phases of time have their end, and it 
is from him that they receive their indefinite extension. 
And that ts the secret of the number seven.” 


For the number seven significs God himself, the heart or centre 
of the six rays, sometimes called the Seventh Ray. In other 
words, in the six days God manifests himself outwardly, but 
on the seventh he returns back into himself. And this is a day 
of rest because the heart and centre of God is “unmoved”, just 
as in a wheel the spokes turn but the hub remains fixed. 


1 God’s breath (rach Adonai) is the spirit, and is thus God himself residing 
within the vessel of clay, the two together constituting a living soul (psyche, 
nefesh). The symbolism indicates that Adam is the first incarnation and Christ 
the second, for as Christ is conceived of the Spirit and born of the Virgin 
Mother, Adam is the creation of the Spirit breathed into virgin matter. 

2 Stromata, vi. 16. 

3 What Clement actually describes is the three-dimensional cross, which, 
when represented on a plane surface appears as the six-pointed star, and this, 
curiously enough, is the earliest form of the Christian monogram for Christ, 
made by the superimposition of the initials of the Greek name 1Coyc : 
xpicToc. It is for this reason chat symbols of the sun—the astronomical 


In the Beginning st 


The tradition maintains that Adam, the primordial man, 
was the perfect man as God originally designed him. He was 
physical and yct immortal, and all creatures of the earth obeyed 
him. The animals served him and the plants fed him, and there 
was no need for him to labour for his livelihood. He was thus 
in perfect harmony with his natural surroundings, and 
constantly aware of the presence of God. For this material 
image of himself God planted a garden—Eden—in the centre 
of the world, which was to be the earthly counterpart of 
Heaven, since all things which were below were to mirror 
those which were above. In Heaven there is “a pure river of the 
water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of 
God. ... In the midst of the stream of it, and (branching out) 
on either side of the river, was the tree of life, which bare 
twelve fruitings, and yielded her fruit every month. And the 
leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.”? So also 
in Eden, “The tree of life (was) in the midst of the garden, 
and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. And a river 
went out of Eden to water the garden,’ 

However, Eden was not quite like its heavenly prototype. 
There was the extra tree, the Tree of Knowledge. Yet this must 
be taken to represent the same risk which was taken in the 
creation of the angels with free will. For Adam, too, was 
endowed with this freedom, and the Tree of Knowledge may 
perhaps be regarded as a kind of materialization of the negative 
potentiality within that freedom—the very real possibility that 
Adam might choose his own will rather than God’s. “And the 
Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree in the 
garden thou mayest frecly eat, but of the Tree of the Knowledge 
imago Dei—may be either four- or six-rayed stars, according as to whether the 
sun is shown in two or three dimensions. Thus the creation of the world in six 
directions and three dimensions is the primordial crucifixion of the Logos, the 
slaying of the Lamb at the foundation of the world (Revelation 13: 8). Creation 
is a sacrificial act in the sense that it is God’s assumption of finite limitations, 


whereby the One is—in play but not in reality—dismembered into the Many. 
1 Revelation 22: 1-2. 2 Genesis 2: 9-10. 


$2 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


of Good and Evil, thou shalt not eat of it, for in the day that 
thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.”? 

After this, the Lord God took another risk. He decided that 
it was not good for Adam to be alone, for of all the beasts of 
the field, none was sufficient to be a companion for him. So he 
put Adam into a deep sleep, and, taking out one of his ribs, 
fashioned from it the Woman, Eve. In this manner, then, was 
completed the creation of the First Parents of our race— 
immortal, free from all conflict and sorrow, innocent, naked, 
and unashamed.? 

It was then that Lucifer entered the garden. He assumed the 
form of a serpent, and entwined himself about the Tree of 
Knowledge. In due time, Eve came to the part of the garden 
where the Tree was standing, and there beheld the golden fruit 
and the splendid snake with shining scales, twisted around 
the trunk of the Tree. And the Serpent Lucifer murmured to 
Eve, saying, “Yes? Hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every 
tree in the garden?” And Eve replicd, “We may cat of the 
fruit of the trees of the garden. But of the fruit of the Tree 
which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall 
not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye dic.” 

“Ye shall not surely die,” answered the Serpent. “For God 


1 Genesis 2: 16-17. 

2 After “going to sleep” Adam became divided, no longer androgyne, but 
two-sexcd. It was this chat made it possible for him to fall. For when God first 
entered (breathed his spirit into) Adam, the indwelling spirit was “awake” and 
aware of its proper divinity, of its substantial unity with God. But this putting 
of Adam into a deep slecp is the Spirit’s voluntary self-forgetting—a further 
extension of the sacrificial character of the creation, as when an actor, playing a 
part, forgets his proper identity and identifies himself with the persona he has 
assumed. In the actual myth the generation of Eve and the Fall succeed one 
another, but myth extends in narrative what is simultancous in reailty. (Note 
that in Plato’s Symposium the order is reversed—-division into two sexes is the 
penalty for the fall.) It need not be supposed that this division of man refers to 
the biological origin of two sexes. In mythology male and female, yang and yin, 
signify duality rather than sexuality, and the Fall is the subordination of the 
human mind to the dualistic predicament in thinking and fecling—to the 
insoluble conflict between good and evil pleasure and pain, life and death. 


In the Beginning $3 


knows that in the day ye cat thereof, then your cyes shall be 
opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.” So 
when Eve saw that the tree was good for food, that it was 
pleasant to the eyes, and a Tree to be desired in that it would 
make one wise, she took and ate the fruit, and then went and 
gave some to Adam, so that he ate as well. At once the eyes of 
both of them were opened, and they knew that they were naked. 
In the shame of this discovery they plucked fig-leaves, and, 
sewing them together, made aprons. 

It was, at this time, the cool of the day, and apparently it was 
God’s custom to descend from Heaven at this hour and walk 
in the garden. Hearing him coming, the pair went and hid 
themselves amongst the trees, fearing that he would sce them 
in their nakedness. But God called them out of their hiding- 
place, and, seeing the aprons of fig-leaves, demanded, “Who 
told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the Tree, 
whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldst not cat?” And 
Adam, searching rather desperately for an excuse, replied, 
“The woman thou gavest to be with me—she gave me of the 
Tree, and IJ did eat.” Whereupon God turned to Eve—“ What 
is this that thou hast done?” “The serpent”, she answered, 
“beguiled me, and I did cat.” 

Hearing all this, the divine wrath of the Lord God was 
aroused, and he pronounced a solemn and terrible curse upon 
the Serpent, and upon Adam and Eve—a curse which 
affected the whole realm of nature because Adam was its head 
and lord. He condemned the Serpent to go always upon its 
belly in the dust, and to be in perpetual enmity with the 
human race. He condemned Eve, and all her female offspring, 
to bring forth children in pain and sorrow, and to be subject 
to her husband. As for Adam, for Adam’s sake the Lord God 
cursed the very carth so that it would no longer bring forth 
fruit for him without sweat and toil, so that it would bring 
forth not only fruit but also thorns and thistles. And finally, 
he pronounced the curse of death and of expulsion from the 


54 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


garden—“For dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return. 
... Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and 
evil. And now, lest he put forth his hand and take also of the 
Tree of Life, and eat, and live for ever... .” Without a further 
word the Lord God expelled the pair from the garden, to 
ull the ground from which they were taken. And at the 
eastern entrance to the garden, to guard the way to the Tree 
of Life, he set a Cherub with a sword of fire which turned 
every way. 

From this moment death, suffering, and evil entered the 
material world—the outward and visible signs of something 
still worse, of the Fall of the world from Grace, of separation 
from the divine life of God, incurring the sentence passed upon 
Lucifer—the sentence of everlasting damnation. 

Tradition, not scripture, adds a further word to this story. 
In the course of time one of the sons of Adam, named Seth, 
procured a branch of the fatal Tree. Versions of this story 
differ very much, for some accounts say that Adam himself 
brought it from Eden when he was expelled, and used it 
throughout his life for a staff. Others say that what Seth ac- 
quired was not a branch of the Tree of Knowledge, but seeds 
from the Tree of Life, given to him by the angel sentinel. 
But despite the differing details, the theme is clear—a portion 
of one of the Trees came out of the garden, and subsequently 
had a most miraculous history. 

It became the famous rod of Moses, which turned into a 
serpent to confound the Egyptian magicians, with which he 
divided the waters of the Red Sea so that the children of Israel 
could flee the hosts of Pharaoh in safety, upon which he hung 
nebushtan, the brazen serpent, so that all who beheld it were 
delivered from a plague of snakes, and with which he struck 
the rock in the wilderness so that it gave forth water. It became 
a beam in the great temple built by Solomon the Wise. It 


1 For the various versions sce A. S. Rappoport, Mediaeval Legends of Christ 
(New York, 1935), ch. 11. 


Gs 

- “Bi 
er 
> 
ay 


Syomart ( 


4 Eth mae ey F . Bae . 

Se NE om ~_ j 

SSNS / pear a 2 (a 6 1 

: . = 5 

bh, : Ps var 2) “al 

= _s va < sata the. wT Bae B cl 

aR SS: f f +4, es = > 

vy 1A i If 2 - Tis Cae eee i esha ae 
4A an : = Ps ‘3 oro Aa SS 

bad - . pai sii: pitad, hth ae ele ae =. . 

Pe a an OY EES ra = ‘ is 


ete ma (Sy pe if 


EE SIE. 


3. THE TREE OF JESSE 
(British Museum, Nero MS., c. twelfth century.) From the phallus of the 
recumbent Jesse springs the Tree of Life, with its stem consisting of David, 
St. Mary, and the Christ. The many-petaled Hower at the top contains the 
Dove of the Spirit, and the figures on either side are two prophets, perhaps 
Elijah and Isaiah. 


4. THE ELEVATION OF THE HOST AT HIGH MASS 
Taken in a monastic church, this photograph shows the solemn moment 
when the Host (the sacred Bread) has been consecrated as the Body of 
Christ and is raised for adoration. The three monks at the altar are the 
Priest (standing, and wearing the chasuble), the Deacon (kneeling by the 
Priest, wearing the dalmatic), and the Subdeacon (kneeling behind 
the Priest, wearing the humeral veil over the cunicle). 

The four monks kneeling to the right of the altar are (left to right) the 
Thurifer in the act of censing the Host, the Master of Ceremonies, and two 
acolytes, one of whom is ringing the Sanctus Bell. The two in the fore- 

ground are acolytes with candles. 


In the Beginning $5 


passed, in ume, to the carpenter’s shop of Joscph, the foster- 
father of Jesus, and from him it was acquired by Judas the 
Betrayer, who, in the end, turned it over to the Roman soldiers 
who used it for the Cross upon which they crucified the 
Christ—for the Cross which became the Tree of Salvation. 

Herein we discover one of those marvelous networks of 
correspondences which do so much to illumine the sense of the 
myth, For Eden is not only the mirror of Paradise above: it is 
also a reflection of Christ, wherein all the events of man’s 
Redemption are seen in reverse. Over against the Tree of 
Knowledge, from which came death, is the Tree of the Cross, 
from which came cternal life. The parallel is brought out in the 
Proper Preface for the Mass at Passiontide: 


Who didst set the salvation of mankind upon the 
Tree of the Cross, so that whence came death, thence 
also life might rise again, and that he who by the 
Tree was vanquisher might also by the Trce be 
vanquished, through Christ our Lord. 


The Theme of the Cross as the true Tree of Life is taken up 
again in the Mass of the Presanctified on Good Friday— 


Crux fidelis, inter omnes 
Arbor una nobilis: 

Nulla silva talem profert 
Fronde, flore, germine. 
Dulce lignum, dulces clavos, 
Dulce pondus sustinet. 


Faithful Cross, the one Tree noble above all: no 
forest affords the like of this in leaf, or fower, or 
sced, Swect the wood, sweet the nails, sweet the 
weight it bears. 


Over against Adam stands Christ, the Second Adam, for 
“the first man Adam was made a living soul; the last Adam a 


$6 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


quickening spirit.”! “For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ 
shall all be made alive.”* Over against Eve stands Mary, who 
bore the fruit of Life as against the fruit of death, and the 
Breviary hymn Ave, maris stella plays on the very reversal of 
Eve’s name: 

Sumens illud Ave 

Gabrielis ore, 

Funda nos in pace, 

Mutans Evae nomen. 


Receiving that Ave from the mouth of Gabriel, 
establish us in peace, changing the name of Eva.? 


Opposite the Serpent Lucifer, entwining the Tree, there 
stands, again, Christ—a type of whom is seen by Christian 
symbolism in the nelssbtan—the Serpent of Bronze which 
Moses hung upon his staff for the healing of the plague, and 
which was kept for many years in the Ark of the Covenant 
in the Holy of Holics of Solomon’s Temple. 

With the Fall of Adam and his expulsion from Eden, the 
Christian story has stated its problem. It has represented the 
whole plight of man and of the created universe—the sense that 
things are not as they should be, that death and pain are 
imperfections, the sense of separation from the divine, of 
conflict with nature, of guilt, anxiety, and impotence of will, 
since “the good that I would, I do not; but the evil which I 
would not, that I do”. From now on the story turns to the 
extrication of man from the tangle in which Lucifer has 
involved him, to his Salvation from Death and Hell. 


ly Corinthians 15: 45. 21 Corinthians 15: 22. 
3 Vesper hymn in the Common of Feasts of the B.V.M. 


CHAPTER II 


God and Satan 


BECAUSE the foregoing story is the Christian account both of 
the very beginnings of the universe and of the origination of the 
great life-problem, evil, we cannot go further without trying to 
understand something of the meaning behind the story. For 
there really is no more important story in the whole history 
of Western civilization. It is not only the genesis of the 
Christ‘an myth as such: it is also a clue to the entire mentality 
of Western culture, which, for more than fifteen hundred 
years, regarded it as the scrious and sober account of the 
world’s origin. 

From the start, Christian mythology involves some problems 
of interpretation which are hardly found elsewhere. These are 
due to the fact that the myth proper contains a large admixture 
of theology, which, in the Western world, is a strange con- 
fusion of two types of knowledge—metaphysic and science. 
Any attempt to describe and interpret the world-vicw of 

$7 


$8 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


Christianity is doomed to hopeless confusion if we do not 
begin with some distinctions between different types of 
knowledge—distinctions which have almost entirely escaped 
the Western mind. 

Myth itself is simply a “numinous” story. Theology is an 
intrusion into the story of certain interpretations and comments, 
and of morals drawn from the story—as that the story itself is 
fact in the historical sense, or that the Lord God is the Ultimate 
Reality in the philosophical or metaphysical sense. The Hebrew 
Bible does not contain assertions of this nature, but Catholic 
doctrine most certainly does. To understand what theology 
has done to the myth, we must first try to see the distinction 
between the oddly assorted components of theology—science 
and metaphysic. 

It is now generally agreed that science—a legacy of the 
Greeks—is the knowledge of events, things, or facts, and is 
thus essentially a history, a record of what has been as a basis 
for the prediction of what will be. Furthermore, “events” or 
“things” are parts of experience, of sense-data, which have been 
isolated, named, and classified by the process of reflective 
thought which, because it involves memory, perceives certain 
regularities and orders in the manner wherein experience is 
presented to us. Thus the language of science consists of positive 
statements of fact: it is an analysis of past experience. 

Metaphysic,! on the other hand, is the apprehension of a 
reality prior to any facts. We have suggested that, of the many 
valid interpretations of myth, the metaphysical is the most 
basic. In the words of Joseph Campbell: 


1 The singular form is used to distinguish it from the “metaphysics” of 
Aristotle, Descartes, Spinoza, Kant, and Hegel, which constitute a viciously 
circular attempt to make factual statements about that which transcends facts— 
in other words, tc make that which is metaphysical an object of scientific 
knowledge. In modern Western thought, something of an approach to a true 
metaphysic may best be found in the “meta-linguistics” of B. L. Whorf and 
others. Sec his “Language, Mind, and Reality” in ETC (Chicago, Spring 
1952). 


God and Satan $9 


All mythology, whether of the folk or of the literati, 
preserves the iconography of a spiritual adventure that 
men have been accomplishing repeatedly for millennia, 
and which, whenever it occurs, reveals such constant 
features that the innumerable mythologies of the world 
resemble cach other as dialects of a single language. 


Thus far, however, we have described the nature of metaphysic 
in somewhat traditional terminology which is peculiarly 
foreign to the modern mind. But the vast importance of the 
subject to a proper grasp of mythology requires an attempt to 
define it in a manner more suited to present ways of thinking. 
As a “pre-factual” knowledge it is concerned with what we 
know directly and immediately, as distinct from what we 
know by reAcction, inference, and abstraction. This is not to 
say that its concern is with uninterpreted sense-data. It is far 
more fundamental. For the very notion that the foundations of 
experience are sense-data is already an opinion, an interpre- 
tation of experience based upon memory and reficctive thought. 
The word “metaphysic” itself is the clue to its meaning; it is the 
knowledge of that which is “beyond” (meta) “nature” (physis)— 
that is to say, of the way in which we experience before we 
ascertain the nature of our experiences by reflection—by 
remembering, naming, and classifying. Strictly speaking, 
then, metaphysic has no language, and its content is inv 
communicable or ineffable. 

In one sense, however, there is no need to communicate 
metaphysical knowledge because it is already the ground of 
what every man knows—what he knows before he knows 
anything else. It is the origin, the sine qua non, the basis of all 
other knowledge. But it is at the same time a neglected know- 
ledge, because the mind is distracted by things that come 
after—somewhat as considerations about the past and future 


1 In his Foreword to Maya Deren’s Divine Horsemen (London and New York, 
1953), p. I. 


60 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


distract us from the immediate present. Therefore metaphysical 
knowledge is communicated, not by direct description, but 
by a removal of distractions and obstacles. When these are out 
of the way, it is possible for the mind to attend one-pointedly 
to the only reality which it knows, veritably, immediately, 
now. 

Nearly every great culture of the world has held this type of 
knowledge in the highest esteem, even when it was enjoyed 
only by an élite minority. For knowledge of this kind is the 
essential corrective, the “balast of sanity”, for a species whose 
chief insttument of adaptation to the world is memory and 
reflective thought, the power of abstraction. It preserves the 
human mind from slavery to, as distinct from mastery of, the 
conventions of thought, and from the anguish and confusion 
which follow from treating certain abstractions, such as the ego, 
as realities. It keeps our consciousness in touch with life itself, 
and preserves it from the emotional frustrations which attend 
the pursuit of such purely abstract mirages as “pleasure”, the 
“future”, or the “good”. 

A formal metaphysical doctrine—such as the Vedanta and 
various types of Buddhism—employs, therefore, a negative 
language in order to convey the realization that reality, life 
itself, is not any fact or thing, since the division of experience 
into things is a convention of language and thought. One 
cannot, for example, point to the difference between two 
fingers. One can point to that which is called “fingers” but 
not to the difference, since the latter is an abstraction. Thus a 
metaphysical doctrine asserts that the world of reality is 
undifferentiated, without, however, meaning that it is numeri- 
cally one, or uniform. In the same vein, it asserts that reality is 
eternal, which is to say non-temporal rather than everlasting, 
since time is a concept, a theory, abstracted from memory. It 
asserts, too, that this reality is infinite, which means not 
“boundlessly large” but indefinable. It goes on to say that from 
this reality all things (1.c. differentiations) are produced out of 


God and Satan 61 


that which is “no-thing” by the Logos, which is word-and- 
thought.! 

These assertions begin to sound like theology; but, from the 
Christian standpoint, theology does not mean anything of this 
kind. It seems quite incongruous to use the name “God” to 
signify that which we experience immediately, before thought 
has sundered it into a world of things. This may be what 
Hindus mean by “Brahman” and Buddhists by “Tathata” 
(that-ness), but it is certainly not what the majority of thought- 
ful Christians have understood as God the Father. The 
problem arises, however, because the theologians really want to 
say that God is a fact, a thing—albeit the first fact and the first 
thing, the Being before all beings. Had it been clear that 
theology was not speaking of facts, the conflict between 
theology and natural science could never have arisen. But when, 
during the era of the Renaissance, this conflict first arose neither 
the theologians nor the scientists realized that there might have 
been any profound difference between the languages they were 
speaking. Theologians and scientists alike understood them- 
selves to be talking about “objective realities”, which is to 
say—things and events. Yet—to add to the confusion—the 
language of St. Thomas, St. Albert the Great, and St. 
Bonaventure was also metaphysical. They said that God was 
not in the class of things, that he was not an event in time, that 
he was not a body, that he had no parts or divisions, that he was 
eternal, infinite, and all the rest. But it is very clear that with 
some few possible exceptions, such as Eckhart and Erigena, 
the scholastics were still trying to talk about a thing—a very 
great thing, beyond and including all other things.” 


1 Thus B. L. Whorf has pointed out that for a people, such as the Nootka 
Indians, whose language contains only verbs and no nouns, the world contains 
no things: it consists entirely of processes. Sce Four Articles on Metalinguistics 
(Department of State, Washington, D.C., 1951). 

® This is clear in the Thomistic identification of God with Being. For the 
purely metaphysical doctrines of India, as well as for St. Dionysius pseudo- 
Areopagite (from whom St. Thomas derived more of the words than the 


62 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


The confusion has its historical roots in the fact that Christian 
dogma is a blend of Hebrew mythology and history with Greek 
metaphysic and science, complicated by the fact that Greek 
metaphysic was never so clearly formulated as Indian, and 
was always in danger of being identified with highly abstract 
thought. Indeed, the Western metaphysicians from Aristotle 
to Hegel have been—above all things—the great abstractionists, 
the thinkers. In this respect they are at the opposite pole from 
any traditional metaphysic, which is radically empirical and 
non-conceptual. It is possible, then, that the Greeks derived a 
number of metaphysical doctrines from India, but, for the 
most part, mistook their nature and treated them as concepts— 
as abstractions which have an objective existence on a “higher 
plane” than material things! It seems to have escaped the 
Greek mind that a metaphysical term such as “eternity” is not 
a concept at all. It is the negation of the concept of time. It 
involves no positive statement. It merely points out that the 
notion of reality as extended through past, present, and future 
is a theory and not a real, first-hand experience. 

Asa result, then, Christian dogma combines a mythological 
story which is for the most part Hebrew, and a group of 
metaphysical “concepts” which are Greek, and then proceeds 
to treat both as statements of fact—as information about ob jec- 
tive realities inhabiting (a) the world of history, and (b) the 
“supernatural” world existing parallel to the historical, but on 
a higher plane. In other words, it talks about mythology and 
metaphysic in the language of science. The resulting confusion 
has been so vast, and has so muddled Western thought, that 
all our current terms, our very language, so partake of the 
confusion that they can hardly straighten it out. It may, there- 
fore, help the reader if we make a brief summary of the types of 
knowledge involved. 


meaning), the highest Reality is “neither being nor non-being”—for the simple 
reason that both “being” and “non-being” are conceptual abstractions—like 
thing, spirit, matter, substance, and form. 


God and Satan 63 


I. SCIENCE. The record or history of facts, which are the 

parts of experience designated by nouns and verbs. However, 

“parts” is already a noun, so that the reality or realities which 
science discusses remain ultimately undefined.! 

2. METAPHYSIC. The indefinable basis of knowledge. 
Metaphysical knowledge or “realization” is an intense clarity 
of attention to that indefinable and immediate “point” of 
knowledge which is always “now”, and from which all other 
knowledge is elaborated by reAlective thought. A consciousness 
of “life” in which the mind is not trying to grasp or define 
what it knows. 

3. METAPHYSICS (Greek and Western). Highly abstract 
thought, dealing with such concepts as being, nature, sub- 
stance, essence, matter, and form, and treating them as if they 
were facts on a higher level of objective existence than sensually 
perceptible things. 

4. MYTH. A complex of images or a story, whether factual 
or fanciful, taken to represent the deepest truths of life, or 
simply regarded as specially significant for no clearly realized 
reason. 

s- THEOLOGY. An interpretation of combined myth and 
metaphysics (3), in which both are treated as objective facts 
of the historical and scientific order. 


The Christian account of the primal beginnings, taken 
simply as myth, is without doubt a marvelous tale, full of 
magic, poetry, and splendour. The wonderful King of kings 
who was alive for ever before time began, the creation—out of 
nothing—of the nine choirs of angels, the dark mystery of the 
villainous Lucifer, the six days of the making of the world, 
the First Man in the paradise-garden, Eve, the Serpent, and 
the Terrible Tree,—all this is as good a tale as ever was told, 


1 Since Hilbert, for example, mathematicians no longer attempt to define a 
S' 
point. Contemporary science more and more accepts the principle that it must 
work witha number of basic unknowns, signified by undefined terms. 


64 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


and ranks with the marvels of the Arabian Nights, of the 
Puranas, of the Iliad and Odyssey, of Hans Andersen and 
Grimm. But—one must hasten to say—this is in no sense 
leading up to the conclusion that the story should be treated as 
mere poetry or mere fairy-tale, having no other function than 
entertainment. 

There is no more telling symptom of the confusion of 
“modern thought” than the very suggestion that poetry or 
mythology can be “mere”. This arises from the notion that 
poetry and myth belong to the realm of fancy as distinct from 
fact, and that since facts equal Truth, myth and poetry have 
no serious content. Yet this is a mistake for which no one is 
more responsible than the theologians, who, as we have seen, 
resolutely confounded scientific fact with truth and reality. 
Having degraded God to a mere “thing”, they should not be 
surprised when scientists doubt the veracity of this “thing” —for 
the significant reason that it seems an unnecessary and meaning 
less hypothesis. (An excellent illustration of the point that 
“things” are really hypotheses.) Certainly, the poets and 
myth-makers have little to tell us about facts, for they make no 
hypotheses. Yet for this very reason they alone have something 
really important to say; they alone have news of the living 
world, of reality. By contrast, the historians, the chroniclers, 
and the analysts of fact record only the news of death. They 
tell us what, precisely, did happen. And because “life” as we 
live it goes repetitively round and round—“history repeats 
itself"—what, precisely, did happen is the best basis for pre- 
dicting what, precisely, will happen. Such information is, 
then, the supremely valuable information for those who have 
no other interest in life than to continue—to keep on keeping 
on. 

Myth does not supply us with facts in the sense, therefore, 
that it gives us no useful hypotheses for predicting the future— 
the use of prediction being to continue, to keep on “living”. 
Because, for so many centuries, the theologians have confused 


God and Satan 65 


eternal life with everlasting life, and salvation with temporal 
immortality, our culture is utterly hypnotized into the notion 
that mere continuity, survival, is a good—if not the supreme 
good. Hence we value practical facts above all other knowledge 
because, above all else, we need to carn our livings, to adapt 
ourselves to events, to master the operations of nature, to 
provide for the future, to benefit posterity...to what? 
Obviously, to keep on going on, to keep on consuming and 
accumulating, longer and longer, more and more. Convinced 
that, in this fashion, we are practical, that we are getting 
somewhere, we do not notice that we are covering the same 
ground again and again—not because we love the ground so 
much that we want to return to it, but, on the contrary, because 
we want to move away from it, to that grass on the other side 
of the fence which is always greencr. 

Yet pleasure and pain are relative, and the grass on the other 
side soon feels like the grass on this side, To retain the sensation 
of getting somewhere we must soon find yet another pasture 
and another fence over which to cast our envious glances. It is 
thus that we feel alive only in terms of the sensation of moving 
from the less to the more—that is to say, by running around 
faster and faster. The principal reason for this practical 
madness is that we are not alive at all. We are dead with an 
immortal, continuing death, which is perhaps what the myth 
means by everlasting, eternally recurring damnation.1 And we 
are dead because cach mai recognizes himself simply and 
solely as his past. His “I”, his continuity and identity, is 
nothing but an ere fom his memory, since what I 
know of myself is always what I was. But this is only tracks 
and echoes, from which the life has vanished. If the only self 
which I know is a thing dead and done, a was, a “has-been”, 


1 By this interpretation the Christian myth of everlasting torture and frustra- 
tion presents a marvelous parallel to the Greek myth of the punishments of 
Ixion, Sisyphus, and Tantalus—Ixion bound co the ever-turning wheel, 
Sisyphus pushing the rock to the hilltop from which ic ever rolls down, and 
Tantalus pursuing the feast which always cludes him. 


66 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


and I am ever reluctant to admit that I am dead, my only 
recourse is to work and struggle to give this “has-been” a 
semblance of life—to make it continue, move, get somewhere. 
But because it is dead, and has all the fixity and permanence 
of an unchangeable fact, this “I” can only go on being what 
it was. Like a machine, it can only repeat itself ad nauseam, 
however fast it may be run. 

Thus when the dead man talks, he gives us the facts; he tells 
all and says nothing. But when the living man talks, he gives 
us poetry and myth. That is to say, he gives us a word from the 
unconscious—not from the psychoanalytical garbage-can, but 
fromthe living world which is not to be remembered, of which 
no trace can be found in history, in the record of facts, because 
it is not yet dead. The world of myth is past, is “once upon a 
time”, in a symbolic sense only—in the sense that it is bebind us, 
not as time past is behind us, but as the brain which cannot 
be seen is behind the eyes which see, as behind memory is that 
which remembers and cannot be remembered. Thus poetry 
and myth are accounts of the real world which is, as distinct 
from the dead world which was, and therefore will be. The 
form of myth is magical and wonderful because the real world 
is magical and wonderful—in the sense that we cannot pin it 
down, that we do not understand it because it under-stands us. 

For these reasons the significance of myth is totally lost when 
we try to approach it through factual analysis—whether as 
“scientific” anthropologists or psychologists or as theologians. 
Above all things, then, one must refrain from approaching the 
Christian myth historically. It is simply not to be explained by 
reference to its Babylonian, Egyptian, Hebrew, and Greek 
antecedents, because they do not explain anything. The 
explanation of ten o’clock is not to be found in nine, cight, 
seven, six, five, four, three, two, and one; it is to be found in 
the moving hand upon the dial. The other and older myths 
are cited, not as if they themselves in any way explained the 
Christian myth, but because they illumine it by showing the 


God and Satan 67 


work of the same hand-—the hand which is not behind in time, 
but the hand which is, now, behind time. 

The theological analysis destroys the myth in just the same 
way as the “scientific” analysis, because theology is a pseudo- 
science—or science a pscudo-theology, I am not sure which. 
In spite of the vital power of its myth, Christianity began to die 
in the moment when theologians began to treat the divine 
story as history—when they mistook the story of God, of the 
Creation, and the Fall for a record of facts in the historical 
past. For the past goes ever back and back into nothing; it 
never leads to its Creator, to its explanation—at least, not in 
the backward direction. For the past is the creation, the empty 
echo, of the Now. Time does not fow forward from a Creator 
who made the world; it fows backwards, like the tail of a 
comet, from a Creator who makes the world, and whom no 
one can remember. 

And here we discover the reason why God has to be con- 
ceived in the human image—or rather, in the image of the 
human mind. It is not simply that we know of nothing higher 
than the human mind in the scale of evolution, so that every 
other image of God would be inferior to our own. The deeper 
reason is that the mind, in its unknown depths, is our point 
of contact with that real “world” which escapes all definition. 
Elsewhere we behold that world superficially, from the outside, 
through our senses. But in the mind we are, and feel from the 
inside, the reality which elsewhere seems only a foreign 
“object”. Through our senses reality appears as a known, but 
in the mind it is a knowing. Upon the outside, reality can be 
plastered with labels, giving us the illusion that we know what 
it is. But the mind, the source and origin of consciousness, 
always escapes the label. It is too close to be accessible, and 
thus can never be made into an object or thing. 

It is at this point, then, that we find what the myth calls 
“Ged”, or what the metaphysical doctrines call the eternal 
and infinite. This is the realm from which myth and poetry 


68 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


speak to us. It is immensely important to distinguish this from 
any kind of “subjective idealism” or psychologism. In saying 
that God is the knowing but ever-unknowable “ground” or 
source of the mind, we are not saying that reality is “mental” 
or “subjective”. On the contrary, that reality which we 
apprehend subjectively as mind is also what we know objec- 
tively as “things”. It is both subjective and objective, or better, 
neither subjective nor objective. In the mind—as minds—we 
are that which, otherwise, we only sec. It is simply the point 
of most intimate contact with reality, and all the pride of 
knowledge is put to confusion by the fact that at the point 
where we feel reality most intimately we understand it least. 

For I never know my “own” act of knowing. I do not 
understand how it is done. I did not create the mechanism by 
which it functions. It goes on as independently of any volition 
or control on my part as the clouds moving above my head, 
or the atoms vibrating in the stones at my fect. I have to admit, 
then, that it is meaningless to say that I do it, or that I know. 
“Te” docs it; “it” knows. And this “ic”, whether as the ground 
of the mind or as the indefinable basis of what our senses 
perceive as structures and “things”, is that which articulates 
the myths, just as it articulates the shapes of trees, the structure 
of the nervous system, and every other process beyond our so- 
called conscious control.! 

The myth is revelation, consisting of “the mighty acts of 
God”, because myth wells up spontancously within the mind 

1 Though I use the word “it”, I do not wish to imply the singular number, 
or any notion of a sort of uniform “scuff” out of which all things are made. For 
that which is truly indefinable escapes every concept whatsoever. In the words 
of St. Dionysius, the father of all Christian metaphysic, “We say that he (God) 
is neither a soul, nor a mind, nor an object of knowledge... neither is he 
reason, nor thought, nor is he utterable or knowable; neither is he number, 
order, greatness, littleness, equality, inequality, likeness, nor unlikeness; neither 
does he stand or move, nor is he quiescent; neither has he power, nor is power, 
nor light; neither does he live, nor is life; neither is he being, nor everlastingness, 


nor time,... nor wisdom, nor one, nor oneness, nor divinity, nor goodness, 
... nor any other ching known to us.” Theologia Mystica, V. 


God and Satan 69 


according to the same involuntary processes which shape the 
brain itself, the foetus within the womb, and the molecular 
pattern of the clements. For myth is the complex of images 
eventually assumed by all involuntary imagination, since, 
left to itself} imagination takes on a structure in the same 
manner as the body and the brain. Thus with their fascinating 
unanimity the myths tell us that the world procecds out of the 
invisible and the unknown by articulation, by the power of the 
Word or Logos, which is “God of God, Light of Light, true 
God of true God, begotten not made, being of one substance with 
the Father; by whom (i.e. the Word) all things were made.” 

So, too, Hindu mythology maintains that everything was 
called into being by Vak, which is speech, or shabda, sound. 
Indeed, the Hindus insist that the roots of their sacred language, 
Sanskrit, are not merely the roots of verbs and nouns, but the 
roots of things themselves, which come into being by the 
utterance of the primordial words. In the Chinese tradition 
the formative principle of the world is called Tao, which 
originally meant “speech”, the creative power of the Great 
Ultimate (fai chi) which is represented by an empty circle. 
Obviously, it is impossible for the mind to recognize any 
things or structures in its experience without the ability to 
number and to name—prior to which the “objective” world is 
simply that Chaos or prima materia, which God created in the 
beginning of time. One must suppose that, for instance, to a 
cat there is not any thing to be known as a field, containing 
another distinct thing to be known as a tree. The field is just a 
state where life becomes green, and the tree where it goes up in 
such a fashion that a dog cannot follow. Before logic, before 
the recognition of orders in experience through name and 
number, there is no thought and thus no things, and it is not 
by chance that there is an etymological relation between thing 
and think, as between the equivalent Latin words res and reor, 
German Ding and denken, the Greek rbema and rheo. 

1 The Nicene Creed. 


70 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


Thus “primitive” thought is not so primitive as one might 
Suppose in perceiving a mysterious identity between things 
and their names—a perception which underlies the Hebrew 
restrictions against the utterance of yvH, the Name of God. 
The convention is equally preserved in modern socicty, where 
a man who is not classified, who has no name or belongs to no 
nation, docs not legally exist. In the same way, modern logical 
philosophy often takes the position that a term without logical 
meaning cannot correspond to any physical reality. Thus the 
term “God” is illogical in so far as it is predicated of “all” things, 
as in the sentence “All things were made by God”, for in 
strict logic that which is predicated of everything is predicated 
of nothing. It follows, then, that if “God” has no logical 
meaning, no God exists—a conclusion highly disturbing to 
theologians so long as they insist upon God as a fact, which 
exists, as distinct from the mythical symbol of a metaphysical 
reality, a no-thing, having neither existence nor non-existence. 

The moment, then, that the theologians started to explain 
God, they began to lose all contact with him. They treated the 
language of myth as the language of fact. They rationalized 
God, and degraded him to the level of a dead, fixed thing— 
dead because all things are past, inhabiting only the world of 
memory. Almost from its earliest beginnings Christian 
orthodoxy began to insist on the scientific rather than the 
metaphysical or mythical interpretation of the divine revelation. 
This was largely due to the fact that during the era in which 
Christianity arose, both the Hebrew and Gracco-Roman 
cultures were much preoccupied with a craving for salvation 
in terms of individual immortality. Both cultures had developed 
in such a way as to incrcase that vivid sense of the ego, of 
individual isolation, which—ever since—has been so peculiarly 
characteristic of the Western mentality.! 


1 Tt is often noted that the carlicr forms of both Greek and Hebrew religion 
almost ignored the problems of an individual survival of death. The places of 
the departed, the Greek Hades and the Hebrew Sheol, were realms where the 


God and Satan 71 


To the extent that the human mind identifies itself with the 
individual ego, it is confusing its life with its past since the 
ego is an abstraction from memory. Hence history and facts 
become more valuable than reality. Because the ego and its 
values have no real life, the real present becomes empty, and 
existence a perpetual disappointment, so that man lives on hope 
and prizes nothing more than continuity. In this general 
misplacement of value God, too, becomes a fact, a historical 
entity, since past and fixed facts seem now more real, more 
certain and sure than anything else. 

It is at this point, too, that God is identified with Absolute 
Goodness, with morality. For goodness, in this sense, is the 
kind of action which we know by memory and experience, 
as a matter of fact, to lead to survival. The good can always be 
recognized because it is simply the abstract name for positive 
content of memory, and “good action” is the law, the method 
of returning more and more to the safe ground we have known. 
Morality is the wisdom of experience, of memory, which 
cannot tell us how to live, but only how to go on being dead. 
This is why even St. Paul insists again and again that the 
Law of Moses cannot give life, that a goodness which is the 
mere obedience of a precept always presupposes and fosters its 
own opposite—evil and sin. “For when we were in the flesh 
(i.e. the world of fact), the motions of sins, which were by the 
law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death. 
But now we are delivered from the law, that being dead 
dead continued only as shadows and memorics. Thus Hades and Shcol were 
“the past”, so that beyond death there was no expectation of any real life for the 
individual. Early Hebraism distinguished between ncfesb, the individual soul, 
and ruach, the spirit, which God had originally breathed into Adam. At death 
the body returned to the dust, the ncfesh to Sheol, but the rach, being essentially 
divine, was reabsorbed in God. See Ecclesiastes 12: 7. It was not unul some two 
centuries before Christ that the Hebrew mind became concerned with individual 
immortality, conceived not merely as the survival of the afesh, but as resurrection, 
in which the body was restored as well as the soul. Even while Christ was alive, 


however, the powerful sect of the Sadducees was opposed to the resurrection 
doctrine. 


72 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


wherein we were held, in order that we should serve in newness 
of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter.”! 

For in the world of fact and past experience good and evil are 
as relative to one another as pleasure and pain. The good which 
we remember is recognized in contrast with the evil which we 
remember. Without evil good cannot be recognized. Therefore, 
as the mind ever returns to the good which it has known, it 
necessarily re-creates the evil—not only because the two are 
mutually related, but even more because the remembered good 
is a dead good, breeding evil as its particular corruption. The 
good which is not in relation to evil is always a grace unsought, 
a gift unsolicited, for—as with happiness—the act of reaching 
for it pushes it away. Naturally, however, the mind which is 
ever seeking more and more of the remembered good docs not 
intend to re-create the evil. For such a mind is self-deceived, 
confusing itself with its past, its life with its death, and thus 
does not realize that it condemns itself to action in a mechanical 
repetitive circle. When, therefore, such a mind conceives its 
rationalized, moralistic God, this God must of necessity be 
accompanied by a Devil whom he does not intend to create. 
Furthermore, the whole art of this Devil will lic in deception, 
and the whole problem of evil will be lost in unfathomable 
mystery. For the origination of evil is a problem and a mystery 
because man identifies himself with his past, and docs not 
realize it. : 

Yet a myth is an extraordinarily difficult thing to kill, for it 
continues to be devastatingly revealing even when one has 
tampered with it, and changed its form by rationalistic or 
moralistic interpretation. We have suggested that the Devil 
is in many ways the most significant figure in the whole Catho- 
lic myth, bearing in mind that the Christian Devil is the 
product of Catholic moral philosophy, working upon the 
earlier Hebrew myth of the Dark Angel who simply personifies 
the wrathful aspect of God. For the theological Devil is a 


1 Romans 7: 5-6. 


God and Satan 73 


symbol which, without any conscious intention, reveals the 
whole confusion of the mentality which produced it. 

The story of the Fall of Adam foreshadows what the later 
myth of the Fall of Lucifer makes vividly clear—that the 
mentality which produces them is one increasingly confused 
by self-consciousness. No sooner do Adam and Eve eat the 
fruit of the Tree than they become painfully aware of their 
nakedness; the shame and the awkwardness of the self: 
conscious mentality is here revealed in its beginnings. With 
the Fall of Lucifer this predicament has become far more 
appalling. The theological myth states that Lucifer fell because 
he loved himself more than God, because he became in- 
fatuated with his own created beauty. Consequently the 
essence of all malice is equated with love of self, as distinct 
from love of God. 

But the confusion of the self-conscious mentality is its 
failure to see that it is not really self-conscious at all. It is a 
mentality baffled by what is, in itself, the marvelous and 
indispensable gift of memory. Upon memory rest all the 
achievements of human culture. Yet it is not really so surprising 
that the human memory should be a source of confusion—for 
the very reason that it is so clear, so sensitive, and so retentive 
that it can create the most persuasive illusions of reality. To the 
extent that they are recognized as illusions, memory serves us 
well—just as the mirror serves us well when we do not confuse 
the reMection with the thing reAected. But when what is 
remembered is mistaken for what is, for reality, we are as 
confused as if we were trying to drive a car looking only into 
the rear-vision mirror. 

For theology there is, then, a very deep mystcry in Lucifer’s 
origination of evil. The Christian consciousness cannot 
understand Lucifcr’s mistake because it is making the same 
mistake itself. It thinks that it is self-conscious, and that it can 
commit the evil of self-love. But in actuality the “self” which 
we know and love is not the self at all. It is the trace, the echo, 


74 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


of the self in memory, from which all life, all selfhood, departs 
in the moment that we become aware of it. Self-consciousness 
is thus a feat as impossible as kissing one’s own lips. 

So long as this mistake remains undetected, the mind is 
condemned to wander in a veritable maze of illusions and 
shams. Even in its most heroic efforts to be genuine and honest 
it is self-deceived, and this comes out nowhere more clearly 
than in the urgency with which the Christian consciousness 
struggles to repent and to be truly contrite—to transform its 
own will. For the self which we perceive in memory and take 
for our own is always a liar, and nowhere more so than when 
it says that it is a liar. The reason is simply that self-conscious- 
ness is itself a lie, a deception, in that it is not truce. When, 
therefore, the penitent says, “I am a sinner”, his statement 
is as problematic as the famous paradox of Eubulides, “I am 
lying”—a statement which is false if it is true. The problem in 
the “I am lying” paradox is that one is trying to make a state- 
ment about the statement one is making—which is impossible. 
Similarly one cannot think about the thought once is thinking, 
or know the self which is knowing. The mind falls for this 
kind of nonsense only because memory provides the convincing 
illusion of achieving the impossible. Thus the Christian peni- 
tent is always tormented by his inability to repent honestly—to 
achieve a contrition which is genuine, and which does not 
have the same motivation as the sin. Perpetually he finds that 
his will mocks him with masks, that the honest act of the will 
has a dishonest intent, for ever and for ever in an exasperating 
infinite regression. 

Thus it is not at all surprising that the Christian mentality 
is profoundly haunted by the Devil, for it finds the Liar 
everywhere—even in admitting the lie. No one is more acutely 
aware of his sinfulness than the Christian saint, because he 
realizes that he is proud of his humility—and worse, proud 
because subtle enough to realize that he is proud. Obviously, 
then, the Devil is credited with an almost infinite intelligence 


God and Satan 75 


for subtle falsification, whereas in truth this is not subtlety at 
all, but merely the endless maze of confusion resulting from 
an unperceived mistake. 

In the end we must face the inevitable conclusion that the 
most deceptive of all the masks of the Liar is the very figure of 
the absolutely righteous God. Not infrequently, Christians 
have had the uncomfortable intuition that the theological God 
is a monster and a bore. Men are commanded to forgive the 
offences of their brethren even when they are repeated until 
“seventy times seven”, but God does not forgive one offence 
save on the condition that you repent and grovel. Men are 
taught that it is an evil to do good works in order to be praised, 
but the moralists’ God demands to be praised for ever and ever. 
Men are taught that the very essence of evil lies in egotism and 
selfishness, but the Lord is entitled to bluster, “I am the Lord, 
and there is none else! Me only shalt thou serve!”’ and is, 
furthermore, said to have been occupied from all eternity with 
nothing but the love and contemplation of his own excellence. 
Granting even that the excellence of God is such that it is a 
“which than which there is no whicher”, so that there is 
nothing more admirable to contemplate, even for God himself, 
the whole concept is profoundly monstrous unless there can be 
one redeeming condition. 

This condition is that God may remain eternally surprised at 
himself, eternally a mystery to himself, so that he is genuinely 
amazed at his own glory, so that he does not know how he 
manages to be God. “Let not your left hand know what your 
right hand doeth.” Only this will free God from the vicious 
circle of the great lie. God is only lovable if he is not pretending 
to be self-conscious—to be impossible. Fortunately, the purely 
mythological God fulfils this condition. He creates the world, 
and then—surprise!—sees that it is good. But in devising the 
theological God, the theologians let their logic run away with 
their sanity. God had to be omnipotent and omniscient, and 
so it seemed illogical that he should not have the most absolute 


76 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


knowledge and control of himself: Yet, after all, it was at this 
point that their logic crashed along with their sanity. If God 
has to control himself, he is not God. If he has to know, to 
illumine, himself, he is not light. And a God who does not 
perform the contradiction of knowing himself as an object is 
still omniscient, knowing all things, since he himself is not in 
the class of things. 

As we have scen, the myth of necessity reveals God in the 
human image—since no higher image is available. But the 
image of God is always modified by the kind of man, the type 
of mentality, in whose terms it is cast. Thus the image of the 
Christian God is in terms of the Western and Christian 
mentality—a type of human consciousness which is to an 
extraordinary degree “split” into “I” and “me”. Three of the 
greatest moulders of Christianity—St. Paul, St. Augustine, 
and Martin Luther—were aware of the problems and contra- 
dictions of self-consciousness almost to the point of torment, 
and yet never perceived the underlying fallacy upon which the 
illusion is based. 

As a result Christianity has not been able to deliver the 
Western world from the split-mindedness, the schizophrenia, 
which renders it such a danger to human culture as a whole, 
the more so since it is equipped with immense technological 
power. On the contrary, Christianity has been expounded by 
an orthodox hierarchy which has consistently degraded the 
myth to a science and a history, and resisted the metaphysical 
interpretation which other great orthodox traditions have 
always allowed. Thus “theologized”, the myth is unable to 


1 It does seem strange that, to the best of my knowledge, theologians have 
overlooked this point, in view of their handling of analogous problems relating 
to the divine omnipotence. When asked, “Could God make himself cease to 
exist?” they have always replicd that the question is nonsense, in that it asks 
whether Being could be the same as Nothing. The same reply—that the question 
is nonsense—should have been given to the question, “Docs God, or can God, 
know himself2” The failure to give the same answer is, of course, due to the fact 
that the theologians thought that they knew themselves. 


God and Satan 77 


liberate Western man from history, from the fatal circle of a 
past which repeats itself faster and faster, from a life which 
loses all touch with reality in its increasing absorption in the 
arid fantasies of abstraction. For the living God has become 
the abstract God, and cannot deliver his creatures from the 
disease with which he is himself afflicted. 

Though the human being is an organism which exists only 
in terms of a marvelously intricate and intimate relationship 
with its social and natural environment, the Western conscious- 
ness feels itself to exist primarily as the ego—a dissociated 
island of awareness, detached from the very body which it 
inhabits, let alone the environment. It follows, then, that the 
Western God is likewise a discarnate ego—a detached soul!— 
existing in total separation from the physical universe just as 
Western man feels himself to be separate from his own body. 

Furthermore the division of the human mind into “I” and 
“me” presents the problem of self-control in such a way as to 
lead to endless confusion—since the human being tries to 
dominate and regulate his emotions and actions, which are 
concrete, with the force of an ego and will, which is purely 
abstract. As a result, man is thrown into a state of conflict with 
himself which can never be resolved in the terms in which it 
« £ * 6Cyos ° 
is proposed. Good-intentioned “I” wrestles with wayward 
“me” like a rider on an unbroken horse. “I keep under my 
body, and bring it into subjection; lest that by any means, 
when I have preached to others, I myself should be a cast- 

1 Primitive Christianity (St. Paul) had a trichotomous conception of man’s 
nature, such that he was held to consist not only of body (soma) and soul 
(psyche, nefesh), but also of spirit (pueuna, ruach). It is very clear that spiric was 
something of a supra-individual nature—a divine element transcending the ego. 
With the development of Christian theology the distinction between soul and 
spirit was virtually obliterated, so that as spirit became identified with soul the 
whole supernatural order became identified with the merely psychic—i.e. the 
world of things existing on a higher level or in a more subtle state than material 
bodies. The conception of God underwent the same degradation. God became 


naturalized, and fell from the rank of a metaphysical reality to that of a psychic 
being, a cosmic ego. 


78 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


away.”! But this conflict between “I” and “me” is not so much 
a sclf-consciousness as an unconsciousness—a failure to sec that 
the righteousness of “I” has the same motivation as the sinful- 
ness of “me”, both alike being attempts to save, to continue, 
myself—the illusory abstraction from memory. 

This conflict is reflected in the irreconcilable war between 
God and Satan, where the absolutely righteous God is, after all, 
the final mask of the Devil—just as the “good” motives of “T” 
are a disguising of the “selfish” motives of “me”. The myth 
itself contains a number of strong hints as to the ultimate 
identity of God and Satan, but this is the one thing to which 
the theological interpretation is most resolutely opposed— 
because it coincides with the special blind-spot of the Western 
mind. For the Christian consciousness has always taken a 
peculiar delight in judging and condemning, in having a 
“scape-goat” upon which to vent the full fury of its indignation. 
Yet this familiar psychological mechanism is easily recognized 
as the “protest complex”, whereby the insincerity of one’s 
motives is conveniently hidden by violent condemnation of 
the same insincerity in others. Nothing advertizes the inner 
identity of God and Satan so much as the uncompromising 
enthusiasm wherewith the partisans of God do battle with 
their Satanic enemies. 

But the myth itself belies the theology. Reconsider the 
Preface of the Cross from the Roman Missal: 


Who didst set the salvation of mankind upon the 
Tree of the Cross, so that whence came death, thence also 
life might rise again, so that he who by the Tree was 
vanquisher might also by the Tree be vanquished, 
through Christ our Lord. 


The poison of evil and death comes into the world, into the 
heart of the First Adam, through the Serpent on the Tree. 
Healing comes through the Second Adam, Christ crucified 


1 Corinthians 9: 27. 


God and Satan 79 


FIG, 2 ENGRAVED GEM FROM AN EARLY CIIRISTIAN RING 
(After Didron) 


on the Tree of the Cross—of which Christian imagery 
discovers a “type” in nebsshtan, the brazen serpent which 
Moses erected in the wilderness so that all who looked upon it 
were delivered from a plague of serpents. The process is homoco- 
pathic—similia similibus curantur, likes are healed by likes. 

Let us remember, also, the myth which identifies the Wood 
of the Cross with the staff or beam taken from the Tree of Eden, 
so that the Cross which is medicina mundi is of the same Tree 
which bore the fruit of knowledge, the poison of death. 

Now the serpent-and-tree is a common mythological theme, 
for one calls to mind not only the World Ash, Yggdrasil, of 
Norse mythology, with the worm Nidhug at its roots, but 
more particularly the Kundalini symbolism of Hindu Yoga. 
One thinks, too, of the Acsculapian symbol of the Caduceus, 
of the two serpents entwined about the rod—one of poison and 
the other of healing—a symbol which passed into Christianity 


1 The identification of Christ with the sebushtan-serpent is based on 
Jobn 3: 14, “As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the 
Son of Man be lifted up.” Thus Christian art often employs the motif of the 
serpent on the cross as an emblem of Christ. See the engraved stone from Gori’s 
Thes. Diptych., vol. iii, p. 160, reproduced also in Lowric’s Art in the Early 
Church, pl. 33a (New York, 1947). Cf Tertullian, De Idolatria, iti; also St. 
Ambrose, De Spiritu Sancto, iii. 9, “Imago enim crucis aereus serpens est: qui 
Proprius erat typus corporis Christi: ut quicunque in cum aspicerct, non periret.” 


80 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


when it was adopted for the bishop’s pastoral staff in the 
Eastern Churches.! 

In the symbolism of Kundalini-Yoga the “tree” is the 
human spine considered as a flowering plant. At the top, 
within the head, is the thousand-petalled lotus sabasrara, 
emblem of the sun beneath the dome of the firmament, arche- 
type of the skull, since here as in almost all mythologies man is 
seen as the universe in miniature. At the root of the spinal-tree, 
at the sexual organs, there sleeps the serpent Kundalini 
entwined about the phallus. So long as the serpent remains at 
the root of the tree, asleep, man is “fallen”; that is to say, his 
divine consciousness is asleep, involved in the darkness of 
mayd, since at this stage the divine has identified itself with the 
finite world. But when the divine consciousness awakens, 
Kundalini ascends the tree and passes up to the thousand- 
petalled lotus in the head. 

Thus the serpent has two roles, which, in Hindu mythology, 
correspond to the two “movements” in the eternal play (lila) of 
God: the one where God (Vishnu) sleeps, and dreams that he 
is the multiplicity of individual beings, and the other where 
God awakens and realizes his proper divinity. Downward 
in the roots, the serpent is the divine One asleep, enchanted by 
his own spell; upward in the sun-lotus, the serpent is the same 
divine One disenchanted, free from the illusion that he is 
divided into many “things”. Therefore the dual role of the 
serpent in Christian mythology might suggest the same idea— 
that Lucifer and Christ are two distinct operations of the 
Divine, respectively the “wrath” and the love of God, the 


1 See British Museum, Guide to the Early Christian and Byzantine Antiquities 
(London, 1903), p. 87. Possibly the crook-shaped pastoral-staff of the Western 
Church has a similar origin, for it closely resembles the serpentine lituus, or 
divining-rod, shown in an Etruscan sculpture reproduced in Murray’s 
Dictionary of Christian Antiquities, vol. ii, p. 1566—an object which, again, 
resembles the official “sceptre” or nyoi carried by Buddhist abbots in the Far 
East. One must recollect the story that, as a sign of the powcr of God, Moses’ 
staff was changed into a serpent to confound the Egyptian magicians. 


God and Satan 81 


shadow and light of the world drama. Interpreted in this 
fashion, the Fall would stand for man’s forgetting of his 
divine nature, for involvement in the illusion of individuality. 
Salvation would be the recollection (anamnesis) of his divinity, 
the awakening or birth of Godhead in man. 

But, as one can only expect, theology will admit nothing of 
this kind, since it 1s the product of a mentality still very much 
under the spell of illusion. Yet, as a result, whole areas of 
Christian dogma do not make sense, or, at least, sense only of a 
very tortuous kind. If it is maintained, for example, that the 
Fall of Adam involves the whole human race, this is only 
because Adam—Man—is inclusive of cach particular man. 
Contrariwise, there can only be Redemption for the human 
race if Christ, the Second Adam, is likewise inclusive of each 
particular man—if the Incarnation of God in the man Jesus is 
representative of God in every man, as Adam represents 
Lucifer inevery man. Yet, with rare exceptions, the theologians 
insist that the Godhead is incarnate in one man only—the 
historical Jesus. This confinement of the Incarnation to a 
unique event in the historical past thus renders the myth “dead” 
and ineffective for the present. For when myth is confused with 
history, it ceases to apply to man’s inner life. Myth is only 
“revelation” so long as it is a message from heaven—that is, 
fromthe timeless and non-historical world—expressing not what 
was truc once, but what is true always. Thus the Incarnation is 
without effect or significance for human beings living today if it 
is mere history; it is a “salvific truth” only if it is perennial, a 
revelation of a timeless event going on within man always.! 


1 This problem will be discussed more fully when we come to the proper 
part of the story. The orthodox theological explanation of how the race is saved 
by the Incarnation of God in Christ is peculiarly confused, because the myth 
was rationalized according to the inadequate categories of Greek philosophy. 
Thus when God became man, he was held to have united himself with human 
nature, but not with any human person, since Christ was human in nature, but 
divine as to his person. Consequently, God has united himself with the nature 
of each man, but not with the person of each man. This would make sense if 
theology would go on to state that the person (nefesh, psyche, soul) is not the real 


82 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


Stull more repugnant to the theologians is the perception of 
the divine in Lucifer, the realization that the two serpents are 
one—Lucifer in descent and Christ in ascent. The nearest 
which the Church approaches to anything of this kind is the 
embarrassing passage which is sung on Holy Saturday at the 
blessing of the Paschal Candle: 


O truly necessary (certe necessarium) sin of Adam, 
which the death of Christ has blotted out. O happy 
fault (O felix culpa), which merited such and so great 
a Redeemer. 


With this one might compare the words of Isaiah 45: 7, “Iam 
the Lord and there is none else. I form the light and create the 
darkness; I make peace and create evil. I, the Lord, do all these 
things.” 

The tragedy of Christian history is that it is a consistent 
failure to draw the life from the Christian myth and unlock 
its wisdom. This whole failure is epitomized in the problem 
of Lucifer, who should have remained the symbol, not of 
“deliberate malice”, but of the necessary “dark side” of life, of 
shadow revealing light by contrast, of darkness as the Light 
(Iuci-) Bearer (fer). He would correspond to what the Chinese 
call yin as distinct from yang, the dark, negative, and feminine 
aspect of life, in complementary opposition to the light, 
positive, and masculine—the two represented together as the 
interlocked commas or fish, one black and one white, one 
ascending and one descending. In the West, this same symbol 
man, but only the abstract and illusory man. But it takes the very opposite 
standpoint, and insists that it is the psyche precisely which has to be saved, and 
since this is that part of man’s being which Christ did sot assume, the salvation 
of the soul remains an impossibility. Yet the Gospels do not actually propose 
the salvation cf the psyche. Cf Jon 8: 21, “Whither I go, ye cannot come”, and 
thus to ascend to heaven man must “deny himself” (fark 8: 34) because “no 
man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even 
the Son of Man which is in heaven”. (Jobn 3: 13.) Similarly, in Matthew 16: 25, 


“Whosoever wouldsave his psyche shall lose it”; andin Luke 14: 26, “Ifany man 
cometo me, andhatenot.. . hisown psyche also, he cannot be my disciple.” 


God and Satan 83 


() 


FIG. 3 DESICN FROM AN ENGRAVED CGEM IN TIIE BRITISIL MUSEUM 


(Early Christian) The two birds suggest Mundaka Upanishad, 3. 1. 1., “Two 

birds, fast bound companions, clasp close the self-same tree. Of these two, the 

one eats sweet fruit; the other looks on without eating.” (T:s. Hume.) These 

birds, in the Hindu figure, are respectively the jiva (ego) and the atman (true 
Self), the spirit enchanted and disenchanted. 


is found as the zodiacal sign of Pisces, and the two opposed 
fishes are a common motif of early Christian gems—Christ 
himself being the ascending fish. 

A truly problematic evil arises in human life when the 
necessary dark side of existence is not accepted and “loved” 
along with the light—that is, when the human mind sets itself 
such goals as the total retention of pleasure and the total 
elimination of pain. Paradoxically, devilish behaviour is the 
necessary consequence of not coming to terms with Lucifer, 
of refusing to admit that life is willy-nilly a coincidence of 
opposites. Thus, in the complex picture of Christian mytho- 
logy, Lucifer has a double role. He is the necessary negative or 


1 Serpent and fish are often mythological equivalents, being alike legless. 
The Greek ixeyc, by a play on the letters, suggested Christ, since each letter 
would be the initial letters of the phrase 1uCcoyc (Jesus) xP1cToc (Christ) 
yloc (Son) oEoY (of God) cwTup (Saviour). But, as Austin Farrer remarks 
in his Rebirth of Images, “The name ixeyc for Christ was also a play on leteers, 
but it would not have been made unless the result had appeared to mean 
something.” p. 64 n. 


84 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


dark aspect of life, personifying the “wrath” of God—the dark 
angel Sammavcl. He is also the Liar, the illusion of sclf- 
consciousness and self-love, personifying the mistake, the 
missing-of-the-mark,! which the human mind has made in 
confusing its identity with a “self” abstracted from memory. 
In both roles he is a “disguise” of God. In manifesting a 
universe of relativity, the metaphysical “absolute”, the unde- 
fined, appears as the defined, and positive is defined in relation 
to negative, life in relation to death, light in relation to darkness 
—God appearing as two-faced like Janus. In becoming 
“enchanted” or identified with the abstract and illusory self, 
that which suffers the enchantment is the ever-unknown 
“ground” of the human mind—the ruach or pneuma—which is 
always divine in principle, and which never “really” becomes 
the individual save in seeming, in dream. Thus Lucifer is God 
seeming to be self-conscious, to be an ego, an individualized thing. 

Both these senses of the myth have been missed by Christian 
theology, so that what is now personified or symbolized by the 
theological Satan is not one of the aspects of God but the very 
illusion of “self”, in which orthodox Christianity most 
fervently believes. After all, it is not so surprising that that 
which it professes to hate most enthusiastically turns out to be 
identical with the ideal which it tries to love, the monstrously 
righteous God. Such predicaments are the inevitable penalty 
for the pursuit of a mirage, or for running after a shadow. For 
the zeal with which you follow measures the speed with which 
it eludes your grasp. 

In sum, then, the tragedy of Christianity is the confusion 
of its myth with history and fact. For this is the realm of the 
abstract and the dead—of the sceming self. Degraded to this 
realm, Christ and Lucifer alike became images of the ego, of 
the past and dead man who does not liberate but only binds. 
For this predicament the myth gocs on to offer its own un- 
heeded solution. 

1 To miss the mark is the original meaning of &yxpz4ve, to sin. 


& 
a4 
Zs 
3 
2 


CHAPTER III 


Advent 


Fro the very beginning, of course, the Lord God had fore- 
seen what Lucifer and Adam would do, and that by their 
disobedience the whole universe would become subject to 
death and corruption. Therefore in the secret counsels of his 
wisdom he had already prepared the remedy, which was to 
consist in the extraordinary act of descending into his own 
creation, becoming himself a creature—man—and, by making 
the life and death of created being his own, deliver it from the 
curse. For in taking the risk of creating beings with freedom 
of action, the Lord God was prepared to suffer the risk himself, 
and to experience the whole burden of anguish which it 
would involve. This is the real reason for the Christian’s 
veneration of Christ. It is not simply that he is a great teacher, 
wonder-worker, and exemplar, but much rather that Christ is 
God himself sharing the fate of his erring creatures. 

For the modern Protestant, who begins to learn his religion 

85 


86 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


from Bible stories, there is a very jong interval between the 
Fall of Adam and the Birth of Christ, because a large part of 
his religious education consists in learning the story of the 
Old Testament—so much so that there are many respects in 
which Protestantism is often more of a Hebraism than a 
Christianity. But in traditional Christianity the religion is 
Icarned less from the Bible than from the cycle of the Christian 
Year, which is a ritual re-living of the life of Christ. Within 
this cycle the events of the Old Testament are interwoven in 
such a way that they form, not a continuous story, but a system 
of oracles or prophecies. 

From this point of view, history begins with Adam and 
begins again with Christ, so much so that what happens in 
between occurs within an epoch of darkness wherein God is 
known only through “types and shadows”. That is to say, the 
Old Testament—the Law of Moses, the Prophets, and the 
history of Israel—is significant to the Catholic mind only 
because it is a symbolical foreshadowing of Christ. Thus the 
Old Testament stories enter into the Christian story in so far as 
they seem appropriate “types” of the various “mysteries” of the 
life of Christ which are celebrated through the course of the 
Christian Year. As an excellent example of the way in which 
the Old Testament is used as a source-book of typology, the 
reader should turn to the Liturgy of Holy Saturday in the 
Roman Missal and go through the section entitled “The 
Prophecies”, noting how both events and actual quotations 
from the Prophets are used as a prefiguring of the Christian 
mysterics.! 

1 The reader will find it much to his advantage to have a copy of the Roman 
Missal available for reference as he goes through this book. Very inexpensive 
editions are available, but he should be careful to acquire the Daily Missal and 
not the Sunday Missal, since the latter is very much abridged. The Missal is 
divided into the following sections: (1) the Ordinary of the Mass, consisting of 
the unchanging parts of the Mass which are recited daily; (2) the Proper of the 
Time, consisting of the parts of the liturgy appropriate to the seasons of the 


Christian Year; (3) the Proper of the Saints, consisting of the variable parts of 
the Mass recited on the feasts of the saints; (4) the Common of Saints, consisting 


Advent 87 


It must be understood that with the Fall of the Angels and of 
Man the whole created universe of time and space, material 
and immaterial, became corrupt—so much so that at one 
period the deeds of men became so evil that the Lord God sent 
a flood upon the earth which destroyed all except Noah and 
his family, who floated upon the waters in an Ark built at 
the commandment of God. For Christianity, the Ark of Noah 
is naturally a type of the Church—the Nave or Ship of 
Salvation, wherein men are saved from the Flood of everlasting 
damnation. However, when God the Son came into the 
world as Jesus of Nazareth, the universe was redeemed from 
this curse, and time itself became holy so that the very years 
are reckoned from his birth—Arnto Domini, in the Year of the 
Lord. Furthermore, the seasons of the year are themselves 
transformed from the pagan Spring, Summer, Autumn, and 
Winter to the Christian Advent, Christmas, Epiphany, Lent, 
Passiontide, Easter, and Pentecost. 

However, because the sun itself in both its daily and annual 
course is seen as a type of Christ, the Sun of Justice, the 
Christian Year is rather significantly integrated with the cycle 
of the sun. The Christian Year begins about four weeks before 
Christmas, which coincides approximately with the Winter 
Solstice—the time when, in the Northern Hemisphcre, the 
sun is at its lowest meridian and is about to begin once more 
its upward journey to the midheaven. Anciently this time was 
sometimes known as the Birth of the Sun, being, as it were, 
the midnight of the year, from which point the sun begins to 
rise. According to tradition, then, Christ was born at midnight 
at the Winter Solstice. 


of Masses for certain general types of saints rather than particular individuals; 
(5) Votive Masses for special needs and occasions; (6) Masses for the Dead. 
The Liturgy of Holy Saturday will be found undcr (2), the Proper of the Time. 
It might also be useful to the reader to have available a translation of the 
Breviary. For this purpose I would suggest cither The Short Breviary (St. John’s 
Abbey, Collegeville, Minn.) or The Monastic Diurnal (Oxford University Press, 
London, 1940). 


88 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


The Vernal Equinox, corresponding in the daily cycle to 
sunrise, is the approximate scason of Easter, the feast of Christ’s 
Resurrection, the actual day of Easter being the Sunday 
following the first full moon after the Vernal Equinox. As the 
sun climbs to the midheaven after the equinox, the Church 
celebrates—forty days later—the Ascension of Christ into 
heaven, and in another ten days Pentecost or Whitsunday, the 
feast of the descent of the Fire of the Holy Spirit upon the 
Church. The solar symbolism is obvious, except that the 
Church keeps no seasonal feast at the Summer Solstice, and 
observes only the course of the sun in its rising. The other half 
of the year is mostly occupied by the somewhat formless scason 
of “Sundays after Pentecost”, which end only at the beginning 
of Advent, and during which the Church rehearses the 
ministry and the miracles of Christ upon earth. 

Christianity in practice is therefore the annual reliving of 
the Christ-life, symbol of the union of the Christian with 
Christ in his birth, his labor, his passion, his resurrection, and 
his ascension in glory. Other concepts of Christianity-in- 
practice are post-mythical, being of a rationalized, historical, 
and moralistic character, and are thus beyond the concern of a 
study of Christian Mythology. In its Protestant form Christi 
anity is increasingly rationalized, and, with the exception of 
Christmas and Easter, the Christian Year is almost wholly 
forgotten. In this conception, Christianity is no longer a 
symbolical re-living of the Christ-life, but rather an imitation 
of his character based on a reading of the Gospels as history 
and biography—to the exclusion of all miraculous and 
mythological elements. 

Thus the Christian Year introduces its presentation of the 
Christian life with the season of Advent, which, to some 
extent, corresponds with the “historically” vast period between 


1 The story is told of a Scotch Presbyterian minister receiving a letter from a 
Catholic priest, dated January 17th, St. Anthony's Day, and replying with a 
letter dated, January 20th, Washing Day. 


Advent 89 


the Fall of Man and the Birth of Christ. Strictly speaking, 
Advent has a double theme. It corresponds to the epoch 
between the Fall and the Incarnation in so far as it is a prepara- 
tion for Christmas, a season of longing for the appearance of 
the Redeemer who will save the world from the Fall and its 
curse. But, by analogy, it looks forward also to the Second 
Coming of Christ at the end of time, “to judge the living 
and the dead and the world by fire”. For our purposes, 
however, we must relegate this event to the end of the story, 
and consider Advent as the season of preparation for Christmas, 
when the Church casts its mind back to the time before the 
first Christmas, and shares the longing of the fallen universe 
for release from its darkness. 


O Day-spring, Brightness of the Light eternal, 
and Sun of Justice, come and enlighten those who 
sit in darkness and the shadow of death.! 


At such a time, then, it is appropriate to remember the Age 
of Wandering, as the time between Adam and Christ was 
called, during which the Lord God raised up a Chosen People 
to be a type of the Church and to prepare the world by 
prophecy for the coming of the Saviour. Thus, during the 


1The Great Antiphon, O Oriens, sung during Advent at Vespers on 
December 21st. From the Breviary. In addition to the annual “hallowing of 
time” by means of the Christian Year, there is also a diurnal time-hallowing by 
means of the Hours of Prayer to be found in the Breviary as distinct from the 
Missal. This is why the shorter form of the Breviary, excluding the night-time 
service of Mattins, is often called the Diurnal or Book of Hours. The Offices or 
Canonical Hours, as these services of prayer are called, are as follows: 


Prime, between 3 and 6 a.m. 
Lauds, immediately follows. 
Terce, between 6 and 9 a.m. 
Sext, between 9 a.m. and Noon. 
None, between Noon and 3 p.m. 
Vespers, between 3 and 6 p.m. 
Compline, about 9 p.m. 


90 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


second week of Advent, the Mass opens with the words of the 
prophet: 
People of Sion (Jerusalem), behold the Lord shall 
come to save the nations; and the Lord shall make 
the glory of his voice to be heard in the joy of your 
heart. (Introit, from Isaiah 30.) 


As the liturgy goes on, the same theme recurs— 


Out of Sion, the loveliness of his beauty, God shall 
come manifestly. (Gradual.) 

Arise, O Jerusalem, and stand on high, and be- 
hold the joy that cometh to thee from thy God. 
(Communto.) 


At the same time the Epistle for the Day, from Romans, begins 
with St. Paul’s words on the Old Testament: “Whatsoever 
things were written aforetime were written for our learning, 
that, through patience and strengthening of the Scriptures, we 
might have hope.” Seeing, then, the entire Old Testament as 
the hope of Christ, the mind of the Church goes back again 
to the beginning of the world, and calls upon Sophia, the 
Divine Wisdom, the Word, to reform the universe of which 
he was at first the ideal form: 


O Wisdom, who came forth out of the mouth of 
the Most High, and reachest from one end to 
another, mightily and sweetly ordering all things; 
come and teach us the way of prudence.! 


In this light the entire story of the generations of Adam and of 

the Chosen People, from the Fall through Abraham and 

Moses to the Return from Babylon, is seen as a rehearsal in 

shadow-play for the manifestation of Christ. We saw that the 

very events of the Fall—the Serpent, the Tree, and its Fruit— 

were the reverse reHection of Christ’s Passion. Thus, even 
1 Great Antiphon at Vespers, December 17th. 


Advent 9I 


though they laboured under the darkness of evil, the actions of 
men and angels could not help but resemble, in however 
distorted a fashion, the pattern of the Christ-life upon which 
the universe was originally designed. 

The discreditable incident of the two sons of Adam, Cain 
and Abel, was a prefiguring of the Old Israel and the New. 
For both sons offered sacrifice to the Lord God, and when 
Abel’s was accepted and Cain’s refused, Cain slew his brother 
as, in a later time, the Jews crucified Christ—so that Cain’s 
unacceptable sacrifice was a type of those ancient offerings of 
bulls and goats which did not cleanse the Chosen People 
from sin, while Abel’s sacrifice foreshadowed the perfect and 
acceptable sacrifice of Christ. The mysterious assumption of 
the patriarch Enoch into heaven prefigured the Ascension of 
Christ, while Jesus as the High Priest of Heaven was fore- 
shadowed in the remote figure of Melchizedek, King of Salem, 
who “brought forth bread and wine” and made offerings to 
“the most high God”. 

The patriarch Abraham, as father of the Hebrew people, 
is a type of God the Father, and his barren wife Sarah who 
miraculously gave birth to Isaac are respectively types of Mary 
and Jesus—a symbolism further suggested by Abraham’s 
willingness to offer Isaac as a sacrifice when commanded by 
God to do so.! The twelve sons of Jacob or Israel—grandsons 
of Abraham—from whom were descended the twelve tribes 
of Israel, stand for the Twelve Apostles of Christ, from whom 
the Church is descended.” 

Much of this typology centers around the whole history of 
the descent and enslavement of the children of Israel in Egypt, 
their deliverance by Moses, and their journeying through the 
wilderness to the Promised Land. The descent into Egypt 
prefigures both the flight of Joseph and Mary into Egypt to 
escape from Herod with the child Jesus, and the descent of 
Christ into Hades after his crucifixion.2 The Exodus, the 


1 Genesis 18: 1-16; 22: I-13. 2 Genesis 3§: 16-26. 3 Genesis 46. 


92 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


deliverance from Egypt, finds Moses in the role of Christ, and 
represents both the salvation of the human race from the 
Kingdom of Satan and the Resurrection of Christ from death. 
In particular this typology centers around the Passover Feast. 
The Latin term for Easter is Pascha, from the Hebrew Pesach), 
the Passover, and the first Passover was the immediate occasion 
of the deliverance of Israel from Egypt. The sacrifice of Christ 
is seen in the sacrifice of the paschal lamb, whose blood was 
spread upon the door-posts of the Israelites to deliver them 
from the Destroying Angel, who was to slay the sons of the 
Egyptians. This terrible visitation persuaded the Egyptian 
king to release the enslaved people, and their miraculous escape 
across the Red Sea is the figure of Christ’s Resurrection. 


Ad regias Agni dapes, 

Stolis amicti candidis, 

Post transitam Maris Rubri, 
Christo cantamus Principi. 


At the royal feast of the Lamb, 
clothed in white robes, 

after the crossing of the Red Sea, 
we sing to Christ our Prince.? 


In general, the wanderings of the children of Israel in the 
wilderness on their way to the Promised Land, “flowing with 
milk and honey”, are taken as a type of the Church Militant— 
that is to say, in its long period of struggle between the 
Resurrection of Christ and his Second Coming, and the final 
entry into the Promised Land foreshadows the Church 
Triumphant in its final attainment of Heaven. During their 
wanderings the Chosen People are guided, in the day, by a 
pillar of cloud and, at night, by a pillar of fire—symbols of the 

1 Genesis 11-14. See also my Easter—Its Story and Meaning (New York, 1950), 


ch. 6. 
~? Vesper hymn for Eastertide, from the Breviary. 


Advent 93 


guidance of the Church by God the Holy Spirit. They are 
refreshed by water from the Rock, which Moses struck with 
his rod, typifying the sacrament of Baptism. They are fed upon 
the mysterious Manna, the bread from Heaven, which is the 
foreshadowing of the Host, the consecrated Bread of the 
Mass. They are taught by the Law revealed by God to 
Moses upon Mount Sinai, and in its turn the Church is 
taught by the doctrine of Christ delivered in the Sermon on 
the Mount.! 

The next great group of typological symbols is connected 
with David, conqueror of Jerusalem, who unified and 
stabilized the tribes of Isracl as a single kingdom after many 
years of struggle and strife in their new homeland. As David 
was the founder of the earthly kingdom of Isracl, so Christ is 
the founder of the heavenly kingdom, the fulfilment of the 
Hebrew hope for the Messiah who would restore the glories 
of the days of David. Hence the Christ, as duly prophesied, 
was born of the line of David in Bethlehem (“House of Bread”) 
where David himself was born.2 The Father of David was 
the shepherd Jesse, of whom the prophet said, in a later day, 


There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, 
and a branch shall grow out of his roots: 
and the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him.? 


And with an illuminating pun the Church takes up the 
theme in the Missal— 


Virga Jesse floruit: 
Virgo Deum et hominem genuit: 
pacem Deus reddidit, in se 
reconcilians ima summis. 
1 For the wanderings, see Exodus 16-40, Deuteronomy 1, 2, 3 and 34. Enuy 
into the Promised Land, Joslua 1-5. Incidentally, Joshua, who in the end leads 
the people into the Promised Land, is the Hebrew form of the Greek name 


Jesus. 
21 Samuel 16: 1-13. 3 [sarah vit 1-2, 


94 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


The verge of Jesse hath blossomed: 
A virgin hath brought forth God and man: 
God hath restored peace, reconciling 

in himself the highest with the lowest.! 


Naturally, David’s victory over the Philistine giant, Goliath, 
is likened to Christ’s triumph over Satan,” the fact that he 
was originally a shepherd-boy makes him a type of the 
Good Shepherd, his power of healing with music pre- 
figures Christ the Healer,? and his eventual setting up of 
the Throne of Israel in Jerusalem makes him the type of 
Christ the King, who reigns enthroned in the New Jerusalem 
on high.4 

Other figures and events from the Old Testament playing an 
important part in this scheme of typology may be listed briefly 
as follows: 


TYPE MYSTERY 

The Assumption of Elijah the Prophet;? The Ascension of Christ 
The miracles of the Prophet Elisha: [fishes 

The multiplication of the widow’s oil® |The miracle of loaves and 

Raising the Shunamite’s son’ The raising of Lazarus 
Jonah and the Whale? The Death and Resurrection 
The deliverance of Shadrach, Meshach, 

and A bed-nego in the furnace® Salvation from Hell 
Susanna and the Elders!® Persecution of the Church 

by the Jews and Pagans 

Tobias and the Fish?! The Healing Christ 


The juxtaposition of the Old Testament type and the New 
Testament mystery was always a favourite convention of 


1 Annunciation B.V.M. The Alleluia when the Feast is in Paschialtide. 


2 Samuel 17. 3: Samuel 16: 14-23. 
42 Semuel 5: 6-12. Cf. Revelation 3: 12. 5 2 Kings 2: 8-13. 
6 2 Kings 4: 1-7. 72 Kings 4: 8-37. 8 Jonah 1 and 2. 


9 Daniel 3. 10 Story of Susanna (Apoc.) 11 Tobit (Apoc.) 6: 1-8. 


Advent 95 


Christian art, as when the opposite walls of a nave would be 
painted with the related scenes from the two Testaments. Often 
they were represented side-by-side in double panels of stained 
glass, or worked together into the design of initial ornaments 
in illuminated manuscripts. 

A more general typology than this symbolism of particular 
events was connected with the two great Old Testament 
institutions of Sacrifice and the Law—institutions embodying 
the promise but not the fact of salvation. In the Old Testament 
the self-offering of man to God represented in the burning of 
bulls and goats upon the altar was, from the Christian 
standpoint, an ineffectual shadow of the only offering which 
can restore human nature to its proper union with God. For 
the perverted human will cannot make a genuine surrender of 
itself to the divine will, so that there can be no true sacrifice 
unless God himself enters into man, and, as man, makes the 
“full, perfect, and sufficient” sacrifice which was consummated 
in the death of the God-man upon the Cross. Similarly, 
the Law given to Moses is one which the human will is ine 
capable of obeying. It serves only to “convict man of sin” by 
setting a standard to which he fails to attain. Thus in the new 
covenant of the Christian dispensation the ancient sacrifices 
are replaced by the Crucifixion, of which the Sacrifice 
of the Mass is a continuing re-collection,! and the Law 
gives way to the mystery of Grace, the power of God which 
enables the human will to perform works beyond its own 
capacity. 

Because this long, long epoch of types and shadows em- 
bodies the promise, and man’s expectation, of a Redeemer, the 
liturgy of the Advent season refers again and again to “captive 
Israel”, to “the people that walked in darkness”, and their 


1 Anamnesis, usually translated as “memory”, “memorial”, or “recollection”, 
is no mere reminder of a chronologically past event. Strictly speaking, anamnesis 
is much more than the simple sign of a fact distant (in time) from itself; it is 
rather the actual “re-collection” of a truth which eternally is, so that to recollect 
the sacrifice of Christ is to make it really and effectively present. 


96 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


hope of deliverance. This is the theme of the great Advent 
hymn Veni Emmanuel— 


O come, O come, Emmanuel 

And ransom captive Israel, 

Which mourns in lowly exile here, 

Unul the Son of God appear. 
Rejoice! Rejoice! Emmanuel 
Shall come to thee, O Israel! 


Its words are based on the seventh of the Great Antiphons of 
Advent, in which the ancient types are repeatedly presented. 


O Adonai, and Leader of the House of Israel, who 
appeared in the bush to Moses in a flame of fire, 
and gave him the Law upon Sinai: Come and 
redeem us with an outstretched arm.! 


O Root of Jesse, standing as an ensign for the people, 
at whom kings shall shut their mouths, unto whom 
the Nations shall seek: Come and deliver us, and 
tarry not.” 


O Key of David, and Sceptre of the house of Israel; 
that opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man 
opens: Come, and bring the captives out of prison, 
those that sitin darkness and in the shadow of death.’ 


O King of Nations, and their Desire; the Corner- 
stone, who makest both one: Come and save 
mankind, whom thou hast formed of clay.* 


1 Vesper antiphon for December 18th. 

? December 19th. The root, stem, rod, or verge of Jesse, the father of David, 
whose Alowering is the bicth of Christ, is another form of the Tree of Life, 
and is associated with the Virgin Mary whose family tree is traced back to Jesse. 

3 December 20th. The Key of David is the type of the “keys of the kingdom” 
later entrusted to St. Peter, who, as supreme representative of the priestly office, 
is charged with the binding and loosing of souls, with giving and withholding 
absoluuon from sin. 

4 December 22nd. The “Cornerstone, who makest both one” is a particularly 


Advent 97 


Because the final reference of the “once upon a time” of the 
myth is to that “time behind time” encountered in the depths 
of our consciousness, there is a particular significance to the 
Advent theme of “captive Israel”. Its understanding is the 
necessary introduction to the miraculous Coming of Christ, 
whether we are considering the First Advent from the Virgin’s 
womb or the Second Advent “in the clouds of heaven”. A 
proverb says that “man’s extremity is God’s opportunity”, 
suggesting that the necessary condition for a miracle is a state of 
impasse which only a miracle can solve. The Coming of Christ 
is associated with a number of striking symbols of the im- 
possible: the rod blossoms, the virgin bears a son, and he 
“whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain” is found 
within the womb. 


Wonder beyond time’s wonders— 
Eternity shut in a span, 
Summer in winter, 

Day in night, 
Heaven on earth, 
And God in man. 


In short, the Coming of Christ is out of all continuity with 
anything that happened before. It is a complete reversal of the 
order of cause and effect, of the determination of the present 
by the past, since he comes to birth out of all relation with the 
continuity of human generation—having no father. 

For the redemption of captive Isracl, liberation from Hades, 
the forgiveness of sins, release from the self-love of Lucifer, 
from the “Old Adam”, and from the bondage of “Egypt” and 


interesting symbol of the divine as the “reconciling principle” in which the 
“pairs of opposites” are transcended. The symbol is widespread, and is found 
in China as the tai cy’, the Great Ultuimate—literally, the Great Ridgepole— 
underlying and uniting yang and yin, the positive and negative principles. See 
A. K. Coomaraswamy’s article “Eckstein”, in Speculum, vol. xiv (1939), 
Pp- 66-72. 


98 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


“Babylon” is in every respect a deliverance from the past. 
Salvation is always the ending of the mind’s fascinated identi- 
fication with the dead and unchanging image of what it was. 
It is a complete reversal of the “natural” order of things, a 
metanoia—the Greek word for “repentance” meaning precisely 
a “turning-around-of-the-mind”, so that it no longer faces 
into the past, the land of the shadow of death, but into the 
Eternal Present. 

So long as the mind is captivated by memory, and really feels 
itself to be that past image—which is “I”—it can do nothing 
to save itself; its sacrifices are of no avail, and its Law gives no 
life. For it is under the spell of death, identified with an 
impotent abstraction so that, in the language of symbolism, 
it is “formed of clay”, or wandering in the wilderness, in “a dry 
and barren land where no water is”. And under this spell it 
remains, hopelessly and helplessly captive, just so long as this 
dead image continues to give any illusion of life, so long as one 
thinks or feels that “I” is able to do anything in the way of a 
creative act. Therefore the necessary condition for the miracle 
is the realization that this “I can do nothing—the discovery 
of its total and inescapable captivity. The “I” must confess 
that it is mere dust, that “there is no health in it”, for liberation 
from the “I” is impossible so long as one retains any hope in its 
powers. While this hope persists one is still under the spell of 
death, turned into a pillar of salt like Lot’s wife who looked 
behind on the way from Sodom. 


Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of Man 
is revealed. In that day... he that is in the field, 
let him likewise not return back. Remember Lot’s 
wife. Whosoever shall seek to save his soul shall 
lose it.! 


1 Luke 17: 30-33. “The day when the Son of Man is revealed” is, of course, 
the Last Day, the day when time comes to an end—as indeed it does eternally 
in this Now, wherein alone we are truly alive. 


Advent 99 
Follow me, and let the dead bury their dead.? 


No man, having put his hand to the plough, and 
looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.? 


On the other hand, the miracle can come to pass if all hope 
in the “I” is abandoned, if that wherein man thought his life 
consisted is seen beyond any doubt to be unreality and death. 
The one thing, then, which is the indispensable preparation 
for the miracle of man’s becoming “no longer I, but Christ”, 
for the birth of Godhead in man, is the confession of “sin’— 
not, however, in the current sentimental sense of the word, but 
inthe true metaphysical sense of bamartanetn, “to miss the mark”, 
to be off the point. The mark or point here—equivalent to the 
“strait and narrow gate” or the “needle’s eye” which is the 
entrance to heaven—is the timeless, eternal moment wherein 
our real life consists.2 To be “off the mark” is to be identified 
with the past, and thus “the soul that sinneth shall die”. 
Repentance in “dust and ashes” is simply the clear admission 
that everything which I know (remember) as myself is dead, 
and can do nothing. The “I” which /s the past can give no 
salvation from the past. 


1 Matthew 8: 22, and Luke 11: 60. 

® Luke 11: 62. These, and many other passages, suggest quite clearly that 
eternal life consists in deliverance from the past, and thus from time in general, 
the whole notion of time being built upon our memory of the past. Cf. Matthew 
6: 34, “Be not anxious for the morrow”, and in Luke 24: 5-6, the words of the 
angels to those who sought the body of Christ in the sepulchre—" Why seek ye 
the living, among the dead? He is not here, but is risen.” 

3 The “point” is the bindw of the Hindu tradition, or the ekaksant, the “one 
moment”, of the Buddhist, which is the same as Dante’s punto a cut tutti li tempi 
son presenti, “point at which the whole of time is present”, in Paradiso, xvii. 
17-18. Cf. Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride, 77: “The principle of knowledge, that 
is conceptual, pure and simple, Aashes through the soul like lightning, and 
offers itself in a single moment's experience to apprehension and vision.” So, 
also, St. Paul in 1 Corinthians 15: 51-52, “We shall not all sleep, but we shall 
all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an cye.” 


100 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


For this reason, then, Advent gives a special emphasis to the 
mission of St. John the Baptist, the Forerunner of Christ— 


The voice of one crying in the wilderness: Prepare 
ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert 
a highway for our God.? 


For immediately before the public appearance of Christ there 
came the desert-prophet John, the son of a barren woman, 
Elizabeth, “preaching the baptism of repentance for the 
remission of sin”. The imagery of Advent achieves a marvelous 
combination of spiritual and seasonal themes, the arid ground 
of the desert waiting for the winter rains corresponding to 
St. John’s baptism in the wilderness, to the coming of the 
“Day-spring from on high” to “those that sit in darkness”, 
and to the miracle of discontinuity—the blossoming rod— 
which is to liberate man from the arid past and revive him 
with the water of eternal life. 


Drop down dew, yc heavens, from above, and let the 

clouds rain justice; let the earth be opened and 

bud forth a Saviour.” 

The wilderness and the solitary place shall be 
glad for them; 

and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose. 

It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with 
joy and singing... . 

For in the wilderness shall waters break out, and 
streams in the desert. 

And the parched ground shall become a pool, and 
the thirsty land springs of water.* 


! Isaiah 40: 3, quoted in Joba 1: 19 et seq., which is the liturgical Gospel for 
the Third Sunday in Advent. 

2 Introit for the Fourth Sunday in Advent, based on Isaiah 45: 8. 

3 Lesson for Ember Saturday in Advent, from [satay 35: 1-7. 


Advent IOI 


FIC. 4 CLORIFIED MADONNA 


A Spanish woodcut of the late rsth century, from the Biblioteca Universitaria, 

Valencia. The Virgin is surrounded with roses; the Christechild holds a rose; 

and the kneeling figures of the two imperia, spirituzi and temporal, hold rosaries, 

as do the two monks above. The symbolism is of the Virgin as Rosa Mundi, 

Rose of the World—that is, of the created order, maya, which Aowers from its 
divine Centre. 


Yet the rain must have a way to enter into the dry ground. The 
earth must be opened. To “make straight in the desert a high- 
way for our God” in conformity with St. John’s cry for 
repentance, the ground must no longer remain closed. The 
whole mystery of the “opening of the earth”, which, from the 
metaphysical standpoint, is the “passive” admission that 
“T can do nothing”, is contained in the all-important figure of 
the Virgin Mary, upon whom the mind of the Church fastens 


more and more as Advent draws to its close. 


102 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


O Virgin of Virgins, how shall this be? For 
neither before thee was any seen like thee, nor shall 
there be after. Daughters of Jerusalem, why marvel 
ye at me? The thing which ye behold is a divine 
mystery. 


In Christian mythology the figure of the Mother of God is 
second only in importance to that of Christ himself, and at 
times popular devotion has seemed to want to raise her to an 
even higher eminence. From every standpoint—thcological, 
historical, or metaphysical—her role in the Christian scheme 
is crucial, because she is that without which there would be 
no Chnist. Her consent—“Be it unto me according to thy 
word”—was the necessary condition of the Incarnation, and 
thus she is the vital bridge between death and life, sin and 
holiness—the “mediatrix of all graces”, by whose openness to 
the Spirit the miracle of redemption could be achieved. 
Rather obviously, she takes the place of Isis, Astarte, Ceres, 
Aphrodite, Cybele, Inanna, Maya-Shakti, and all the great 
Mother Goddesses of the Earth known to ancient history, for 
Catholic piety has endowed her with their ttles—Mother of 
God and Queen of Heaven. 


Ave, Regina caelorum, 
Ave, Domina Angelorum: 
Salve radix, salve porta, 
Ex qua mundo lux est orta. 


Hail, Queen of Heaven! 

Hail, Lady of the Angels! 

Salutation to thee, root and portal, 
whence the light of the world has arisen.” 


Tradition traces her ancestry back to Jesse, the father of 


1 Great Antiphon for December 23rd in the ancient English Use of the 
Sarum Breviary. 
2 At Compline, Final Antiphon B.V.M. 


Advent 103 


David, and even to Abraham himself, so that she represents a 
culmination of the entire history of the Chosen People—the 
Tree sprung from the Root of Jesse and the Seed of Abraham, 
whose own wife, Sarah, brought forth her son miraculously 
in her old age.? But behind this earthly descent the Church 
discerns her heavenly origin, according her a mysterious 
kinship with Sophia, the Divine Wisdom, in the time before 
time was. It is presumably with reference to this premundane 
origin that, at the Feast of the Assumption of the Virgin, the 
Lesson at Mass is taken from Ecclesiasticus 24, In omnibus requiem: 


In all things, I sought rest; and I shall abide 
in the inheritance of the Lord. 

Then the Creator of all things commanded, and 
spake to me; 

and he that made me rested in my tabernacle. 

And he said to me: Let thy dwellings be in Jacob, 
and thy inheritance in Israel, 

and take thy root in my elect. 

From the beginning, and before the world, 
was I created, 

and unto the world to come I shall not ccase to be; 

and in the holy dwelling-place I have ministered 
before him. 

And so was I established in Sion, and in the holy 

city likewise I rested, 

and my power was in Jerusalem; 

and I took root in an honourable people, and in 
the portion of my God his inheritance, 

and my abode is in the full assembly of saints. 


1 The gencalogies of Christ given by Matthew and Luke trace the descent of 
Christ through Joseph to David and Abraham. But mediaeval writers such as 
de Voragine argue that since Joseph was not the natural father of Jesus, and that 
since Jesus was of the line of David, it must follow that Mary also was of the 
same line—an opinion in which St. John of Damascus Likewise concurs, 

: » sy 
tracing Mary’s descent through David's son Nathan. 


104 Myiél and Ritual in Christianity 


I was exalted like a cedar in Libanus, and as 
a cypress-tree on mount Sion; 

I was exalted like a palm-tree in Cades, and 
as a rose-plant in Jericho; 

as a fair olive-tree in the plains, and as a plane-tree by 
the water in the streets was I exalted. 

I gave a swect perfume like cinnamon and aromatic 
balm; 

I yielded a sweet odour like the best myrrh.! 


It would scem that the association of the Virgin with Sophia, 
the Second Person of the Trinity, is that she is his feminine, 
though material, counterpart, consort, and image—being that 
Prima Materia which was the original Womb of Creation. 
For the Virgin is both Bride and Mother of God the Son— 
Bride in so far as she represents the universe and the Church, 
destined for an eternal union with Christ, and Mother in so far 
as the Son takes from her his human nature when he enters 
into the Womb and is born in the world. The nuputal 
symbolism of the relationship between God and the world is 
both ancient and very widespread in mythology and mysticism 
alike. No doubt it has historical origins in ancient cults of 
fertility, where the fertilization of the Earth Mother by sun and 
rain from Heaven was seen in analogy with human procrea- 
tion. No doubt it is sometimes—in mysticism—a “compensatory 
fantasy” for the celibate life. But a sexually self-conscious 
culture such as our own must beware of its natural tendency 
to sce religion as a symbolizing of sex, for to sexually un- 
complicated people it has always been obvious that sex is a 
symbol of religion. That is to say, the ecstatic self-abandonment 
of nuptial love is the average man’s nearest approach to the 
self-less state of mystical or metaphysical experience. For this 
reason the act of love is the easicst and most readily intelligible 


1 Ecclesiasticus 24: 7-15. The lesson Dominus posscdit me from Proverbs, 
quoted in the first chapter, where the words are also those of Sophia, is used at 
the Mass of the Immacuiate Conception. 


Advent 105 


illustration of what it is like to be in “union with God”, to live 
the eternal life, free from self and time.! 

The importance of the nuptial symbolism of the unio 
mystica explains the presence in Holy Scripture of that great 
Hebrew loveepoem The Song of Songs or Canticles, consistently 
interpreted in Christianity as the dialogue between Christ the 
Bridegroom and his Bride, the Church or the human soul, of 
which the Virgin is the supreme type. Canticles is therefore 
one of the most important sources of both symbols of the 
Virgin and liturgical devotions in her honour. 


Who is she that riseth up as the morning, fair 
as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as 
an army with banners 2° 


I am black, but comely, O ye daughters of Jeru- 
salem; therefore the King delighteth in me, and 
hath brought me into his chambers.* 


Lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and 
gone: rise up, my love, and come away. 


From this poem the Church derived such symbols of the 
Virgin as the Rose of Sharon, the Lily, the Enclosed Garden, 
the Sealed Fountain, and the Ivory Tower, and its glowing 
language runs through the whole liturgy like a thread of gold 
In a woven tapestry. 


Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest 
among women? Whither is thy beloved turned 
aside? 


1 Thus, much of the Freudian interpretation of mythology is valid only 
for those Western sub-cultures where the repression of sex lias led to its obsessive 
over-valuation. The notion that the sexual experience is so much the summum 
bonum of human life that it is the final, inner meaning of all mythological 
symbols, is a point of view which seems quite fantastic to those for whom sexual 
realization is as natural and usual as eating and sleeping. 

2 Feast of the Assuinpuon, antiphon ac Lauds, from Canticles 6: 10. 

3 Common of the B.V.M., anuphon from Canticles 1: 5 and 4. 

4 Common of the B.V.M., antiphon from Canticles 2: 11 and 10. 


106 


Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


A bundle of myrrh is my well-beloved unto me; 
he shall lic all night betwixt my breasts. 


Stay me with flagons, and comfort me with 
apples; for I am sick with love.! 


The forty-fifth Psalm is another source of the poetry of the 
Virgin, and the Church’s conception of her glory has no 
doubt been enhanced by the language of the scriptural passages 
which seemed applicable to her: 


Thou art fairer than the children of men: 
grace is poured into thy lips; 
therefore God hath blessed thee forever. . . . 
All thy garments smell of myrrh, and alocs, and 
cassia, out of the ivory palaces, whereby 
they have made thee glad. 
King’s daughters were among thy honourable women: 
upon thy right hand did stand the queen 
in gold of Ophir. 
Hcarken, O daughter, and considcr, and incline 
thine ear; 
forget also thine own pcople, and thy 
father’s house; 
So shall the king greatly desire thy beauty: 
for he is thy Lord; 
and worship thou him.... 
The King’s daughter is all glorious within: 
her clothing is wrought of gold. 
She shall be brought unto the King in raiment 
of needlework: 
the virgins her companions that follow her 
shall be brought unto thee. 
With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: 
they shall entcr into the King’s palace. 


1 Compassion of the B.V.M. (Friday after Passion Sunday), antiphons 
from Canticles 6: 1, 1: 13, and 2: 5. 


Advent 107 


The ultimate picture of the Virgin in the fullness of her 
heavenly glory comes from the vision of St. John at Patmos: 


And there appeared a great wonder in heaven: 
a Woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under 
her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve 
stars.) 


Upon this passage Catholic art bases its iconography of the 
Virgin reigning as Queen of Heaven after her assumption— 
with the crescent moon beneath her feet, and the twelve stars 
forming an aureole about her head. 

Despite its richness and complexity, the symbolism of the 
Virgin gives a definite picture of her role in the scheme of 
Christian mythology. The Virgin Mother is, first of all, Mater 
Virgo—virgin matter or the unploughed soil—that is to say, 
the Prima Materia prior to its division, or ploughing, into the 
multiplicity of created things. As Star of the Sea, Stella Maris 
(mare= Mary), the Sealed Fountain, “the immaculate womb of 
this divine font”, she is likewise the Water over which the 
Spirit moved in the beginning of time. As the “Woman 
clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet”, she is also 
everything signified in other mythologies by the goddesses of 
the moon, which shines by the sun’s light, and appears in the 
night surrounded (crowned) with stars. As the Womb in 
which the Logos comes to birth she is also Space, signified in 
the common artistic convention of clothing her in a blue 
mantle, spangled with stars. As the Jesse Tree, the Cedar of 
Libanus, the Cypress of Mount Sion, the Palm of Cades, 
and the Olive of the Plains, she is also to be identified with the 
Axle-Tree of the World, with the serpent at its roots—“it shall 
bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise its heel”*—and bearing 
alike the fruits of death and life.? As the Rose and the Lily 

1 Revelation 12: 1. 2 Genesis 3: 15. 


3 The Virgin has also been associated in another way with the Tree of the 
Cross, upon which Christ performs the feminine-redemptive function of 


108 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


she is the open cup of the flower, symbol of the receptive, 
passive, feminine aspect of man’s spiritual transformation— 
represented also in the Chalice or Graal which receives the 
life-blood of Christ. 

The Virgin Mary in Christianity thus typifies everything 
signified by Maya in Hinduism and Buddhism—that is, the 
female shakti, or consort, of God, the world which “God so 
loved”, or the finite manifestation of the infinite. The word 
maya is derived from the root matr-, to measure, from which in 
turn come jjt70 (mother), metre, matrix, mater, and matter, 
for mayd is that “no-thing”, which, when measured or divided, 
becomes things. The Divider (“I came not to bring peace, but 


a sword”) is the Logos, who “set a compass on the face of the 
deep”,! who “divided the light from the darkness”,? and 
created the firmament to “divide the waters from the waters”’.® 
Thus it is prophesied of Mary, “A sword shall pierce through 
thy own soul also”,4 since in all the great traditions creation 
is always through a sacrifice: the multiplicity of things is the 
One disemembered and divided. By yet another sacrifice the 
Once is reemembered—“Do this in reemembrance (anamnesis) 
of Me”—for the original Unity is restored when the sacrifice is 
repeated, because the repetition is a recollection of what was 
done “in the beginning”. 

The story of the creation of the world by the dismemberment 
or division of the feminine Chaos, Prima Materia and Virgin 
Matter, has one ofits carliest forms in the Babylonian tablets— 


When in the height heaven was not named 

And the earth beneath did not yet bear a name, 
And the primeval Apsu, who begat them, 

And Chaos, Tiamat, the Mother of them both,— 


“giving himself up” co death—to Non-being and Night. Death is always a 
return to the Womb in the sense of going back to the No-thing out of which 
one came, and ic is of interest that the bone behind the uterus is the os crucis, 
popularly known as the Holy Bone, kreuzbein, etc. 

1 Proverly 8: 27. 2 Genesiy 1: 4. * Genesis 2 6. 4 Luke 2: 35. 


Advent 109 


Their waters were mingled together, 

And no field was formed, no marsh was to be seen; 
When of the gods none had been called into being, 

And none bore a name, and no destinies were ordained... . 


The Lord stood upon Tiamat’s hinder parts, 
And with his merciless club he smashed her skull. . . . 


Then the Lord rested, gazing upon her dead body, 

While he divided the Acsh . . . and devised a cunning plan. 
He split her up like a fat fish into two halves; 

One half of her he stablished as a covering for heaven.! 


Chaos-Tiamat is represented as a dragon or serpent because, 
before the division, she is “footless” or unmeasured. She is the 
“no-thing” which by the measurement, the maya, the “art” of 
the Word is made to appear as things. 

In Christianity, however, theology has consistently repressed 
a truth which in other traditions is abundantly clear. For when 
the primal Mother is disemembered into “things”, it is only 
then that she becomes created. Prior to her apparent division 
into parts by the art or maya of the Word, she is uncreated and 
divine, being simply the female aspect of Godhead.? But for 
theology this is blasphemy and heresy, since theology, as 
distinct from myth, is the creation of individuals who cannot 
see this truth for the very reason that they are still spell-bound, 
enchanted by the Word which makes the Many seem to be 
different from each other and from the One, and the creation 
separate fromthe Creator. Yet whereas the individual theologian 

1L. W. King, The Seven Tablets of Creation (London, 1902). Note, again, 
the repeated association of the creation of things with “naming”, for it is always 
the “Word of God which is a sharp two-edged sword” which is the instrument 
of division. 

9 Christian official theology having ever been one-sided, and unable to grasp 
the riddle of the “compass” which God set upon the “face of the deep”. For the 
compass, the dividers, is “two” at the points and “one” ac the pivot, so that he 


who holds it at the pivot is above and beyond the “pairs of opposites” which 
include being and non-being, Father and Mother. 


110 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


remains spell-bound, it is otherwise with the folk, the common 
man.! For more than six hundred years theology has fought a 
steadily losing battle with the Catholic folk-mind, which, 
step by step, is persuading the official Church to recognize the 
true divinity of the Virgin. 

This is the obvious tendency behind the promulgation of 
the Immaculate Conception and the Assumption of the 
Virgin as dogma, belief in which is “essential to salvation”, 
and one can hardly doubt that these will in due course be 
followed, first, by the dogma that she is Mediatrix of All 
Graces, and, ultimately, by some dogma to the effect that she 
must receive latria—the worship proper to God himself—by 
virtue of her assimilation to the Godhead.” This will be the 
victory of what was apparent long ago at Chartres and today in 
Mexico, where the Virgin of Guadaloupe is—in practice— 
honoured far above the Father and the Son, and whose icon 
stands before the worshippers in its own right, representing the 
Virgin alone without even the Christ Child in her arms.? 
Furthermore, the shrine of Our Lady of Guadaloupe is a 
basilica, and ranks third among all the shrines of Catholic 
Christendom. 

The dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin— 


1In the proper meaning of a now debased usage, for the “common man” 
is the Man common to us all, which Jung would call the “collective un- 
conscious”. He is the man who is a “nameless nobody”, not being this or that 
particular individual. Hence the monastic and, in general, initiatory practice of 
giving up one’s proper name when entering into religion, and receiving instead 
a “Christian” name—i.e. one of the names of the Common Man, Christ, 
who—as even theology insists—is not a particular human person, not a4 man 
but man. It is only in the Nestorian heresy that Christ is held to be a man. 

2 Worship is of two kinds—latria, the adoration of the Godhead, and dulia, 
the veneration of the saints, though the reverence paid to the Virgin is already 
called byperdulia. One might venture the guess that some further step in the 
divinization of the Virgin is contained in the parts of the Fatima visions 
remaining unpublished. 

8 See the marvelous treatment of this problem in the section dealing with 
Mexican culture in F, S. C. Northrop’s Meeting of East and West (New York, 
1946). 


Advent III 


not to be confused with that of the Virgin Birth of Christ—is 
to the effect that Mary was conceived without inheriting the 
taint of Original Sin which has descended to all other human 
beings from Adam and Eve. It is no wonder that the proper 
Mass for the feast of this mystery has, as its Epistle, the Dominus 
possedit me passage from Proverbs 8, in which Sophia, the 
handmaid of Logos, declares that she was “set up from eternity”, 
and that “he who shall find me shall find life”! For the 
miracle whereby the Virgin is free from Original Sin, that she 
never “missed the mark” or was “off the point”, is clearly that 
she is of heavenly or divine origin. Like the Son, she was 
“begotten before all the worlds”, for “I was set up from of old, 
before ever the earth was”. 

The dogma of the Assumption maintains that, after her 
death, the Virgin Mary was assumed bodily into heaven, where 
she was subsequently crowned—“more glorious than the 
Cherubim and Seraphim’—to reign with Christ for ever 
and ever. 


The most ineffable Trinity itself applauds her with 
unceasing dance, and since its grace hows wholly into her, 
makes all to wait upon her. The most splendid order of 
the apostles extols her with unspeakable lauds, .. . un- 
willing Hell itself howls to her, and the wanton demons 
shriek her praise.” 


The mysterious and altogether peculiar nature of the Assump- 
tion is still clearer in the following passage from St. John 
of Damascus: 


O Blessed Virgin, thou hast not gone to heaven as 
Elias did, or as Paul, who went up to the third heaven; 


1 The Tract of this Mass also identifies her with the City of God, in view 
of which it is interesting to read the vision of Ezekiel 40, in which the Holy City 
is measured by “a man whose appearance was like the appearance of brass”—i.c. 
the Son of Man. 

2 From the [Jomilies of Gerardus, quoted in de Voragine’s Golden Legend, 
ts, Ryan and Ripperger (London and New York, 1941), vol. ii, p. 458. 


112 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


thou hast mounted even to the kingly throne of thy Son! 
The death of the other saints is blessed because it brings 
them to blessedness, but this is not true of thee: for not 
thy death . . . has bestowed upon thee the security of thy 
blessedness, since thou art the beginning and the middle 
and the end of all the blessings that surpass the mind of 
man! Hence death has not beatified thee, but thou hast 
glorified death, dispelling its sadness and turning it to joy!! 


We arc here within sight of the recognition that the Assump- 
tion is the revelation of what the Virgin was from the 
beginning—the one who reigns eternally with Christ, Sophia 
as the consort of Logos, divine Matrix of the universe. All the 
honours and symbols of this estate are present, and the only 
thing lacking is the precise theological definition. 

We are now in a position to sce what light the figure of 
the Virgin throws upon the metaphysical problem of man’s 
redemption from time, death, and the past. A widespread 
symbolism likens the creative movement of life to the passage 
of a bird through the sky: the point is that it leaves no trace, 
because the sky is always “pure and immaculate”. Similarly, 
the real world and the real life of man is an eternal present 
having neither a past nor a future; it “moves” through the Void 
like a bird or dancing spark which Icaves nothing behind. 
For this reason, the memories which give the impression that 
there is an “I”, a conditioning past whose dead hand rules the 
world, arc shadows without any substance. It is for this reason 
that Ruysbrocck says, “\We must found all our lives upon a 
fathomless abyss”; for this is, in truth, how they are founded— 
upon an abyss in which nothing “sticks” or leaves any trace, 
since all things past are as unreal as “the footprints of a star”. 
This abyss in which nothing leaves any stain is the Virgin, 
the Immaculate Womb wherein Creation comes to birth, 
and which, after birth, remains “ever Virgin” and spotless. 


1 Thid., pp. 463-4 


Advent 113 


Thou art all fair, O Mary; there is no spot in 
thee.... Thy raiment is white as snow, and thy 
countenance like the sun.! 


As the Prima Materia, the No-thing out of which all things 
were made, the Virgin has always represented our own true 
nature—the human nature which she gave to the Christ in 
bearing him. Thus the redemption of man from time depends 
on the realization that his own true or real nature is, from the 
beginning, immaculate: he bas no past, and the stain which he 
seems to leave behind him, and which is everything that makes 
up his individuality, is a seeming only. In reality it is not there; 
in reality there is only the spark of eternity in the trackless abyss. 
“The Moving Finger writes, and, having writ, moves on” —yes, 
but in truth it writes on the sky. Of all this there is perhaps no 
more eloquent symbol than the fact that our earth and the 
whole host of heaven are suspended in emptiness. Time and 
space are the same void. “Look!” said Meister Eckhart. “The 
person who lives in the light of God is conscious neither of 
time past nor of time to come but only of the one eternity. . . . 
Therefore he gets nothing new out of future events, nor from 
chance, for he lives in the Now-moment that ts, unfailingly, 
‘in verdure newly clad’.”? 

Unfamiliar as such an interpretation of the Virgin may be, 
it comes naturally cnough, without “stretching” the symbols, 
and is precisely the interpretation which brings the Christian 
myth into its proper relation with the other great mythological 
traditions—as a form of the philosophia perennis rather than a 
strange abnormality. As the deep upon which God set his 
compass, the waters upon which the Spirit moved, the Womb 
in which the Logos was made Aesh, the Immaculate and 
Ever-Virgin Mother is clearly that “nothing” in which “things” 
are made to “seem” by maya, by measurement and division, 


1 Immaculate Conception B.V.M., anuphons at the Hours. 
*R, Blakney, Meister Eckbart (New York, 1941), pp. 209-10. 


114 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


just as what we call time and space are abstractions created by 
measurements upon the fathomless void. From another point 
of view, she is that which passively, willingly, without resistance 
submits to the Dividers and the Sword, offering no obstacle 
to the free play of the divine maya; “Be it unto me according to 
thy word”. She is thus the Open One—the Rose, the Lily, 
the Womb, the Sky. And out of this “being nothing” there 
comes, paradoxically and miraculously, fruitfulness—the Tree 
and its Fruit, the Rod of Jesse which blossoms and bears the 
Christ. 

This miracle is what “I” can never understand; for “I” 
always thinks it must do something to be fruitful and creative. 
It docs not understand the famous “law of reversed cffort”, 
whereby creative action at one level of one’s being depends 
upon inaction at another. Only when the “I” is seen to be 
nothing, a shadow unable to move even a grain of dust, the 
Man in us comes to life “in a moment, in the twinkling of an 


eye. 


CHAPTER IV 


Christmas and Epiphany 


SHE who was, from the beginning, the Virgin of virgins and 
the Immaculate Mother of the universe, appeared in due time 
as Mary, the daughter of Joachim and Anna. According to 
St. Jerome, Joachim was from the town of Nazareth in 
Galilee, and Anna from the City of David—Bcthlehem; and 
the two were just and godly folk who divided their wealth 
into three parts—one for the Temple, one for the poor, and 
one for their own needs. Anna, however, was barren and 
lived for twenty years with her husband without bearing 
him a child. But, moved to compassion by their holy lives, 
the Lord God at last sent his angel with the news that 
there would be born to them a daughter. They were to give 
her the name Mary, and to dedicate her from infancy to the 
service of God, for, said the angel, “as she will be born to 
a barren mother. so will she herself, in a wondrous manner, 
bring forth the Son of the Most High, whose name shall 


IIs 


116 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


be called Jesus, and through whom will come salvation to 
all the nations”. 

When the child was three years old, her parents took her to 
the Temple at Jerusalem, and left her in the company of the 
Temple virgins, with whom she grew up until she was 
fourteen—constantly visited by the angels and enjoying always 
the mystical vision of God. Now that she had become a 
woman, it was the proper custom that she should be returned 
to her home and given in marriage. But Mary told the High 
Priest that it could not be so with her, since she had promised 
her virginity to God. Perplexed, and secking guidance from 
the Most High, the High Priest entered into the sanctuary of 
the Temple, and, as he prayed, a Voice came forth from the 
inmost shrine of the Holy of Holies, commanding that all the 
marriageable men of the House of David should come to the 
Temple and cach one lay a branch upon the altar. One of 
these branches, said the Voice, would burst into fower, and 
he to whom it belonged was to take the Virgin Mary as his 
wife. And so it came about that the branch which blossomed 
was that which belonged to Joseph, a carpenter from 
Bethlehem. This branch was no doubt that ancient cutting 
from the Tree of Eden, which, according to another legend, 
had been handed down among the patriarchs of Israel until it 
had at last found its way to Joseph; and now, as it blossomed 
upon the altar, the Holy Spirit appeared from heaven in the 
form of a dove, and rested upon it. 

Joseph was therefore espoused to Mary—whereafter he 
returned to Bethlehem to prepare for the wedding, and she to 
her home in Nazarcth.! One day when Mary was at prayer 

MIt is of interest that “Nazareth” means “branch”, though St. Bernard 
understood it to mean “flower”, and said that the Virgin was the Flower who 
willed to be born of a Aower, in Aower, in che season of Howers. As Christ is the 
Fruit of the Flower—the Mystic Rose, so in the traditions of India the avatars or 
incarnations of God are commonly represented as born from or enthroned upon 


the lotus. I have in my possession an old Chinese Buddhist print of an arbat 
(awakened sage) holding in his hand a small bottle from which arises a lotus 


Christmas and Epiphany 117 


See 6 


=s 


A nae 
SUNG 


FIG. § THE ANNUNCIATION 


Spanish woodcut, about 15th century. Note the inner border, where the 
Tree of Life grows out from the Skull (lower left). Cf. Figs. 8 and 9. 


she found herself, suddenly, in the presence of a shining being, 
robed in white and carrying a lily in his hand—none other than 
the Messenger of God, Gabricl the Archangel, who greeted 
her crying, “Hail, full of grace, the Lord is with thee! Blessed 
art thou among women!” And as Mary was troubled, wonder- 
ing at the meaning of this vision, the Archangel spoke again: 
“Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found favour with God. 
Behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a 
Son, and shall call his name Jesus.! He shall be great, and shall 


bearing the figure of the Buddha as a baby—the bottle being a recognized 
symbol of Tatha gata-garbha, the womb of the Buddha-nature, which is sunyata, 
the primal “no-thing” or Void. 

1 This is the Greek form of the Hebrew Jehoshuah, Joshua, or Jeshua, 
meaning “YHVH is Salvadon”. The original Greek is written 11coyc, abbrevi- 
ated in Christian symbolism as 1C, 111C, or IIIS. 


118 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


be called the Son of the Highest; and the Lord God shall give 
him the throne of his father David, and he shall reign over the 
House of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be 
no end.” 

And Mary answered, “How shall this be, seeing that I know 
not a man?” 

Again the Archangel spoke: “The Holy Spirit shall come 
upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow 
thee. Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee 
shall be called the Son of God.” 

To this Mary responded with the words which have ever 
been regarded as the “opening” of Matter to Spirit, Earth to 
Heaven, so that the Incarnation of God could be possible: 
“Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according 
to thy word.”! 

At this instant the Second Person of the Trinity, God the 
Son, the Eternal Word by whom all things were made, was 
conceived in the Womb of the Virgin. 


Great is the mystery of the inheritance. The womb 
of her that knew not man is become the temple of the 
Godhead; by taking flesh of her, he was in no way 
defiled. 


A great and wondrous mystery is made known 
to us this day: a new thing is done in both natures: 
God is made man. That which was, remained. That 
which was not, he assumed; suffering neither con- 
fusion nor division.” 


! The foregoing account of the Annunciation is, of course, based on Luke 1: 
26-38. To avoid the unnecessary re-telling in detail of a story told incomparably 
well in the original, it would be best if the reader would, before proceeding 
with this chapter, read the whole Nativity Story as it is found in Like 1: 5 to 
2: §2, and Matthew 1: 18 to 2: 23. 

2 Office of St. Mary on Saturday, antiphons at Vespers and Lauds. “Both 
natures” are the divine and the human, being and non-being, “that which was” 


and “that which was not”, the All (Logos) and the Void (Sophia). 


Christmas and Epiphany 119 


Whereupon Mary went to visit her cousin Elizabeth, who had 
meanwhile conceived in her old age the son who was to be 
St. John the Baptist, and while the two women rejoiced 
together, Mary, out of the fulness of her heart, spoke the words 
which for so many centuries have been the great Vesper 
canticle, Magnificat: 


My soul doth magnify the Lord: and my spirit 
hath rejoiced in God my Saviour. 

For he hath regarded the lowliness of his hand- 
maiden; for behold from henceforth all generations 
shall call me blessed. 

For he that is mighty hath magnified me: and 
holy is his Name.? 


Joseph and Mary were duly married, and Joseph was at 
once astonished to find that she was already with child. Bur, 
while he slept, an angel appeared to him in a dream, foretelling 
the nature of the child which his young wife was to bear, so 
that his mind might be at rest. Close to the time of her delivery, 
it was necessary for them to make a journey from Nazareth— 
where they had lived since the wedding—to the city of 
Bethlehem. The Roman Emperor Augustus had ordered a 
census for purposes of taxation, for which every man had to 
repair to his own home-town. Because of the crowds present 
in the city for the census—though some attribute it to their 
extreme poverty—there was no room for Joseph and Mary at 
the inn. They were thus compelled to lodge for the night in a 
cattle-manger which, according to most traditions, was in a 
cave close to the inn. 

Precisely at midnight there occurred the event which, for 
Christendom, marks the very centre of time, and from which 
the years are numbered backward to the Creation and forward 

1 Luke 1: 46-55. At Solemn Vespers incense is brought in and blessed before 


the Magnificat is sung, and, during its singing, the officiane and his deacons or 
acolytes cense the altar. 


120 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


to the Last Day—the entrance of eternal life being ever in that 
Moment which separates past and future. The Virgin gave 
birth to the Child who is true God and true man, in whom 
time and eternity are one. 


While all things were in quict silence, and night 
was in the midst of her course, thine almighty Word, 
O Lord, came down from thy royal throne: 
alleluia!? 


In the middle of the centuries, at the depth of the year—the 
Winter Solstice, in the midst of the night, and in the cave—the 
depth of the carth, the King of kings and Light of lights was 
born in circumstances of the most extreme humility, amidst 
the animals in a crib of hay. 


The Virgin today brings forth the Superessential, 
and the earth offers a cave to the Unapproachable. 
I behold a Mystery strange and wondrous 
(paradoxon): the cave is Heaven, and the Virgin is 
the throne of the Cherubim; in the confines of the 
manger is laid the Infinite.” 


The tradition holds that at the moment of the Lord’s birth 
all Nature was still as if time itself had missed a beat and paused 


1 Sunday within the Octave of the Nativity, antiphon at Vespers. The 
preparatory condition for the unio mystica is invariably silence and the very depth of 
night—silence or “the prayer of quict” being the state which comes about when 
ic is clearly seen chat “I” can do nothing, which is also midnight in the sense of a 
kind of despair. But this is “despair” in the special sense of being “de-spirited” 

“ . » = “ ” if = i. cy * 
or “de-spirated”, that is to say “blown out”, which is the literai meaning of the 
term nirvana. It is the “sigh of relief” which comes after “I” has reached the 
limit and discovered its impotence, so that it “gives up the ghost”. Then, “I live; 
yet no longer I, but Christ”. Cf the opening words of the Divina Commedia, 
“Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita mi ritrovai per una selva oscura, che la 
diritta via cra smarrita”. This extremity of man must always be reached before 
the divine Ife can begin. 

2 Collect and Dismissal Hymn from the Menaion, proper of the Greck 
Liturgy for December 25th. “Superessential” is byperousion, St. Dionysius’ 

Y 
peculiar word for the divine nature which is above every conception (essence) 
which the nund can form, including those of “being” and “non-being”. 


Christmas and Epiphany 12] 


FIG. 6 THE NATIVITY 


Spanish woodcut, ¢. 15th century 


in its course, and that the shock of a stillness so strange and 
sudden was known to all creatures so that, for a moment, 
there was a universal revelation of the Incarnation of God. 
According to the Golden Legend, “it was revealed to every class 
of creatures, from the stones, which are at the bottom of the 
scale of creation, to the angels, who are at its summit”. It was 
made known to stone by the sudden crumbling of the “Eternal 
Temple of Peace” in Rome, concerning which the oracle of 
Apollo had prophesied that it would stand until the day when 
a virgin gave birth to a child. It was made known to water, 
for in the same night a spring that flowed in Rome was 
changed into a fountain of oil. It was made known to plants, 
for the vines of Cades suddenly Aowered, bore grapes, and 
produced their wine. It was made known to animals, to the 
ox and ass present at the manger. It was made known to the 
birds, for at midnight the cock crew as at dawn. It was made 


122 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


known to the angels, for the whole Host of Heaven had come 
down to earth and shone around the cave with a brilliance that 
turned night into day. Hardly had that intense throb of silence 
passed when all the nine choirs of heaven cried out, singing—— 


Gloria in excelsis Deo—Glory be to God on high, 


and on earth peace to men of good will! 


And, by the angels, it was made known also to men through 
the shepherds of Bethlehem, to whom the Messenger of God 
came as they watched their sheep, saying: “Fear not; for, behold, 
I bring you tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. 
For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, 
who is Christ the Lord.” 

It is impossible to tell the whole story of the Nativity and its 
surrounding events in a chronologically consistent order. Not 
only are there differences in the accounts of Matthew and Luke 
which arc hard to reconcile, but the Church Calendar also has 
a confused order, due in part to the fact that it was not until the 
fourth century that the feast of Christmas (December 25th) 
was widely separated from the feast of the Epiphany 
(January 6th), commemorating the visit of the Magi. The 
memorial of the Massacre of the Holy Innocents, which would 
be expected to follow the visit of the Magi, falls on December 
28th, so that popular imagination has to associate the Magi 
with Christmas as well as Epiphany. The Nativity was 
ultimately fixed upon December 25th because of the 
irresistibly appropriate symbolism of associating the Birth of 
the Sun of Justice with the pagan prototype of the Brumalia, 
the feast of the Birth of the Unconquered Sun—Natalis 
Invicti Solis. 


Nam post solstitium, quo Christus cor pore natus 
Sole novo gelidae mutavit tempora brumae, 
Atque salutiferum praestans mortalibus ortum, 
Procedente die, secum decrescere noctes 

Jussit, 


Christmas and Epiphany 123 


FIG. 7 THE ANGEL AND THE SHEPHERDS OF BETHLEHEM 


Woodcut from de Alliaco’s Tractatus Exponibilium, Paris 1494 


For it is after the solstice, when Christ born in the 
flesh with the new sun transformed the season of ccld 
winter, and, vouchsafing to mortal men a healing dawn, 
commanded the nights to decrease at his coming with 
advancing day.? 


Thus in the complete symbol of the Nativity there are 
gathered round the Virgin with her Child not only the adoring 
host of angels with Joseph, the shepherds, the ox and the ass, 
but also the three Magician-Kings representing the nations of 
the earth—Caspar, Melchior, and Balthasar—and above all 
the blazing Star of the Epiphany, of the Manifestation of 


1 Paulinus of Nola, Poema xiv. 15-19. 


124 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


Christ to the world.’ Tradition gives a number of varying 
stories of the Magi, representing them as Chaldean or Persian 
astrologers, as Zoroastrian sages, and as kingly types of the 
great races of the world—white, negro, and mongolian. The 
point is always, however, that they represent both the Gentiles 
as well as the height of human wisdom and dignity, whercas 
the shepherds represent the Jews and the humble peasantry— 
constituting together a symbol of the homage of mankind to 
the Incarnate God. Their gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh 
are usually understood to be offerings ap propriate to Christ: as 
King, the gold of tribute, as God, the incense of worship, and 
as Sacrificial Victim, the myrrh for embalming the body. 

According to the version of Matthew, the visit of the Magi was 
followed immediately by the flight of the Holy Family into 
Egypt. For as the Magi had followed the mysterious Star of the 
Epiphany from a distant land, they went to Jerusalem before 
proceeding to Bethlehem, since the former was the notable 
holy city in which they might have expected the Christ to be 
born. Here they had taken counsel with Herod, the King of 
Judaca, and the priests and scribes of the Temple, and were 
directed to Bethlehem in accordance with the prophecy of 
Micah that the Christ would be born in the city of the “House 
of Bread”. Herod, fearing that so great a King of kings would 
usurp his own throne, requested the Magi to return to him 
after they had found the Child, that he also might go and 
worship him, though his real intent was to put him immediately 
to death. Thus, when the Magi were warned by God in a 
dream not to return to Herod, the latter, as soon as he had 
discovered their deception, gave orders for the slaughter of all 
male children in Bethlehem under two years old. But, again 
in a dream, the angel of God had in the meantime warned 
Joseph to Ace with the Virgin and Child into Egypt, and 
remain there until it was safe to return. 


1 According tothe Golden Legend the Greek form of their names was A ppellioss, 
Damaskos, and Amerios, and the Hebrew Galagat, Sarachin, and Malagat. 


Christmas and Epiphany 125 


It is of great interest that the Matthew story works out a 
typological correspondence between the life of Christ and the 
history of Isracl. For the Aight into Egypt corresponds to the 
Egyptian captivity of the tribes of Israel, while Joseph, like 
Joseph the son of Jacob, is a dreamer of prophetic dreams. 
Furthermore, the whole Gospel is divided into five books 
corresponding to the five books of the Pentateuch, since the 
Gospel is to be the New Law superseding the Old Law of 
Moses. Likewise the great Sermon of Christ is given, 
not, as in Luke, on a plain, but on a mountain as upon Mount 
Sinai Moses received the Old Law from God.! 

Luke does not record the flight into Egypt. The Nativity is 
followed by the events which would normally attend the birth 
of a Jewish child—Circumcision, eight days after birth, and, 
later, the ceremony of the Purification of the mother, together 
with the Presentation of the child in the Temple. The 
Church keeps these two feasts on January st (Circum- 
cision) and February 2nd (Purification of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary). The former feast typifies the submission of the Incar- 
nate God to the“ordinances of the flesh”, that is, to the law of 
nature, as well as the formal bestowal of the Name of Salva- 
tion, Jesus. 


Thou, O compassionate Lord, being by nature 
God, didst without change take upon thyself the 
form of man, and, to fulfil the Law, wast willing to 
submit to circumcision in the flesh, in order that 
darkness should cease, and that thou mightest roll 
away the thick veil of our sufferings.” 


1 The “five books” of Matthew will be found as follows: (1) chapter 3: 1 to 
7: 29; (2) & Ito 11: 1; (3) 11 2 to 19: 2; (4) 19: 3 to 26: 2; (5) 26: 3 tothe end. 
The closing sentence of each book begins with the phrase, “And it came to pass 
that when Jesus had made an end of...” The Pentateuch comprises the first 
five books of the Old Testament—Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and 
Deuteronomy, the so-called “five books of Moses”. 

2 The Menaion, dismissal hymn for January rst. 


126 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


In the cycle of the Christian Year the rites of the Incarnation 
are governed by the solar calendar, since they are connected 
with the Birth of the Sun, and so fall upon fixed dates. On 
the other hand, the rites of the Atonement, of Christ’s Death, 
Resurrection, and Ascension, are governed by the lunar 
calendar, for there is a figure of Death and Resurrection in the 
waning and waxing of the moon. The rites of the Incarnation 
begin with the solemn celebration of the Midnight Mass of 
Christmas—a feast which is unique in that it requires three 
masses. The first, at midnight, is centred upon the mystery of 
the appearance of Light in the depth of darkness, of God 
“who hast made this most sacred night to shine forth with the 
brilliance of the truc light”, and of him who is begotten “from 
the womb before the daystar”. The second is at dawn, the 
Aurora Mass, which with the rising sun celebrates the 
illumination and transfiguration of the world, opening with 
the Introit Lux fulgebit—“A light shall shine upon us this day, 
for our Lord is born to us”. The third, during the day, 
celebrates the eternal generation of the Divine Word from the 
Father, since the Child born this day is he who in the 
beginning created all worlds. 

Twelve days later, the Feast of the Epiphany, of the Mani- 
festation of Christ’s glory, commemorates three events—the 
Adoration of the Magi, the Baptism of Christ by St. John, 
and the first miracle—the transformation of water into wine at 
the wedding-feast in Cana. These three events all have to do 
with the beginnings of “the power and the glory”, for the 
transformation of the water is the beginning of the works of 
power, the Baptism with the descent of the fiery Dove is the 
beginning of Christ’s ministry, and the tribute of the Magi is 
the beginning of the “kingdom which shall have no end”. 


The Gentiles shall walk in thy light, and kings 
in the brightness of thy rising. ... The multitude of 
camels shall close around thee, the dromedaries of 


Christmas and Epiphany 127 


Midian and Ephah: all they from Saba shall come, 
bringing gold and frankincense, and showing forth 
praise to the Lord.? 


Finally, the rites of the Incarnation reach their climax with 
the Feast of the Purification on February 2nd, otherwise known 
as Candlemas. For at this time the Church blesses all the 
lights to be used in its ceremonies throughout the year, since 
it was at Christ’s Presentation in the Temple that Simeon 
called him “the Light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the 
glory of thy people Israel”, in the canticle Nance dimittis which 
is now sung nightly at Compline: 


Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in 
peace; according to thy word. 

For mine eyes have seen thy salvation; which 
thou hast prepared before the face of all peoples. 

To bea light to lighten the Gentiles; and to be the 
glory of thy people Israel. 


As the choir chants this hymn, all the clergy and people 
assembled for Candlemas receive the blessed candles before 
the altar, and then go in procession with them around the 
church, singing: 


O daughter of Sion adorn thy brideechamber, and 
welcome Christ the King: greet Mary with an 
embrace, who is the gate of heaven; for it is she who 
bringeth the King of Glory, of the new light. She 
remains a virgin, bearing in her hands the Son 
begotten before the day-star; whom Simcon received 
in his arms, declaring him to the people as Lord of 
life and death, and Saviour of the world. 


During the Mass which follows, all hold their lighted candles 
during the chanting of the Gospel as well as from the Elevation 


1 Jsaiah 60, used for the Lesson and Gradual of the Mass. 


128 Mv‘) and Ritual in Christianity 


to the Communion, while the bread and wine—mystically 
changed into the Body and Blood of Christ—remain upon the 
altar. The Sun which first shone in the cave has now given 
forth an ocean of stars. 

The entire theme of the Incarnation is the transformation of 
manhood into God—the birth or awakening of the divine 
and eternal nature in man as his true Self. 


O wondrous interchange! The Creator of man- 
kind, taking upon him a living body, vouchsafed 
to be born of a Virgin: and proceeding forth without 
seed as Man, hath bestowed upon us his own Deity 
(largitus est nobis suam Deitatem).} 


This, however reluctantly and grudgingly admitted by 
theology, is the actual dogma of the Incarnation, and the 
dogma is always that which constitutes the authentic form of 
the myth—the rest being individual opinion. The dogma of 
the Incarnation, as fully formulated by the General Council 
of Chalcedon in a.D. 451, declares the Christ to be one 
Person in two Natures. The Person? is God the Son, who is, 
from all cternity, of the divine nature—“God of God, Light 
of Light, very God of very God”. By reason of his Birth from 
the Virgin Mary he is also endowed with human nature and 


1 Office of St. Mary on Saturday, antiphon at the Hours. “Without seed” 
is the exact equivalent of asamprajnata, the word which Patanjali employs for 
the state of consciousness, the samadhi, in which the divinity of the true Self 
(atman) is fully realized. It is described as a state of consciousness which is, 
figuratively speaking, perfectly empty—virgin, immaculate, and pure—since 
not a trace of “I” remains in it. This is not literal empty-mindedness, but the 
equivalent of the Chinese wu-hsin (“no-mind”) or wu-nien (“no-thought"= 
nirvikalpa), and of the Christian agnosia (“unknowing”) whereby God is wuly 
known. In this state the mind is “emptied of the past” and of all “things” in the 
sense that it perceives the world of abstract construction for what it is—may4, 
measurements upon the Void. Instead, it perceives the world yathabhutam, i.e. just 
as it isin reality—existing undivided and undifferentiated in this eternal moment. 

2“Person” is bypostasis, that which “under” (bypo) “stands” (stasis), i.e. the 
“ground” or “basis” of the being—in other words, the Self, which in Sanskrit 
is the purusa (person) or &tman. 


Christmas and Epiphany 129 


all that pertains to it, so that he is not only true God but also 
true—that is, complete and perfect—Man. But he is not, as the 
Nestorians believed, a human person. He is man, but not a man. 
The inference is obviously that personality does not belong to 
the perfection of human nature, being essentially a divine and 
not a human property.} 

But the importance of the truth that the Christ is Man and 
not @ man is that the Incarnation of God is not something 
which comes to pass in a single, particular individual alone. 
Theological, as distinct from mythological, Christianity has 
always wanted to insist that such an Incarnation ocurred only 
with respect to the historical individual called Jesus of 
Nazareth. It has confused the true uniqueness of the Incarna- 
tion with mere historical abnormality. For the Incarnation is 
unique in the sense that it is the only real event, the only 
ocurrence which is Now, which is not past and abstract. 
It is thus the one creative and living act as distinct from dead 
fact, eternally happening in this moment. One would readily 
agree with the theologians that the Birth at Bethlehem is not 
simply—indeed not at all—the symbol of God incarnate as 
each and every man. There never was any question of God 
becoming each, a, or this particular man in the sense of any 
individual human personality. For there are no human 
personalities; at most one can say that there were such person- 
alities, every ego being a construct of memory only. But 
He-Who-Is is never at any time That-Which-Was. “Before 
Abraham was, I am.” 

It is true that the Birth of Christ is told as a history—that it 
happened in that particular place and that particular time, but 
history has an eternal significance only when it is also myth, 

1 Human nature has personality (i.e. creative life and originality) only to the 
extent chat it manifests the Creator and the Origin, the Person of the Eternal 
Word. While every such manifestation is outwardly unique, the words 
“personality” and “originality” are utterly misused when applied to the super- 


ficial idiosyncracies of purely abstract egos. “Human personality” is thus a 
contradiction in terms. 


130 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


when the past fact symbolizes the timeless, present reality. 
Otherwise, its significance is merely temporal, since it is 
nothing but a past event whose effects must in time wear off, 
and pass into oblivion. To say that this historical event was the 
Incarnation of God is, quite necessarily, to say that its signifi- 
cance is eternal rather than temporal since God, the Eternal, 
is what it signifies. But it is almost nonsense to say that it is the 
only historical event which has this significance. 

This “historical abnormality” version of the Incarnation was 
doubtless based, in the beginning, on the extreme insularity 
of the culture in which Christianity arose, since it knew of other 
cultures only as vague and legendary places from which 
merchant-adventurers brought such luxuries as silk and spices. 
It was thus unaware of the other Incarnation-myths of a 
stature equivalent to its own.! Furthermore, what had 
become, after the fourth century B.c., the extreme racial 
exclusivism of the Old Israel, became in turn the extreme 
spiritual exclusivism of the New Israel—the inferiority 
complex of a repressed nation becoming that of a repressed 
religion. In part, the notion of Jesus as the sole historical 
Incarnation was due to such a simple confusion as the appli- 
cation of the term “only-begotten Son” to Jesus as man, 
whereas it refers strictly to the Eternal Word “begotten before 
all ages”.? 

1 St. Jerome, adv. Jovinianum i. 42, mentions the Virgin Birth of the Buddha, 
but of course knows nothing of Buddhism, of the cultural and spiritual context 
which would give this myth a stature equivalent to the story of Christ. The 
Buddha was born miraculously though not, expressly, virginally, though this 
may be presumed in that he descended from the Tushita heaven, entered the 
womb of his mother Mayi in the form of a glorious white elephant, and was 
delivered painlessly from her side. According to Ashvaghosha’s life of the 
Buddha, Fo-Sho-Hing-Tsan-King, his mother Maya “was beautiful as the 
water-lily and pure in mind as the lotus. As the Queen of Heaven, she lived on 
earth, untainted by desire, and immaculate.” At the Buddha’s birth, “the child 
came forth from the womb like the rising sun. . . . Celestial music rang through 
the air and the angels rejoiced with gladness.” 


2 Cf. Jon 1: 14. Even if one were to take a literal and legal view of the 
authority of Scripture, this notion could not even be justified by Acts 4: 12, 


Christmas and Epiphany 131 


In later times the theory that God has been incarnate but 
once in history has been defended for the curious reason that it 
illumines the special value of history, stressing the eternal 
value of unique and particular facts. It is felt that incarnations 
which came to pass more or less regularly—Krishna, the 
Buddha, Jesus, Ramakrishna—would render the act of 
incarnation almost “non-historical”, like the recurrent cycle 
of the seasons. But if one wishes to advocate this special respect 
for history, it is hardly proper to base one’s version of the facts 
upon one’s theory of the value of history. Besides being a 
begging of the question, it is also a profound disrespect for 
scientific historical study to argue from the theory to the event, 
saying that because history is deeply significant therefore there 
must have been but one historical incarnation. Furthermore, 
this point of view involves the principle that cyclic and 
repetitive events are without historical significance, which is 
only to say that the Western view of time and history is linear— 
that the course of events is a series of significant steps towards 
God. Repetitions are not significant because they lack linear 
direction. But this is again to determine one’s version of history 
by a particular philosophy of history and theory of time. 

Yet here is another example of the marvelous way in which 
myth continues to be revealing even when distorted. The very 
insistence on the one historical incarnation as a unique step 
in a course of temporal events leading to the future Kingdom 
of God reveals the psychology of Western culture most clearly. 
It shows a mentality for which the present, real world is, in 
itself, joyless and barren, without value. The present can have 
value only in terms of meaning—if, like a word, it points to 
something beyond itself. This “beyond” which past and present 
events “mean” is the future. Thus the Western intellectual, as 
well as the literate common man, finds his life meaningless 


since the Name of Jesus is always to be understood as the “spirit” of Jesus, which 
would, of course, be that Eternal Word which is embodied in every Incarnation 
or avatar. 


132 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


except in terms of a promising future. But the future is a 
“tomorrow which never comes”, and for this reason Western 
culture has a “frantic” character. It is a desperate rush in 
pursuit of an ever-receding “meaning”, because the promising 
future is preciscly the famous carrot which the clever rider 
dangles before his donkey’s nose from the end of his whip. 
Tragically enough, this frantic search for God, for the ideal 
life, in the future renders the course of history anything but a 
scrics of unique steps towards a goal. Its real result is to make 
history repeat itself faster and more furiously, confusing 
“progress” with increased agitation. 

But the Western disillusion with past and present events— 
excluding the Incarnation—is based on a sound intuition. 
We said that it seeks for the meaning of events, as if they were 
words: and, indeed, this is exactly what they arc. In so far as 
we are aware of life as history only, as a series of facts, the life 
that we know is an abstraction without real value or joy. This 
will include our specious “present”, which is not the truc 
present but a memory of the immediate past—the so-called 
nunc fluens as distinct from the nune stans, the present which is 
always Aying away as distinct from that which is eternal. Our 
plight is that in failing to be aware of the true present we look 
for the meaning of events in the future, and it disappoints us 
perpetually because it is as abstract as the past. This is the folly 
of “laying up treasure upon carth”, that is to say, in time, and of 
“being anxious for the morrow”, for the Kingdom of Heaven 
is not future, within time, but now, above time.! 


1 St. Paul's “redeeming the time” is often understood to mean that, through 
Christ, the course of time is redeemed so that it leads to God, and not just on 
and on. This is not quite the sense of the passage in Ephesians 5: 14-16, “Awake 
thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Chrise shall give thee light. See, 
then, that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools but as wise, redeeming the time, 
because the days are evil.” Arising from the dead is ccasing to identify the Self 
with the past—as a result of which time “leads to” or “ends in” Christ, not in the 
future, but now. Cf Lynn White, “Christian Myth and Christian History,” 
in Journal of the History of Ideas, ili. 2 (New York, 1942), p. 145—an excellent 
discussion of this whole problem of “the course of time” in Christian thought. 


Christmas and Epiphany 133 


When, therefore, man awakens to the true present he finds 
his true Self, that wherein the reality of his life actually consists, 
as distinct from the “old man”, the self that was and is not. 
He is then “no longer I, but Christ”, and this “Christening” of 
mankind is the clear sense of the whole symbolism of the 
Incarnation, apart from which 1t is difficult to see how there 
can be any meaning in the i important conception of Christ as 
the Second Adam. “For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ 
shall all be made alive.”! If the First Adam communicates 
sin to all, the Second must communicate divinity to all—a 
point which was clear even to the earlier theologians. 


But we hold that to the whole of human nature the 
whole essence of the Godhead was united... . He in his 
fulness took upon himself me in my fulness, and was 
united whole to whole that he might in his grace bestow 
salvation on the whole man... . Further, the mind has 
become the scat of the divinity united with it in sub- 
sistence, just as is evidently the case with the body too.” 


Patristic literature is, indeed, rich in its testimony to the 
truth that in the Incarnation God “so united himself to us and 
us to him, that the descent of God to the human level was at 
the same time the ascent of man to the divine level.”> St. Cyril 
of Alexandria explains the symbolism of the New Adam 
thus: 


We are all in Christ, and the totality of mankind 
comes to life again in him. For he is called the new Adam 
because by sharing in our nature he has enriched all unto 
happiness and glory, as the firsts Adam filled all with 


11 Corinthians 15: 22. Cf. also 15: 45, “The first man Adam was made a 
living soul (psyche), the last Adam a life-giving spirit (prewma).” Note the 
contrast between psyche and pneuma, niefesh and ruacl, ego and wue Self. 

2 St. John of Damascus, De Fide Orthodoxa iii. 6. 

3St. Leo, Serm. VII de Nativitate Domint, ii. C£ also his Serm. LX XII, iv: 
“We have been made one Body with the Son of God, and by him placed at 
the right hand of the Father.” 


134 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


corruption and ignominy. Thus by dwelling in one, 
the Word dwelt in all, so that, the one being constituted 
the Son of God in power, the same dignity might pass 
to the whole human race.! 


Perhaps the point could hardly be put more strongly than in 
the words of St. Maximus of Turin: 


In the Saviour we have all risen, we have all been 
restored to life, we have all ascended into heaven. For a 
portion of the Aesh and blood of each one of us is in the 
man Christ. Therefore, where a portion of me reigns, I 
believe that I reign; where my blood rules, I conceive 
that I rule; where my flesh is glorified, I know that I am 
glorious.” 


Likewise St. Gregory of Nazianzus maintains that God 
became man “to sanctify man, and to be, as it were, a leaven 
for the entire mass; and by joining himself to what has been 
condemned, to free the whole from damnation.”? For “from 
the whole of human nature, to which was joined divinity, 
arose, as the first fruit of the common mass, the man who is in 
Christ, by whom all humanity was united to divinity.””4 

Naclantus even goes so far as to stress the still deeper truth 
that, by virtue of the Incarnation, we have become not only 
of one nature but also of one Person with Christ: 


He not only is clothed, sheltered, and fed in us: “As 
long as you did it unto one of the least of these my 
brethren, you did it unto me”; but we are reputed to be 
one and the same Person as he, and we receive his 


1JIn Ioan. Evang, 1. 9. 24. St. Cyril returns constantly to this theme: “We 
were crucified with him when his flesh was crucified; for in a sense it contained 
all nature, just as when Adam incurred condemnation the whole of nature 
contracted the disease of his curse in him.” (In Epist. ad Kom., vi.) 

2 Wom. VI in Pascha, 

3 Or. XXX, xxi. in MPG xxxvi, p. 132. 

4 Or. de verbis 1 Cor. 15, in MPG xliv, p. 1313. 


Christmas and Epiphany 135 


throne. ... And thus at last, from having been adopted 
sons, we become in a sense natural sons, and we call to 
the Father not alone by grace but, as it were, by natural 
right? 


For “he that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit,”® that ts, 
one and the same Self or Person, and it is with this union of 
the divine and the human in mind that wine and water are 
together poured into the chalice at Mass, with the prayer— 


Grant that, by the mystery of this water and wine, 
we may be made partakers of his divinity who vouch- 
safed to become partaker of our humanity. 


The feeling that the Incarnation has, in principle, already 
achieved this union is the clearest indication of its mythological 
character—of the fact that, as a story, it is the outward and 
visible symbol of a perennial truth about man. For upon the 
historical figure of Jesus the “common man” has projected 
symbols referring to the inmost, unconscious depths of his own 
nature. For this reason the Christ of Catholic dogma is a far 
more powerful conception than the rationalized “Jesus of 
history”. The latter is a mere preacher and exemplar of morals 
who, like all such, can only suggest superficial transformations 
of conduct which do not affect the inner core of our being. 
But the transforming power of the myth depends upon a full 
and effective realization of its meaning, which is something 
very much more than a devout fascination for the numinous 
quality of its symbols. 

Yet the full sense of the myth comes to light only as it is seen 


1 De Regno Christi, ftom Thomassinus, De Incarnatione viii. 9. 18. To “call 
to the Father by natural right” means to have the sane relationship to the Father 
which is enjoyed by God the Son as the Second Person of the ‘Trinity. Some 
modern theologians have argued that so substantial an identity between man 
and God would destroy the possibility oflove between the two, reducing all to a 
“meaningless monism”. But by the same argument it would have to follow that 
there could be no love between the Persons of the Trinity, since all Three are 
One God! 2 Corinthians 6: 17. 


136 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


in the spirit of a true catholicity—quod semper, quod ubique, quod 
ab omnibus, of the truth held always, everywhere, and by all— 
which is neither the official ideology of a “party religion” nor 
the lowest-common-denominator faith of a statistical demo- 
cracy. That which has been held “always, everywhere, and by 
all” is the one common realization, doctrine, and myth which 
has appeared with consistent unanimity in every great culture, 
without benefit of “historical contacts” between the various 
traditions. It was even obvious to St. Augustine, though he 
later retracted the statement, that “the very thing now called 
the Christian religion was not wanting among the ancicnts 
from the beginning of the human race, until Christ came in the 
flesh, after which the true religion, which already existed, 
began to be called ‘Christian’.” In the light of such a catholicity 
the Virgin-born Onc, who is both God and Man, is that 
uncaused Reality which is both the timeless and the present, 
which is simultancously the true life of man and of all. Every 
avatar, every incarnation of the “only-begotten Son” speaks in 
thename of this “one-and-only” Self who is yHvH, I am. 


I am the way, the truth, and the life... . I am the 
resurrection and the life.... I am the door.... 
Before Abraham was, I am.} 


I am the Self in the heart of all beings; I am the 
beginning, the middle, and the very end of 
beings....I am the origin of all. ...I am the 
father of this world. . . . I am light in moon and 
sun.... Tam the insight of the wise.* 


I was in many a guise before I was disenchanted, 
I was the hero in trouble, I am old and I am young. 
... Tam universal.? 
1 John 14: 6, 11: 25, 10: 7, 8: 58. 
? Sri Krishna in Bhagavad-Gita 10: 20, 10: 8, 9: 17, 7:8, 10. 
3 Talicsin, from Coomaraswamy, On the One and Only Transmsigrant, in 
J AOS, vol. 64, No. 2, supplement, p. 33 n. 


Christmas and Epiphany 137 


I am the wind which blows o’er the sea, I am the 
wave of the ocean...a beam of the sun... the 
God who creates in the head the fire.? 


I am in heaven and on earth, in water and in air; 
I am in beasts and plants; I am a babe in the womb, 
and one that is not yet conceived, and one that has 
been born; I am present everywhere.” 


1 Amergin, from Coomaraswamy, tbid. “Wind” and “wave of ocean” are 
the Spirit and Water of Genesis 1: 2. 
® Hermes Trismegistus, Lib, xiii. r1b. 


CHAPTER V 


The Passion 


IN the cycle of the Christian Year we move very swiftly from 
the Birth of Christ to his Passion, Death, and Resurrection, 
for the great feasts and fasts of the calendar commemorate the 
mythological aspects of the life of Christ—his great, world- 
saving actions rather than his teachings or miracles for the 
healing of individuals. However, the season of Christmas and 
Epiphany is separated from that of the Passion by the fast 
time of Lent.! The purpose of Lent is not primarily to 
commemorate the forty-day fast of Christ in the wilderness 
which immediately followed his baptism; in the ancient 
Church Lent was, above all things, the period of spiritual 

1 Lent is actually divided from Epiphany by the so-called Pre-Lenten 
season, the three Sundays of Septuagesima, Sexagesima, and Quinquagesima. 
These names are derived from the fact that the First Sunday in Lent was 
originally called Quadragesima-- the fortieth day before Easter—and the three 


Sundays preceding take these names by analogy, and not because they are 
respecuvely the fiftieth, sixtieth, and scventicth days before Easter. 


138 


The Passion 139 


training and instruction which preceded initiation into the 
Christian Mysteries by the Sacrament of Baptism. The proper 
time for initiation was Easter Eve, because the Sunday of the 
Resurrection is the greatest feast of the whole year—repre- 
senting the fulfilment of the Incarnation, whereas Christmas is 
only the beginning. 

Prior to the general practice of infant baptism, initiation into 
the Christian Mysteries was a tremendous solemnity involving 
preliminary disciplines, tests, and cxorcisms of a most scrious 
kind. For in this respect, as in many others, Christianity was 
following the pattern of the other great Mystery cults of the 
Graeco-Roman world. In those days the inner Mystery of the 
Mass was by no means a public rite which anyone might 
attend. It was a truc mystery, and the actual rite was divided 
into two parts—the Mass of the Catechumens and the Mass 
of the Faithful. The Catechumens were those undergoing 
preparation for baptism—being catechized—and because they 
had not yet received initiation were permitted to attend only 
the introductory part of the Mass. After the reading of the 
Gospel for the day, the Deacon of the Mass would turn to the 
people and say, “Let the catechumens depart”, whereafter it 
was the duty of the Door-keepers to see that no uninitiated 
person remained in the church. This custom prevailed so long 
as Christians were a minority in their society, but disappeared 
when Christianity had been adopted as a state-religion, and 
when whole societies were nominally Christian. 

While the primary purpose of the Quadragesima or Lent 
was, therefore, the preparation of the Catechumens, the fast 
was also kept by the Initiated Faithful as a matter of annual 
participation in the labours of Christ. Thus with the third 
Sunday before Lent—Septuagesima—the Church changes 
its vestments to the purple of penitence, and goes with Christ, 
as Christ, into the cycle of darkness. From now until Easter 
the Gloria in excelsis is not sung, nor is the triumphal cry 
“Alleluia!” heard in the liturgy. The Mass of Septuagesima 


140 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


opens with an introit from Psalm 17, appropriate to the entry 
of Christ in the darkness which he is to redeem: 


The groans of death surrounded me; the sorrows 
of hell encompassed me: and in my affliction I called 


upon the Lord. 


Lent? itself begins on the Wednesday before Quadragesima 
Sunday—a day called Ash Wednesday because of the rite of 
imposing blessed ashes on the forcheads of the faithful. Before 
the Mass, the priest takes ashes which have been made from 
palm-leaves used on Palm Sunday of the year before, and 
solemnly blesses them at the altar with holy water and the sign 
of the Cross. Thereafter the faithful come to the altar, and the 
priest traces the sign of the Cross with the ashes upon their 
forcheads, saying to cach: “Remember, O man, that dust thou 
art, and unto dust thou shalt return”, while the choir sings: 


Let us change our garments for ashes and sack- 
cloth: Iet us fast and lament before the Lord: for our 
God is plentcous in mercy to forgive our sins... . 
Attend, O Lord, and have mercy: for we have 
sinned against thee. 


The fast itself consists in special acts of picty carried on 
throughout the forty days, as well as abstention from “Aesh” 
food—that is to say, from “blood”. For both Hebrew and 
Christian symbolism identify blood with the life-principle, 
and abstention from blood is in recollection of the shedding 
of the Blood of Christ—that is, of the pouring out of the 
Divine Life into human nature. 

Generally speaking, the penitential observances of the 
Church have, in practice, a sentimental rather than a spiritual 
atmosphere because they express the feeling of remorse rather 

1“Lent” is an Anglo-Saxon word meaning “spring” (lencten). In France 


the season is known as Caréme, in Italy as Quaresima, both from the Latin 
Quadragesima. 


The Passion 141 


than “metaphysical conversion” or metuneia. From the carliest 
times they have dwelt upon the extreme “horror” of sin, and 
upon how deeply it “wounds the feelings” of Christ, and 
“grieves” the Holy Spirit. While it is all too true that the 
“missing of the mark” called egocentricity underlies all the 
enormities of human behaviour, Christians have seldom 
recognized that the inculcation of shame, horror, and guilt is 
in no sense a cure for sin. It is merely the opposite of mis 
conduct, the automatic reaction of the ego to social rejection, 
and, like every mere opposite or reaction, it is nothing more 
than a swing of the pendulum. The pendulum will continue 
to swing between good and evil until the weight is raised to 
the fulcrum, the Centre above and beyond the opposites. For 
sentimental guilt by no means destroys egocentricity, being 
nothing other than the sensation of its wounded pride—a pride 
which it then labours to restore by acts of penitence and piety. 


When the Devil was ill, 

The Devil a monk would be; 
But when the Devil was well, 
The Devil the Devil was he! 


In the sentimental sphere of “morals” both good and evil are 
sin, because the weight is away from the Centre, and thus 
“off the mark”. The Church recognizes this in principle, but 
nct in practice, in the doctrine that, lacking the divine Grace, 
even moral actions are done “under sin”. In effect, however, 
this has come to mean that only those “good” actions per- 
formed under the auspices of the Church are “really” good. 
The state of Grace has been confused with a permanent swing 
of the pendulum in one direction—an impossibility so long 
as the end, the ego, remains weighted. 

After five weeks of Lent the Church comes to the week in 
which it celebrates the central mystery of the entire Christian 
myth—the Mystery of the Atonement, of the “at-one-ment” of 
God and man achieved by the Incarnation. The rites of the 


142 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


Birth and of the Labours of Christ have been enacted, and the 
Church now turns to that phase of the Incarnation wherein 
God the Son descends into man’s suffering and death as well 
as into his life and labour, thereby raising the most finite level 
of human experience to the infinite. 

The Sacrificial Victim enters the temple for the final act 
of the Mystery with a triumphal procession, commemorating 
the entry of Jesus into Jerusalem for that Passover Sacrifice 
which was to be his own crucifixion.! Thus the first day of 


1 Here again, I suggest that the reader refresh his memory of the Gospel 
narrative—if necessary—before proceeding further with this chapter. The rites 
of the Church follow the order of events as described in folsn, and the relevant 
sections of this Gospel are Jol 12: 12 to 13: 38, and 18: 1 to the end of the 
Gospel. John, however, has no complete account of the Last Supper, and to fill 
in the full details of this and other events one should read also the accounts of 
both Matthey and Luke, at least. For these, see Matthew 21: 1-20, and 26: 1 to 
the end of the Gospel, and Lwke 19: 28-48, and 22: 1 to the end of the Gospel. 
To clarify the order of events in the second part of the week, I append the 
parallel Jewish and Christian calendars, inserting the events of the Christ-story 
as John places them: 


CHURCH CALENDAR JEWISH CALENDAR CURIST STORY 
Weds. in Holy Week 
Sunset: Nisan 13th 
First Day of 
Unleavened Bread 
Thurs. (Maundy) 
Sunset: Nisan 14th 
The Parasceve Last Supper 
Gethsemane 
Fri. of Preparation Peter’s Denial 
Trial by Pilate 
Crucifixion 
3 p.m. Paschal Lamb Death of Christ 
slain Burial of Christ 
Sunset: The Sabbath 
Passover meal 
eaten 
Sat. (Easter Eve) 
Sunset: First Day of 
the Weck 
Sun. (Easter Day) Dawn: Resurrection 


Note that in the Jewish Calendar days are reckoned from sunset to sunset. 


The Passion 143 


Holy Week is Palm Sunday—a day upon which the rites of 
the Church assume, and retain throughout the week, the 
definite character of a Mystery Drama in which the actual 
events of the Passion are re-enacted year after year, in witness to 
the fact that what is done here, in time, is the anamnesis or 
re-presentation of a truth which, at the metaphysical level, 
ever is. Jerusalem, the City of God and of the Temple, is 
Heaven when considered as the Jerusalem Abeve, but as the 
Jerusalem on earth it is the type of the human body, the 
material Temple of the Holy Spirit. To this shrine the Christ 
comes in triumph, the Word assuming the flesh to be 
crucified in the flesh, and “the children of the Hebrews” 
honour him by strewing their garments in his path and waving 
branches of palm and olive about his head, crying, “Hosanna! 
Blessed is he that cometh in the Name of the Lord! Hosanna 
in the highest!" 

The Mass of Palm Sunday is therefore preceded by a rite of 
peculiar interest and solemnity, having itself the form of a mass, 
save that the elements to be consecrated are not bread and wine 
but branches of palm and olive. As the procession of the priest 
and his ministers enters the church, the choir chants: 


Hosanna to the Son of David; blessed is he that 
cometh in the Name of the Lord. O King of Israel: 
Hosanna in the Highest. 


They repair to the altar for the intoning of a Collect, Lesson, 
and Gospel after the usual manner of the Mass, and thereafter 
chant the Preface and Sanctus to the music of the Mass for the 
Dead. The priest then blesses the branches with incense and 
holy water, recalling in his prayer not only the palms with 

1 Tt should be noted, too, that in entering the City of the Body he rides upon 
the animal—“Brother Ass” as St. Francis called the body. Many of the avatars 
are thus pictured, Lao-tzu upon the water-buffalo, the Buddha entering Maya 
upon the elephant, and Feng-kan riding the tiger. Krishna as the Chariotcer 


has the same sense, for ultimately it is always the real Self who holds the reins 
and “tides the beast” and not this “I”. 


144 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


which Christ was greeted at Jerusalem, but also the olive- 
branch which the dove brought to Noah as a sign of the ending 
of the Flood and of peace between God and man. For the 
Flood is ever the symbol of that unconsciousness of the Spirit, 
the true Self, into which the Divine—as the Sun—descends 
at night, and from which it arises at dawn, since these are the 
same watcrs from which the world was made in the beginning. 
The essential meaning of the Atonement is that it is the 
representation in time of the Sacrifice which was made “before 
time”, of the voluntary sacrifice wherein and whereby the One 
seems to become the Many. By the spell of the Word the true 
Self is enchanted, and appears to be this, that, and the other 
“I”, unconscious of its original Identity as, by night, the sun is 
lost in “the waters beneath the earth”. 

After the blessing, the palms are distributed to the people, 
a procession is formed, and the clergy with the choir leave the 
church, gathering outside the great West Door which stands 
at the opposite end of the church from the altar. At this point 
a group of cantors re-enters the church, and, facing the closed 
Door, begin the hymn Gloria, laus et bonor: 


All glory, laud and honour 
Tothee, Redeemer King, 
To whom the lips of children 

Made swect Hosannas ring. 


And at the close of each verse the choir outside repeats the 
refrain, echoing back and forth, until with the last verse the 
Subdeacon strikes upon the door with the foot of the proces- 
sional cross. At this, the Gate of Jerusalem, the Door of 
Christ’s Body the Church, is opened and the whole procession 
makes its triumphal entry, singing: 


As the Lord entered the holy city, the children of 
the Hebrews, declaring the resurrection of life, with 
palm branches cried out: Hosanna in the highest. 


The Passion 145 


During the Mass, at the time for the chanting of the Gospel, the 
clergy and the choir sing the whole story of the Passion accord 
ing to Matthew in a dramatic form, wherein members of the 
clergy take the parts of Christ, Pilate, Judas, and the Narrator, 
while the choir sings the words of the Hebrew multitude. The 
same rite is repeated on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Good 
Friday with the Passion stories according to Mark, Luke and 
Jobn. 

Thursday is an exception, because it is the feast Caena 
Domini, of the Lord’s Supper, commemorating the institution 
of the Mass itself, and for a moment the purple of mourning 1s 
exchanged for the white of gladness. On the night before he 
was crucified Christ and his Twelve Disciples partook of a 
last meal together. This, according to John, was not the 
Passover meal itself, which would have been eaten after sunset 
on Friday; it was possibly a chaburab, a type of solemn fraternal 
banquet held from time to time among Hebrew religious 
societies. At this supper Christ instituted the Sacrament or 
Mystery which was thereafter to be the very centre of Christian 
life and worship, and to be known by such names as the Holy 
Sacrifice of the Mass, the Eucharist, and the Divine Liturgy.) 

The action of Christ at the Last Supper may best be de- 
scribed in the words of the Mass itself, taken from the Quam 
oblationem—the Prayer of Consecration in the Canon or Order 
of the Roman Mass. Having given thanks, and having called 


1 The word “mass” is supposedly derived from the final salutation of the 
priest to the people, Ite missa est—“Go, it has been sent forth”—ain other words, 
the mission of the Incarnation has bec completed. “Eucharist” is the Greek 
word for “thanksgiving”, and is used because Christ “gave thanks” before he 
took the Bread and the Cup to perform the Mystery. The priest does the same 
before repeating the Act, beginning the Preface with the words, “It is very meet, 
right, and our bounden duty that we should at all times and in all places give 
thanks unto thee, O Holy Lord, Almighty Father, Eternal God”. The word 
“liturgy” is from the Greek Jeitour gos, that is, “public” leitos “work” ourgos—a 
term applied to the rites of the Church as a whole, but to the Mass in particular 
as the Great Work performed by the Church as the Body of Christ, the 
company of all faithful people. 


146 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


upon the Father to accept the Bread and Wine offered upon 
the altar, the priest continues: 


Which offering do thou, O God, vouchsafe in all 
things to bless >, consecrate >, approve >, make 
reasonable and acceptable: that it may become for 
us the Body »& and Blood >] of thy most beloved 
Son our Lord Jesus Christ. Who the day before he 
suffered took bread into his holy and venerable 
hands, and with his eyes lifted up to heaven, unto 
thee, God, his almighty Father, giving thanks to 
thee, he blessed >, brake, and gave to his disciples, 
saying: Take and cat this all of you, FOR THIS IS 
MY BODY. 


In like manner, after he had supped, taking also 
this excellent Chalice into his holy and venerable 
hands; also giving thanks to thee, he blessed >, and 
gave it to his disciples, saying: Take and drink this 
all of you, FOR THIS IS THE CHALICE OF MY 
BLOOD, OF THE NEW AND ETERNAL TESTAMENT; 
THE MYSTERY OF FAITH: WHICH SHALL BE SHED 
FOR YOU AND FOR MANY UNTO THE REMISSION 
OF sins. As often as ye shall do these things, ye shall 
do them in memory of me. 


At these words, spoken first by Christ, and thereafter by any 
duly ordered priest of the Apostolic Succession, that which 
was bread and wine becomes, in substance, the veritable Body 
and Blood of Christ. Thus the frail Host, the round wafer of 
bread, which the priest holds in his hands, becomes effectively 
the Eternal Word, God and Man, Creator and Ruler of the 
universe. Lifting it above his head, the priest shows it to be 
adored by all amid the rising smoke of incense and to the 
solemn ringing of bells. 

Bread and wine arc respectively the staple food and drink 


The Passion 147 


of men, and thus the substance of human life. Yet before they 
become food, the wheat and the grapes undergo a trans- 
formation: they are ground and crushed, baked and fermented, 
and in this they typify the strangest and most problematic 
aspect of life itself. For every form of life exists at the expense of 
some other form, the whole living world constituting a colossal 
cannibalism, a holocaust in which life continues only at the 
cost of death. Man lives because of the sacrifice of the wheat 
and the vine, and he, in his own turn, is a sacrifice to the birds 
and the worms, or to the bacilli which effect his death. This is 
the inescapably grim fact of being alive, and which most 
civilized peoples do their best to conceal. 

From the relative standpoint of time and space this mutual 
slaughter is hardly a sacrifice in the accepted sense; for every 
true sacrifice is voluntary, whereas the wheat which was 
ground for our bread, and the lamb which was slain for our 
roast could not exactly be called the willing victims of their 
fate. On the other hand, the Mass represents a true sacrifice, 
in that Christ submitted deliberately and willingly to his 
crucifixion, which took place at the very moment when the 
Jews were sacrificing the Passover Lamb at the Temple. The 
reason why the new Christ-Sacrifice redeems and the old 
Passover-Sacrifice does not is that the Victim of the former 
is willing, the performer of a self-sacrifice, at once Priest and 
Offering.! 

Now the voluntary sacrifice redeems man from the curse of 
sin and death because there is but One who can actually 
perform self-sacrifice—namely God, the true Self. That other 
self called “I” is utterly unable to end itself, for it can only think 
in terms of its own continuity. Even ordinary suicide is not a 
true self-ending because, like every desire for a future, it is an 


1 Naturally, the Jews have to play the part of “villain” in this story, bur if one 
were to consider Hebrew Mythology i in its own right, it would be found to 
express the same philosophia perennis as the Christian, more especially in that 
complete form known as the Kabala. 


148 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


attempt to retain something out of the past, out of memory—in 
this instance the memory of sleep, but sleep to continue for ever. 
But “I comes to an end when, in the light of immediate 
“now-consciousness”, of the true Self, it is seen to be unreal, 
abstract, and incapable of creative action. This actual Self 
alone, being of eternity and not time, is free from the wish to 
continue, and is able to come to an end—the “end” here 
signifying the “mark” which sin misses, the point of the needle 
on which the angels stand, the One Moment of eternity. 

The marvelous symbolism of the Mass, as of the Crucifixion 
itself, has to be understood in relation to the mysterious “Lamb 
sacrificed from the foundation of the world” whichis mentioned 
in the Apocalypse.t Seen from the temporal standpoint of “I”, 
life is founded on the grim holocaust of mutual slaughter 
unwillingly endured, since “I” must ever wish to continue. 
But from the standpoint of the Point, of eternity, this holocaust 
is the outward expression of the eternal self-ending of the 
Creator. Hindu mythology puts it rather more directly by 
saying that each form of life is the disguise of God, and that 
life exists because it ever offers itself to itself, since the food 
which is eaten is the disguised God giving himself to be eaten. 
Hence the formula, Annam Brabman—food is God—and the 
verse: 


Who gives me away verily helps me! 
I—the food—eat the eater of food! 
I overcome the world! 


All of which is to say, with Christ, of the Bread, “Take and 
eat this all of you, for this is my Body. . . . Be of good cheer, for 
I have overcome the world.” 

The “death” from which we are redeemed is always the past, 
and salvation is release from the enchantment of time. At once 
this deprives physical death, so essential to life, of its peculiar 
horror because the mind is no more obsessed with the wish to 


1 Revelation 13: 8. * Taittiriya Upanishad, iii. 10. 6. 


The Passion 149 


continue, to go on piling up memories indefinitely. Physical 
death is then understood as the instrument of eternal renewal. 
It is not only the transformation of life into food; it is also the 
wiping away of memory, of the past, which, if it continued to 
accummulate indefinitely, would strangle all creative life with 
a sense of unutterable monotony. Physical death is the in- 
voluntary end of the memory-system called myself—the end of 
my time. But the real and eternal Self does not die at death—for 
the paradoxical reason that it wills to “die”, to “end”, eternally, 
and is therefore “new” at every moment. 


Behold, I make all things new. ... It is done. 
Iam Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the 
end.... Behold, I come quickly, and my reward 
is with me.} 


To put it less symbolically—the world of reality is ever-present, 
always at an end because it has no future, and always new 
because it has no past.? 

In the Mass, then, we represent the crux of the whole Myth: 
the bread and wine which we are, because we cat it, becomes 
by Sacrifice the Body and Blood (i.e. Life) of Christ. And this, 
in turn, we eat again so that it becomes us, making our body 
and blood Christ’s. This is why the myth so properly insists 
that the Mass is much more than a mere symbol: the bread and 
wine become in actuality and not alone in figure the very 
Christ. It is precisely in the almost magical character of the 
Catholic Mass that its whole truth lics, and all attempts to 
rationalize the Mystery deprive it of its real point. For in every 

1 Revelation 21: 5, 6; 22: 12. 

2 Cf. Jami, Lawa’ih, xxvi: “The universe consists of accidents pertaining to a 
single substance, which is the Reality underlying all existences. This universe 
is changed and renewed unccasingly at every moment and every breath. Every 
instant one universe is annihilated and another resembling it takes its place... . 
In consequence of this rapid succession, the spectator is deceived into thie belief 


that the universe is a permanent existence.” ‘Trs. Whinfield and Kazwini 
(London, 1906). 


10 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


way the rite of the Mass concentrates upon a point—the point 
of time at which the priest utters the solemn words, Hoc est enim 
Corpus meum, Hoc est enim Calix Sanguinis mei, and the point of 
space, the altar, where the attention of the whole congregation 
is focused in its worship of the Sacramental Presence. Yet 
because the Mass is also a symbol as well as an actual Mystery, 
this one point is the temporal and spatial “focus” of the 
point of the Eternal Now, in which and at which the very 
universe is Christ’s Body. In the language of time and space 
the miracle of transubstantiation is limited to a particular 
point of time and space—to that bread and wine ritually 
consecrated. But from the eternal point represented by the 
temporal point the miracle of transubstantiation does not 
become but is, from the foundation of the world, and includes 
the entire creation.} 

The actual rite of the Mass is, as we saw, divided into two 
parts—the Mass of the Catechumens and the Mass of the 
Faithful. The former is a re-adaptation of the Jewish synagogue 
service, consisting of prayers and readings. The actual action 
of the Mass does not begin until the Mass of the Faithful. It is 

1 It should hardly be necessary to labour this point, for the symbolism of the 
Mass is so clear and obvious—the transformation of the substance of life into the 
divine nature. However, official theology in its peculiar horror of anything that 
might possibly suggest “pantheism’—the doctrine that all “things” are God— 
has very much discouraged any interpretation of the Mass which fails to confuse 
the language of myth with that of science. But, as a matter of fact, pantheism 
has never been a part of the philosopbia perennis, since it would be absurd to 
identify with God those “things” which, as we have seen, exist in a verbal and 
conventional sense alone. This deeper significance of the Mass is beginning to 
appear again in the contemporary Liturgical Reform movement within the 
Church, whereas during the whole period of the transubstantiation controversies 
with Protestantism a very narrow view of the Mass prevailed. Its essential work 
was, as it were, stopped short at the altar, and the communicant remained in 
actual touch with the True Body only for so long as the sacred species continued 
undissolved in his stomach! However, Patristic views were quite otherwise, 
as St. Leo, in Sermo 63 (MPL, liv, 357), “Nothing else is aimed at in our 
partaking of the Body and Blood of Christ than that we change into what we 


consume, and ever bear in spirit and in flesh him in whom we have died, been 
buried, and have risen.” 


The Passion I$ 


divided into three main phases—Offertory, Consecration, and 
Communion. The Offertory is the presentation of the bread 
and wine at the altar, and represents the offering of ourselves, 
the laying open of humanity to Godhead in the spirit of the 
Virgin’s “Be it unto me according to thy word”. In the 
Consecration the priest assumes the part of Christ and repeats 
the actions of the Last Supper, as described above, performing 
with his hands what he also says in words—concluding with 
the solemn breaking of the Host, called the Fraction, because 
an essential part of the Mystery is that the Body of Christ is 
broken and divided and yet remains entire in every fragment. 
The “natural” world of separate “things” is always the seeming 
division of the supernatural, which, however, remains One 
and undifferentiated. In the final act of Communion all the 
clergy and people gather at the altar and consume the sacred 
elements, brought to them by the priest and his attendant 
ministers. 

The Mass which is celebrated on the Thursday of Holy Week 
is, then, a very special commemoration in honour of Christ’s 
first celebration of this Mystery. The Gloria is: excelsis, ordinarily 
omitted in Lent, is sung, and at this time the bells of the church 
ring out for the last time until Easter. During the Mass the 
priest consecrates a special Host which, when the Mass is over, 
is placed in the Chalice, veiled, and, attended with lights, 
is carried in solemn procession to a side-altar radiant with 
candles and flowers. In this fashion the Church accompanies 

1In the Roman Catholic rite the Chalice is not received by any but the 
priest himself, a restriction dating from early mediaeval times when, because of 
the prevalence of shaggy moustaches and beards which might catch drops of the 
consecrated wine, precautions were taken to preserve the [3lood of Christ from 
profanation. Not all of the consecrated bread is consumed in the Communion, 
and that which remains is “reserved” in a tabernacle upon the altar which is 
ceremoniously veiled and attended by an ever-burning light. This “reservation 
of the Sacrament” is for the purpose of having the Host ready at all times 
for the Communion of the sick and dying, and to constitute the perpetual 


centre of devotion for the faithful who visit the church outside the time of 
Mass. 


152 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


Christ to the Garden of Gethsemane, singing as it goes the 
great hymn of St. Thomas Aquinas, Pange lingua: 


Now, my tongue, the mystery telling 
Of the glorious Body, sing, 

And the Blood, all price excelling, 
Which the nations’ Lord and King, 
In a Virgin’s womb once dwelling, 
Shed for this world’s ransoming. 


At the side-alear the Host is reserved throughout the remaining 
hours of the day and night until the morning of Good Friday, 
and during this time groups of the faithful take turns at the 
altar to keep the vigil with Christ in the Garden. 

After Vespers have been sung, the priest and his ministers 
go to the high altar and strip off its fine cloths of linen and silk 
while the choir sings: 


They parted my garments among them; 
And upon my vesture they cast lots— 


remembering how Christ was stripped of his clothes before 
crucifixion. This done, the priest puts aside his purple cope 
(i.e. cloak), girds himself with a linen towel and, taking a 
vessel of water, gocs and washes the feet of the faithful. He 
pours a little water on the right foot of cach person, wipes it 
with a towel, and kisses it, and, while he re-enacts the humility 
of Christ in washing the feet of his disciples after the Supper, 
there is chanted the antiphon: 


Mandatum novum do vobis—A new commandment 
I give you: that you love one another, as I have loved 


you, saith the Lord. 


And thus in English-speaking lands this day is called Maundy 
Thursday from the first word of this antiphon—mandatum, 
a commandment. 

In a monastic church where the Divine Office is regularly 


The Passion 153 


sung in choir, the ensuing hours of the night are observed with 
the marvelous rite of Tenebrae or “Darkness”, consisting of the 
special version of Matins and Lauds appropriate to Holy 
Week. By the altar there is set a triangular stand upon which 
there burn fifteen unbleached candles, one of which is ex- 
tinguished at the end of each psalm composing the Office—in 
representation of the desertion of Christ by his disciples. The 
psalms are interspersed with various anthems and lections from 
the scriptures and the Fathers, so that the whole rite may last 
for two or more hours. 

The profound psychological effect of Tenebrae is largely 
dependent upon the “contemplative” tone of the endlessly 
flowing Gregorian chant to which the words are sung. Unlike 
modern, and like most types of “traditional” music, it has no 
fixed rhythm, so that it follows the natural rhythm of the 
spoken word. Furthermore, it has a peculiarly impersonal 
quality. That is to say, it is not at all suggestive of strong 
individual emotions, and lacks the “personal style” which 
post-Renaissance composers have worked so assiduously to 
cultivate. It is therefore a music possessed of a universal and 
supra-individual character wholly suited to the words of the 
Divine Office, and likewise of the Mass itself, since these are 
understood to be the words of God and not of man. Indeed, 
the entire principle of worship is that man speaks, not words, 
but the Word, in expression of the fact that he is “no longer I 
but Christ”. 

As Tenebrae proceeds into the night the church grows darker 
and darker. Psalm by psalm the candles at the altar are put out, 
and towards the end all other lights in the church are extin- 
guished too, until one solitary light remains at the apex of the 
stand. This is Christ alone, surrounded by the “forces of 
darkness” when all his disciples have fled. At a deeper level 


1 Galatians 2: 20. Strictly speaking, then, Christianity knows of no such 
thing as “private prayer”, which is actually a contradiction in terms. Man is 
related ro God only as Christ, and never as “I”. 


154 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


Tenebrae is a representation of the spiritual journey into the 
“Dark Night of the Soul”, the disappearance of light symboliz- 
ing the progressive realization that “I am nothing”. After the 
singing of the Canticle of Zacharias, the Benedictus, the one 
light remaining is taken out and concealed behind the altar so 
that the church is plunged into total darkness. 

Even Christ has gone—“crucified, dead, and buried”. There 
is nothing whatsoever left to which “I” can cling. Every 
belief and hope, even in God, which seemed to offer life to 
the “I” has been taken away, for as Christ said to his disciples, 
“Tt is expedient for you that I go away, for if I go not away the 
Paraclete (the Holy Spirit) cannot come unto you.”! This is, 
then, the “cloud of unknowing”, the “divine darkness”, of 
St. Dionysius in which it is discovered that because all 
“knowledge” is memory, knowledge of that which was, all our 
knowledge amounts to nothing in so far as it fails entirely to 
grasp That which is. But in the now total darkness and silence 
of the church there is a sudden, sharp noise, and the one candle 
is brought back to its place on the stand—whereupon all leave 
the church in silence. This strepitus or sudden noise, heralding 
the return of the light, of the “one point” of fire, is the promised 
Resurrection into Life—always “sudden” in representation of 
the timeless and instant nature of eternity. 

The day of the Crucifixion, known as Good Friday or the 
Friday of the Preparation (for the Passover), is observed with 
the sombre splendour of the Mass of the Presanctified. The 
clergy, vested in black, come to the bare altar and celebrate the 
ritual drama of the Passion according to John, singing the 
18th and 19th chapters of the Gospel, from the Agony in 
the Garden to the Burial in the tomb of St. Joseph 
of Arimathaca. This done, the priest chants some sixteen 
prayers of intercession for the Church and for the whole human 
race. When these are ended, he receives from the deacon of the 
mass a great wooden crucifix veiled in black. He holds it up 

1 Jolon 16: 7. 


The Passion 1$5 


<f, 
SO eA ER 


SAA SS LK OS <i RA 
COO3)OOO OR 
FIG. 8 THE CRUCIFIXION 
This extraordinary woodcut was made in Rennes, France, about 1830. It 
shows almost the full symbolism of the Cross as the Tree of Life, surmounted 
by the figure of God the Father and the Dove of the Holy Spirit. To the left 
and right are the sun and moon, the sponge and the spear. Below, the Skull of 
Golgotha is clearly associated with the sphere of the world, encircled by the 
Serpent. I am unable to account for the peculiar symbolism of the dismem- 
bered heads and limbs, except by association with other traditions in which the 
divine sacrifice is more explicitly a dismemberment than a crucifixion. 


156 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


before the people, and, unveiling the top part, sings upon a 
low note— 


Ecce lignum crucis—Behold the wood of the cross, 
on which hung the Saviour of the world. 


And the choir responds: 
Venite adoremnus—Come let us adore. 


Unveiling the right arm of the crucifix, the same words are 
sung again louder and a little higher. Finally the whole 
crucifix is laid bare, and the words are cried out once more 
upon a note higher still. The “wood of the cross” is placed 
before the altar upon a cushion, where the priest removes his 
shoes, kneels before it and kisses it, all the people following 
him in turn. 

As the adoration of the Wood of the Cross proceeds, the 
choir sings the Reproaches: 


O my people, what have I done unto thee? 
or in what have I afflicted thee? answer me. 


Because I led thee out of the land of Egypt, 
thou hast prepared a Cross for thy Saviour. 


The Reproaches are interspersed with an ancient Greek 
litany—the use of Greek rather than Latin indicating the 
great antiquity cf this rite. 


Agios 0 Theos—O holy God, 

to which are echoed the same words in Latin— 
Sanctus Deus! 

And the Litany proceeds: 
Agios ischyros—O holy mighty One! 


Sanctus fortis! 


The Passion 1$7 


Agios athanatos, eleison imas—O holy 
immortal One, have mercy upon us! 


Sanctus immortalis, miserere nobis! 


The Reproaches call to mind all the “types” of salvation 
bestowed upon the Chosen People in the Old Testament—the 
manna in the desert, the opening of the Red Sea, the pillar of 
fire, the water from the rock, and the sceptre of the Throne of 
David—the while reproaching the People for crucifying the 
Substance of which these types were the shadows. 


I gave thee a royal sceptre, and thou hast given 
me a crown of thorns. 


Yet it is just here that the rite brings out the marvelous 
paradox of the whole Crucifixion Mystery. On the one hand, 
the wood of the Cross is the entire summation of man’s 
ignorance and sin, being the instrument of torture which it 
prepared for the Man who is God. On the other hand, the 
Reproaches close with the antiphon: 


We adore thy Cross, O Lord: and we praise and 
glorify thy holy Resurrection: for by the wood of the 
Cross the whole world is filled with joy. 


Whereupon there is immediately sung the extraordinary hymn, 
Crux fidelis, in which the instrument of execution appears as 


the very Tree of Life: 


Crux fidelis, inter omnes 
Arbor una nobilis: 

Nulla silva tamen profert 
Fronde, flore, germine. 


Faithful Cross, the one Tree noble above all: 
no forest affords the like of this in leaf, or 
flower, or seed. 


158 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


De parentis protoplasti 
Fraude factor condolens, 
Quando pomi noxialis 
In necem morsu ruit: 
Ipse ligntm tune notavit, 
Damna ligni wt solveret. 


The Creator pitying the sin of our first parent, 
wherefrom he fell into death by the bite of the 
poisoned apple, did himself forthwith signify 
wood for his healing of the hurts of wood. 


It is obvious that the Wood or Tree of the Cross is of the 
highest mythological significance, and that its relation to the 
actual stauros (stake) upon which the historical Jesus was hung 
is relatively small. Many modern Christian historians think 
it most unlikely that Jesus was actually crucified upon a 
wooden cross of the type familiar in crucifixes, whether of the 
Latin t, Greek +, or Egyptian Tau-cross T forms. It was 
more probably a simple stake, such that the actual symbol of 
the Cross was shaped according to mythological rather than 
historical considerations. As is well known, the Cross and 
the Sacrificial Tree are symbols far more ancient than Christi 
anity, and had a significance of such importance that it is not 
at all inappropriate for the hymn to say: 


Sola digna tw fuisti 


Ferre mundi victimam. 


Thou alone (the Tree) wert found worthy 
to bear the Victim of the world. 


So many of the hero-gods and avatars are associated with the 
Tree that the central symbol of Christianity is of a truly universal 
nature, and by no means a historical abnormality. In the myth 
of Osiris, “he who springs from the returning waters”, the 
body of the God—slain by Set the Evil One—is found within 


The Passion 1$9 


a giant tamarisk or pine-tree which had been cut down and 
used for the central pillar of the Palace of Byblos. Attis, son of 
the virgin Nana, died by self-sacrifice under a pine-tree. 
Gautama the Buddha, son of Maya, attained his supreme 
Awakening as he sat in meditation beneath the Bo Tree. 
Odin learned the wisdom of the runes by immolating himself 
upon the World-Tree, Yggdrasil, with a spear cut from the 
same Tree: 

I know that I hung 

On a wind-rocked tree 

Nine whole nights, 

With a spear wounded, 

And to Odin offered 

Myself to myself; 

On that tree 

Of which no one knows 

From what root it springs. 


In like manner, Adonis (= Adonai, the Lord) was born of 
Myrrha the myrtle, and the Babylonian god Tammuz was 
associated in his death with the cedar, the tamarisk, and the 
willow.* 

In almost all the mythological traditions this Tree is the 
Axis Mundi, the Centre of the World, growing in the “navel 
of the world” as, in mediaeval drawings, the Tree of Jesse is 
shown growing from the navel of Jesse. In the myth of Eden 
the Tree stands in the centre of the Garden, at the source of four 
rivers which “go out to water the garden”. For obvious 
reasons, Christianity regards the Cross as the centre of the 

1 Odin’s Rune Song, us. Benjamin Thorpe in The Edda of Sacmund the 
Learned (London, 1866). 

2In the Babylonian hymn called The Lament of the Flutes for Tammuz, a 
so-called “fertility” god taken to represent the death and resurrection of the crops, 
he is described as “a tamarisk that in the garden has drunk no water, . . . a willow 
that rejoiced not by the water-course.” 


3 The clear identity of the Cross with this central Tree of Eden is shown, not 
only in the legends of the Holy Rood which assert that the Cross of Christ 


160 Myth and Ritual ia Christianity 


world, and likewise places it upon the altar as the ritual centre 
of the church. The World-Ash, Yggdrasil, had its roots in 
Niflheim, the uttermost depths, and its topmost branch, 
Lerad, reached to the palace of the Allfather Odin in heaven. 
Similarly the world-tree of the Siberian Yakuts grows at “the 
central point, the World Navel, where the moon does not 
wane, nor the sun go down.”! Conversely, the Axle-Tree of 
the Upanishads and the Bhagavad-Gita grows out of Brahma and, 
like the Sephiroth Tree of the Kabala, has roots above and 
branches below. 

The symbolism of the Tree is quite clearly that the Tree is 
the world—Life itself—having its stem rooted in the unknown. 
Its branches, leaves, flowers, and fruit form the multiplicity of 
creatures—“I am the vine; ye are the branches’—which 
blossom from the ever-fertile source of life. The wood of the 
Tree is matter, prima materia, out of which all things are made, 
so that it is not unfitting that, in his earthly incarnation, the 
Son of God should be also the Son of the Carpenter—Joseph. 
For this reason the Gnostics distinguished between three types 
of men, the pneumatic, the psychic, and the hylic—the 


was made from the wood of that Tree, but also in the famous Great Cross of 
the Lateran, a mosaic dating, perhaps, from the time of Constantine, and 
restored by Nicolas IV. It shows an ornate Cross of the Latin form, having at 
its head the descending Dove of the Holy Spirit. From its foot there flow four 
rivers named Gihon, Pison, Tigris, and Euphrates, which were the four rivers 
of Eden. Between these rivers stands the City of God, guarded by the Archangel 
Michael, and behind him, in the midst of the City, stands a palmaree sur- 
mounted by a phoenix. (The phoenix was commonly associated with Christ 
because it was supposed to rise eternally from the ashes of the fire in which it 
perished.) Two stags stand upon either side of the Cross, and at the bottom of 
the whole mosaic six sheep are standing in the waters of the four rivers. The 
parallel with Ygedrasil is extraordinary, for its topmost branch, Lerad, bears 
the falcon Vedfolnir whose piercing eye sees all things in the universe, and the 
four stags Dain, Dvalin, Duneyr, and Durathor feed upon its leaves. Honey- 
dew drops down from their horns, and supplies water for all the rivers of the 
earth. 

1 From Joseph Campbell, The Hero With a Thousand Faces (New York, 
1949), Pp. 334-5. Many representations of the crucified Christ likewise 
show the sun and moon on either side of the Cross. 


The Passion 161 


last-named being those unfitted for supreme knowledge because 
of their total involvement in materiality, in bylé, which in 
Greek is “wood”. Furthermore, the Tree is cruciform because 
the Cross is the “shape of the world”, since the earth has four 
directions or quarters, and the very universe itself—ringed by 
the Zodiac—has four fixed, four cardinal, and four mutable 
points. Christ with his Twelve Apostles is in clear corre- 
spondence with the Sun in its twelve zodiacal signs, and the 
crucifix is very frequently found with the four fixed signs 
Taurus, Leo, Scorpio (interchangeable with the phoenix- 
eagle), and Aquarius at its extremities, standing for the Four 
Evangelists who, with the Four Archangels, do duty in 
Christianity for the Four Regents of Hindu-Buddhist 
mythology—the caryatidal kings who support the dome of 
heaven.! 

To this Tree, image of the finite world, the Son of God is 
nailed by his hands and feet, and a spear is thrust in his side. 
And because the finite world is manifested by the contrast of 
opposites, left and right, high and low, before and behind, 
day and night, good and evil, the image of the world is 
cruciform. On the right hand is the sun, and on the left the 
moon. At the head is the fiery Dove, and at the foot the serpent 
or the skull—contrasting figures of life and death, liberation 
and bondage. The whole is, in short, a revelation of what 
human life is—in so far as our life is the identification of the 
true Self with time and space, past and future, pleasure and 
pain. This identification is the nailing, in consequence of 
which we are “dead and buricd”—absorbed and confused 
in a past which “is not”. 

1 Fanciful as these correspondences may seem to the modern mind, we must 
not forget that the Christian myth was formulated by people for whom they 
were immensely significant. Christianity was not elaborated from the scriptures 
by the rational and historical methods of its modern apologists. The tremendous 
importance of the four directions and of astrological symbolism in general is 


well ueated in Dr. Austin Farrer’s study of the Apocalypse entitled A Rebirth of 
Images (London, 1949). 


162 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


This 1s why the Son of God ts impaled with Five Wounds, 
for the world of ime and space with which the Self is identified 
is based on the five senses—strictly speaking, on the memory 
of what comes to us through the five senses, for this is the sense 
of being “stuck” or nailed. In reality the past drops away, but in 
the mind it “sticks” and so impales us that we are in bondage to 
the past and to death. By the sticking, the memory, of the five 
senses we are helplessly attached to a world which we simul- 
taneously love and hate, which is pain to the degree that it is 
irresistible pleasure. In the Jataka Tales the Buddha, as Prince 
Five Weapons, is found in a similar predicament with the 
Giant Sticky-Hair—a monstrous ogre whom no man could 
defeat because all weapons became stuck in the clinging hairs 
which covered his body. The Prince fared no better than others, 
for he fought with the giant until he was glued to its hair by 
both hands, both fect, and even by his head. But just as the 
giant was about to devour him, the Prince said, “Monster, 
why should I fear? For in one life one death is quite certain. 
Moreover, I have in my stomach a thunderbolt—a weapon 
which you will be unable to digest if you cat me. It will tear 
your insides to pieces!”"! At this, Sticky-Hair let go, and the 
Prince was free. 

The thunderbolt, the lightning-Aash, in the future Buddha’s 
stomach was the vajra, otherwise known as the Diamond Body, 
which is equivalent to the Godhead in Christ—the eternal 
Self which is never actually in time. So long, then, as man 
thinks of himself as this “I”, he finds that there is absolutely 
nothing he can do to release himself from the bondage of time; 
indeed, the more he struggles to be free, to be unselfish, just, 
and good, the more he is stuck in the entanglements of pride. 
“T-consciousness” is a vicious circle such that every attempt to 


1 Jataka, $5: 1. Cf, A. K. Coomaraswamy, “A Note on the Stickfast 
Motif”, in Journal of American Folklore, vol. $7, pp. 128-31 (1944). This is, 
of course, a version of the universal motif which appears in American folklore 
as the Tar-Baby story. 


The Passion 163 


23 


3-9 2% 
ORB 


iS) 
iy 


FIG. 9 THE CRUCIFIXION 


Froma Spanish woodcut in the British Museum, ¢. 15th century. The Virgin 
and St. John the Evangelist stand upon either side 


stop or escape from it makes it whirl the more. Every move, 
whether towards sclf-assertion or self-denial, is like the plight 
of the fly in honey—for one loves oneself only to hate oneself, 
and then the struggle to be free imprisons every limb. In such 
an impasse “T” must at last give up. 


My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? 
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. 

It is finished. 

And he gave up the ghost. 


This is the universal testimony of the “knowers of God” 
—that the spiritual life of man dawns in the moment when, 


164 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


in a profound and special sense, he does nothing. “I do 
nothing of myself.” This is no ordinary inactivity, for to be 
idle with the express intention of attaining sanctity, as in 
formal “quictism”, is still activity in so far as it is a method, 
a means to discover God. But the true state of divine union 
is “without means”, and comes to pass when man “gives 
up” not as a means to get, but because he knows with 
certainty that he has no other alternative. In the ordinary 
way, such certainty comes only through a struggle to be free 
by all available means, leading to the conviction of their 
futility. To put it in another way, the mind does not become 
free from the illusion of ego by the way of unconsciousness— 
by any attempted reversion to “nature”, or to primitive inno- 
cence, and still less by any kind of forgetful inebriation in 
ecstatic sensations, whether induced by drugs or sclf-hy pnosis. 
The ego is dissolved only through the way of consciousness, 
through becoming so conscious of what “I” is that it has no 
more power to enthrall. 

This “giving up” is the Sacrifice by which the Cross is 
transformed from the instrument of torture to the “medicine 
of the world”, so that the Tree of Death becomes the Tree of 
Life. By the same alchemy the cruciform symbol of the earth, 
of conflict and opposition, is also the symbol of the sun, of 
life-giving radiation. 


Fulget crucis mysterium; 
Qua vita mortem pertulit, 
Et morte vitam protulit. 


Shines forth the mystery of the Cross; 
whereby life suffered death, and by 
death brought forth life. 


For this reason Christian art fashions the crucifix in two ways— 
the Cross of Christ suffering and the Cross of Christ in 


triumph, the latter showing him crowned and vested as King 


The Passion 165 


and Priest amid a full aureole radiating from the centre of the 
Cross. Properly, the first type of crucifix hangs or stands at the 
Rood Beam above the entrance to the choir or sanctuary, while 
the second type belongs upon the altar. 

Thus the Tree standing at the axis, the cross-roads of the 
world, at the central point of time and space, is at once 
the Now out of which time and space, past and future, arc 
exfoliated to the crucifixion of the Self, and the Now into 
which the Self “returns” when it “takes up the Cross” and no 
longer “misses the mark”—the “target” into which the spear of 
attention is at last thrust, releasing the river of blood and water 
which cleanses the world. 


Spina, clavi, lancea, 

Mite corpus perforarunt: 
Unda manat et cruor: 

Terra, pontus, astra, mundus, 
Quo lavantur flumine! 


Thorns, nails, and spear pierce that gentle 
Body: water flows forth, and blood: in which 
stream are cleansed the earth, the ocean, the 
stars, and the world! 


The Mass of the Presanctified moves on to its climax with 
the solemn procession which, after the adoration of the Wood 


1 From the hymn Crux fedelis, Cf, Mundaka Upanishad, ii. 2. 3: 


“Using for a bow the great weapon of the Upanishad, 
One should set thereon an arrow made sharp by meditation. 
Suetching it with a mind pointed to the essence of That, 
Penetrate as the mark that Imperishable.” 


Note also that the cross of the Aztec saviour, Quetzalcoatl, was formed when 
the hero shot a pochotl tree through with another pochotl, used as an arrow. 
Likewise, Love comes to birth when Cupid penctrates the Heart (of the world) 
with his dart, which Heart appears in Catholic symbolism as the Sacred Heart 
of Jesus pierced with a dagger or spear. 


166 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


of the Cross, brings from the altar of repose—Gethsemane—the 
Host which was consecrated the previous day.! As the choir 
sings the Vexilla Regis, the hymn praising the Cross as the 
triumphal Banner of the King, the Host is brought to the high 
altar amid lights and incense. It is laid upon the corporal, the 
small square cloth which is always spread upon the altar for 
the Holy Sacrament, and solemnly the priest swings the 
censer of incense thrice around it, and once over it in the form 
of a cross. He washes his hands, and then, after singing the 
Pater noster, elevates the Host for the adoration of the people. 
Silently, he receives it in Communion, and the Mass ends 
without another word. All lights are extinguished; the doors 
of the Tabernacle are unveiled and thrown wide open; the 
church is deserted.” 

When Christ had “given up the ghost” and the spear had 
been thrust into his side, his body was taken down from the 
Cross and taken to the garden of St. Joseph of Arimathaca. 
Just before sundown, the beginning of the Passover Sabbath, 
it was laid in St. Joseph’s tomb to await embalming upon the 
first day of the week since this was a work which, according to 
Jewish law, might not be performed on the Sabbath. This 
was the St. Joseph who, according to the great tradition of 
Western Christianity, received the Holy Cup of the Last 
Supper and brought it to the Celtic lands of Western Europe 
—a tradition which is the legendary basis for the cult of the 
Holy Graal.? 

While the Body of Christ remained in the tomb, his soul and 
spirit descended into Hades or Sheol, the place of imprisonment 


1 Hence the name Mass of the Presanctified. 

? It is a relatively recent custom to follow the Mass of the Presanctified with 
the Tre Hore, the Three Hour service of meditation upon the Seven Last Words 
from the Cross, which is more of an instruction than a regular part of the 
Liturgy. 

3 Unfortunatcly the vast subject of the Graal myths cannot form a part of 
this book since it is our purpose to confine the subject to the central story of 
Christianity, excluding the many subsidiary myths which have accrued to it. 


The Passion 167 


of all who had departed this world from Adam unul 
that very day. This tradition is only once mentioned in the 
canonical scriptures, but is preserved in detail in the apocryphal 
Acts of Jobn. Catholic art, taking this text as its source, repre- 
sents Hades or Hell asa monstrous dragon with a vast mouth 
lined with terrible teeth. At the approach of Christ, carrying 
a Cross whichis now transformed intoa spear and pennant, the 
dragon of Hades yawns wide to release Adam and Eve, Noah, 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses, Aaron, and all those who 
had lived justly under the Old Dispensation of the ages before 
the Incarnation. After this “harrowing of Hell” only those 
remain in prison who are in the following of Lucifer and his 
angels—chief among them the traitor Judas who betrayed 
Christ and then hanged himself—there to stay until the Day of 
the Last Judgement. 

The importance of the “harrowing of Hell” is that the power 
of the Incarnation is retroactive or, to put it in another way, 
timeless. The coming of Christ is not a truly historical event—a 
step in a temporal process which is effective only for those who 
follow. It is equally effective for those who came before, and 
thus the Descent into Hades is a feature of the Christ-story 
which particularly suggests the timeless and mythological 
character of the whole. From another point of view, the descent 
into the depths is almost invariably one of the great tasks of 
“the Hero with a Thousand Faces”, of the Christ in his many 
forms. Hades or Hell may here be understood as the Valley of 
the Shadow, the experience of impotence and despair in which 
“T” die and Christ comes to life. The descent is likewise a 
figure of the descent of consciousness into the unconscious, of 
the necessity of knowing one’s very depths. For so long as the 
unconscious remains unexplored it is possible to retain the 
naive feeling of the insularity and separateness of the conscious 
ego. Its actions are still taken to be free and spontaneous 
movements of the “will”, and it can congratulate itself upon 
having motivations which are purely “good”, unaware of the 


168 Myth and Ritwal in Christianity 


“dark” and hidden forces of conditioning which actually 
guide them.! 

Down in Hades the work of Christis to bring Adam through 
the jaws of the dragon into Paradise. It will be remembered 
that when Adam was expelled from the Paradise Garden, the 
way back was guarded by a Cherub with a flaming sword 
which “turned every way”. The gnashing jaws of the dragon 
and the whirling sword are forms of the important mytho- 
logical motif which also appears as Symplegades, the Clashing 
Rocks, the task of the hero being to leap through before he is 
cut or crushed. But this “Active Door” opens and shuts with 
such incredible rapidity or suddenness that the hero has to get 
through in “no time at all”. His only chance is to leap without 
hesitation, for the slightest wavering or indecision will be his 
undoing. Obviously, the Active Door is the same as the 
“needle’s eye” and the “strait and narrow gate”, through 
which one can enter into heaven only on the condition of 
having become nothing and nobody. Adam can pass through 
the Jaws of Hades into Paradise because now that he has been 
“crucified with Christ” who took upon himself the flesh of 
Adam, he is no more Adam but Christ. He goes forth into 
Paradise as Christ, as the New Adam. The reason is that 
Christ is the only one who can pass through the Active Door, 
being the Real Man who has no past and does not exist in 
time. Living entirely in the eternal Moment, it is no problem 
for him to move between the jaws of past and future where all 
others are trapped. 

In many of the myths of the Active Door, the hero gets 


1 Jung has admirably demonstrated the compensatory relationship between 
the conscious and the unconscious, whereby the unconscious is identified with 
“evil” to the extent that the conscious is identified with “good”, and vice versa. 
In other words, the relationship between good and evil is polar, and the only 
means of holding to the one and rejecting the other is by unconsciousness—by 
forgetting the rejected pole. Liberation from this vicious circle is possible only 
from a standpoint which is “beyond good and evil”—i.c. a standpoint which is 
sttictly un-self-ish. 


The Passion 169 


through at the cost of leaving something behind. A European 
folk-story tells of the Hare who wrests the Herb of Immortality 
from the Guardian Dog, leaving, however, his tail in the 
Dog’s jaws. In the Christian version, the one Ieft behind is 
Lucifer. Obviously, the Hare’s tail is his past, that which is 
behind him, being the only thing which Time the Devourer 
can actually devour. Similarly, Lucifer is the “dead man”, 
the ego abstracted from memory. So long as the mind is 
identified with it the gate of heaven is closed. Past and future 
clash together in a present which is exasperatingly brief, giving 
the sense that we have “no time” for anything. But when it is 
seen that the true Sclf is not the self we remember, the tail is 
“docked” and the Hare is “through”. 

In the Old Testament the analogous situation is Moses’ 
passage of the Red Sea, where the waters roll back to let 
“Israel” go through but rush together to trap “Egypt” in the 
flood. Very properly, then, Christ’s passage through Death and 
Hades is likened by the Church to the Crossing of the Red Sea, 
for in the “harrowing of Hell” the jaws of the dragon yawn 
wide to give passage to those that are “in Christ”, but close 
again upon Lucifer and his hosts. Beyond the rolling waters, 
the perilous gates or jaws of Hell, past and future, good and 
evil, life and death, and the whole gamut of opposites wherein 
man as ego is inescapably trapped, there lics the Risen Life— 
always open to him who Icaps without hesitation, who moves 
with the Moment and does not linger in the past. 

LCf Wuemen Kwan, xxxviii. “A cow passes through a gate. Its head, 
horns, and the four legs pass through easily, but only the tail cannot pass. 
Why can’t it?” For the entire treatment of this motif I] am indebted to A. K. 


Coomaraswamy’s cssay “Symplegades” in Essays in the History of Science and 
Learning, ed. M. F. Ashley Montagu (New York, 1947), pp. 463-88. 


CHAPTER VI 


From Easter to Pentecost 


DEsPITE the greater popularity of Christmas, Easter is the 
most important feast of the annual cycle. Known in Latin 
countries as the Pascha, its English name “Easter” is said to be 
derived from an Anglo-Saxon goddess of dawn, Eostre, whose 
rites were celebrated at the Vernal Equinox.! Be this as it may, 
its importance for the Christian myth is that it represents the 
fulfilment of the work of Christ—the Resurrection of his Body 
from death, seen as the very result of his voluntary sacrifice 
upon the Cross. The myth makes it clear that this is not merely 
the return of a ghost from the dead, nor even a simple resuscita- 
tion of the corpse. The Body which was nailed to the Cross 
and pierced with the Spear rises again into life, but so trans- 
formed that it can pass through closed doors, and appear and 

1A folk-lorist “legend” for which I have been able to find no really sound 
authority, though onc uses it for lack of any good alternative explanation! The 
original source of this supposition is the Historia Ecclesiastica of the Venerable 
Bede, and we have it on his authority alone. 

170 


From Easter to Pentecost 171 


disappear out of all conformity to the ordinary physical laws. 
It can even be touched and handled by the doubting Thomas, 
but Mary Magdalene is forbidden to cling to it when she 
recognizes Christ in the garden.! 

The stress upon bodily resurrection, though problematic for 
rationalists, is of great mythological importance. For the 
resurrection of man from death, from sclf-identification with 
the past, involves an utterly different view of what was hitherto 
known as the “physical” world and the “material” body. 
What were formerly “things” are now scen as “That” which 
neither dies nor is born, neither comes nor goes, and to which 
it is simply impossible to “cling” with the memory, or to 
confine within the walls of conventional concepts and cate- 
gories. From this standpoint bodily existence is no longer felt 
as an intolerable restriction upon the spirit; on the contrary, 
the body is “spiritualized”—becoming a member of the Risen 
Body, of the world as it really is beyond the conventions of 
time, space, multiplicity, and duality. Obviously this cannot 
be described, for that which is described—by the “compass 
upon the face of the decp’”—is of necessity the conventional 
world. The Risen Body of the Word is no longer bound by 
its own spell. 

In the Church, the rites of the Resurrection began anciently 
at midnight between Holy Saturday and Easter Sunday.? 
Because this was also the time of initiation into the Christian 
Mystery, the candidates (i.e. white-robed ones) for Baptism 
were assembled in the church before midnight for the final 
scrutiny, exorcism, and examination of their faith. Just before 
the midnight hour the church was put into complete darkness, 
lacking even the light which was left burning at the close of 

1 The usual translation of fol 20: 17 is “Touch me not—Noli me tangere”, 
but the Greek dmzw has rather the sense of “fasten” or “cling”, and sometimes 
“to embrace carnally”. 

2 For some centuries now it has been the custom of the Roman Church to 


observe these rites on the morning of Holy Saturday—a concession to secular 
routine! 


172 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


Tenebrae. In the narthex, or porch, at the West Door there 
gathered the pricst or bishop, with his deacon, subdeacon, and 
attendant acolytes. Equipped with the special ritual objects for 
these ceremonics—Aint and stcel, holy water, five grains of 
incense imbedded in wax nails, a triple-candle shaped like a 
trident and mounted upon a reed, and the processional cross— 
they made ready for the rite which announces the first moment 
of the Resurrection, the Blessing of Fire. 

Remaining still in the narthex, the priest strikes a spark from 
the Aint and blows it into a Aame upon tinder. Over this newly 
kindled fire he utters the following prayer: 


O God who by thy Son, the Cornerstone, hast 
bestowed upon the faithful the fire of thy brightness; 
sanctify this new fire produced from a stone for our 
use: and grant that, during this Paschal festival, we 
may be so inflamed with heavenly desires, that with 
pure minds we may come to the solemnity of eternal 
glory.! 


Having blessed the New Fire, he blesses the five nails of 
incense— 


that not only the sacrifice which is offered this night 
may shine by thy mysterious light; but also into 
whatever place anything of this mystical sanctifica- 
tion shall be brought, there, by the power of thy 
majesty, all the malicious artifices of the devil may be 


defeated. 


He sprinkles both with holy water, and, when the coals in a 
censer have been lighted from the flame, they move a little into 
the church. Here they kneel for a moment while fire is brought 


1“Eternal glory” is perpetua claritas, more literally “perpetual clarity”, the 
quality of a “pure mind” which is “empty” of any clinging to the past. Thus, 
“Happy are the pure in heart, for they shall see God”. Note again the symbolism 
of Christ as the Cornerstone “who maketh both one”, who overcomes the 
opposites. 


From Easter to Pentecost 173 


Fic. 10 TRIPLE CANDLE FOR HOLY SATURDAY 


to one of the branches of the triplevcandle, carried by the 
deacon, who, as it catches, sings on a quict, low note: 


Lumen Christi! The light of Christ! 
And on the same note the choir replies: 
Deo gratias! Thanks be to God! 


The procession moves to the middle of the church, where a 
second branch of the candle is lighted, and upon a note higher 
and louder the deacon sings again, “The light of Christ!” 
Again the choir responds, “Thanks be to God!” When they 
arrive at the sanctuary, close to the high altar, the third branch 
is lighted, and the voice of the deacon calls out with full force, 
“The light of Christ!” And now the choir roars back, 
“Thanks be to God!” 

Beside the high altar, at the “Gospel corner” which is to the 
left as one faces it, there stands a great candle known as the 
Paschal Taper, which is to burn throughout the Great Forty 
Days from Easter to the Ascension as witness of the Risen 
Christ upon carth. To this the deacon now carries the triple 
candle with its three branches alight, and begins to sing the 
Paschal Pracconium for the blessing of the Paschal Taper. 
This prayer is chanted to what is perhaps the most ancient 


174 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


music in Christendom, and constitutes one of the most 
extraordinary passages in the whole Liturgy, sometimes known 
as the Exsultet from its first words— 


Exsultet iam angelica turba caclorum—Rejoice now 
all ye heavenly Iegions of angels! Celebrate with 
joy the divine mysteries, and for the King that 
cometh with victory let the trumpet proclaim salva- 
tion. Rejoice, O earth, illumined by this celestial 
radiancy: and may the whole world know itself to 
be delivered from darkness, brightened by the glory 
of the Eternal King. 


Having called upon the whole Church, and upon all those 
present to rejoice with him, he sings the versicles and responses 
which normally introduce the Canon of the Mass: 


V. The Lord be with you. 

R. And with thy spirit. 

V. Hearts on high! 

R. We lift them up to the Lord. 

V. Let us give thanks to the Lord our God. 
R. It is meet and just. 


And the Praeconium continues: 


Itis truly meet and just to proclaim with the whole 
affection of heart and mind, and with the service of 
our voice, God the invisible almighty Father, and 
his only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. Who 
paid for us to the eternal Father the debt of Adam; 
and by his precious Blood put away the bond of the 
ancient sin. For this is the Paschal feast in which 
that true Lamb was slain, by whose Blood the 
door-posts of the faithful were consecrated.! This 


1 Throughout the Praeconium the Old Testament types, especially those 
connected with the Passover, are rehearsed. Most missals for the laity translate 


From Easter to Pentecost 175 


is the night wherein formerly thou didst bring forth 
our forefathers the sons of Israel from Egypt, leading 
them with dry feet through the Red Sea. This, 
therefore, is the night which purified the darkness of 
sin by the light of the Pillar (of Fire). This is the 
night which today delivers throughout the whole 
world those who trust in Christ from the vices of 
the world, and from the darkness of sin, restores to 
grace, and clothes with sanctity. This is the night in 
which, breaking the chains of death, Christ ascended 
conqueror from the depths. For it availed us nothing 
to be born, unless it had availed us to be redeemed. 
O how wondrous is thy faithfulness towards us! 
O how inestimable is thy loving kindness: in that 
thou hast delivered up thy Son to redeem a slave! 
O truly necessary sin of Adam, which the death of 
Christ has blotted out! O happy fault, that merited 
such and so great a Redeemer! 

O truly blessed night, which alone deserves to 
know the time and the hour, in which Christ rose 
from the depths. This is the night of which it is 
written: And the night shall be as light as the day, 
and the night is my illumination in my delights. 

veteris piaculi cautionem as “the guile of the ancient (or original) sin”—which is 
somewhat misleading in that the modern equivalent of cautio is a bond given in 
bail. In the Exodus narrative the Destroying Angel “‘passed over” the houses of 
the Hebrews whose door-posts were sprinkled with the blood of the sacrificial 
lamb. Presumably the door-posts are the gates (ayatana) of the senses, which, 
when purified from the past, do not involve the mind in death. 

1 Step by step the Praeconium builds up “the praise of night’, including 
even the darkness of sin, to conclude with the phrase from Psalin 138 (Vulg.) or 
139 (AV) which St. Dionysius applicd to that “divine darkness” which 1s the 
highest degree of mystical contemplation—because the light of God is to be 
seen only in the moment when it is realized that all other knowledge is by 
comparison darkness and ignorance. In yet another sense the immediate 
knowledge of God is “dark”, because metaphysical reality is always denoted 


by negations. Thus it is only in the Dark Night of the Soul, the “despair” of 
finding that one has neither past nor future, that it is possible to “know the 


176 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


Therefore the sanctification of this night puts crime 
to Aight, washes away blame, and restores innocence 
to the fallen and joy to the sorrowful. It banishes 
enmitics, brings concord, and humbles empires. 


At this point the deacon inserts the five wax nails with their 
grains of incense into the side of the Taper in the form of a 
cross—marking the Five Wounds and the five senses whereby 
Christ ‘is crucified to the world. He then continues: 


Therefore in this sacred night, receive, O holy 
Father, this evening sacrifice of incense, which thy 
holy Church presents to thee in the solemn offering of 
this wax candle made by the labour of bees. But 
now we know the excellence of this pillar, which 
the shining fire sets alight in the honour of God. 


With these words he lifts up the triple-candle and with one of 
its branches lights the great Taper. 


Which (fire), though now divided, suffers no loss 
from the communication of its light.! Because it is 
fed bythe melted wax, which the mother bee brought 
forth for the substance of this precious lamp. 


Acolytes now take lights from the flame, carrying them to the 
altar candles and other candles in the church, multiplying the 
fire to flood the whole church in light. 


O truly blessed night which despoiled the 
Egyptians and enriched the Hebrews: night in which 


time and the hour” which is the One Moment of Eternity. The startling “O 
ttuly necessary sin of Adam, etc.” so disturbed the Abbot Hugh of Cluny 
that he forbade it to be sung in the monastery. It remains the sole explicit 
mention, in the Liturgy, of the necessary part of Lucifer in the “play” of God. 

1 And similarly the Bread is broken, but the Body of Christ remains entire 
in every fragment. By the power of the Word, God divides and dismembers 
himself into the whole universe of “things”; yct in truth he remains undivided 
and ever Onc. 


From Easter to Pentecost I 


NI] 
) 


heaven is united with earth, and humanity with 
divinity. We beseech thee therefore, O Lord, that 
this candle, consecrated in the honour of thy Name, 
may continue to dispel the darkness of this night. 
And being accepted as a sweet savour, may it be 
united with the lights supernal. May the morning 
star find it burning: that morning star, I say, which 
knows no setting.” That (star) which being returned 
from the depths, shineth serene upon the human race. 


After the Praeconium comes the solemn chanting of the 
Prophecies, consisting of twelve passages from the Old 
Testament prefiguring the mystery of the Resurrection. This 
done, the Paschal Taper is taken down from its stand and 
carried in procession to the Baptismal Font as the choir sings: 


Like as the hart panteth after the fountains of 
water, so longeth my soul after thee, O God. My 
soul hath thirsted for the living God: when shall I 
come and appear before the face of God! 


Arrived at the Font, the priest or bishop proceeds to the solemn 
consecration of the baptismal waters, singing an invocation 
similar in both form and chant to the Praeconium: 


O God, whose Spirit in the very beginning of the 


world moved over the waters, that even then the 


1 Onthe whole theme of the luminous night, cf. Apuleius in Metamorphoses, 
“Understand that I approached the bounds of death; I trod the threshold of 
Persephone; and after that I was ravished through all the elements, I returned 
to my proper place. About midnight I saw the sun brightly shine’—a de- 
scription of his initiation into the Mysteries of Osiris. 

2 The “morning star” is, of course, lucifer—in Greek phosphorus—and is the 
planet Venus, representing that love which is from one standpoint divine 
charity, and from another venereal. This is a wonderful “riddle” of the divine 
ambivalence, manifesting itself in duality as that star which is both Lucifer 
and Christ. Cf. 2 Peter 1: 19, “We have also a more sure word of prophecy; 
whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark 
place, until the day dawn, and the day star (phosphorus) arise in your hearts”. 


178 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


nature of water might reccive the virtue of sanctifica- 
tion. O God, who by water didst wash away the 
crimes of an evil world, and in the overflowing of 
the Flood didst give a figure of regeneration: that one 
and the same clement might, in a mystery, be the end 
of vice and the origin of virtue... . 


As God with his “compass” divided the waters of Chaos in 
the beginning of time, the priest now with his hand divides 
the water of the Font in the form of a cross, singing: 


Who makes this water fruitful for the regeneration 
of men by the arcane admixture of his Divine Power, 
to the end that those who have been conceived in 
sanctity in the immaculate womb of this divine 
Font, may be born a new creature, and come forth a 
heavenly offspring:' and that all who are distin- 
guished either in sex or in body, or by age in time, 
may be born into one infancy by grace, their 
mother. 


Here is the process in reverse of the onc Body or the one Light 
which, however much divided, suffers no loss. Those who 
Yocy oes é ” : « : ” 
were “distinguished” are now brought into “one infancy”—the 
infant signifying the ever-newness of cternal life, which, like 

the new-born babe, has no past. 
After an exorcism of the water from the sccret artifices of the 
powers of darkness, the priest utters the blessing itself: 


Wherefore I bless thee, O creature of water, by 
God > the living, God > the true, God > the holy, 
by that God who in the beginning separated thee 
by his Word from the dry land; whose Spirit 
moved over thee. 


1 Baptism, as the Sacrament of Initiation, identifies the Christan with 
Christ—conceived by the “arcane admixture” of the divine power of the Holy 
Spirit with the humanity of the Immaculate Mother, and born as first-fruit of 
the New Creation. 


From Easter to Pentecost 179 


Dividing the water again with his hands, he scatters some of it 
towards each of the four quarters of the world, singing: 


Who made thee to flow forth from the fountain of 
Paradise, and commanded thee to water the whole 
earth in four rivers. Who, changing thy bitterness 
in the desert into sweetness, made thee fit to drink, 
and produced thee out of the Rock to quench the 
thirst of the people. I bless »& thee also by Jesus Christ 
his only Son, our Lord, who in Cana of Galilee, 
in a wonderful figure, changed thee by his power 
into wine. ... Who made thee to fow together 
with blood out of his side. 


As the blessing proceeds, he stoops to breathe thrice upon the 
water as God in the beginning breathed upon it with his 
Spirit. 

Do thou with thy mouth bless these clear 
(simplices) waters: that besides their natural virtue of 
cleansing the body, they may also be effectual for the 
purification of minds. 


And then he takes the Paschal Taper and plunges it thrice 
into the Font, singing cach time on a higher note: 


May the power of the Holy Spirit descend into the 
fulness of this Font. 


And breathing thrice upon it once more, he goes on: 


And make the whole substance of this water 
fruitful for the effecting of regeneration. 


And the Taper is finally lifted out of the water.? 


2 Water and wine are symbols of the human and the divine, the union of 
the two being signified in the mixture or transformation of the one into the other. 
2 The symbolism of the immersion of the Taper in the “immaculate womb” 
of the Font is very obviously phallic, chough, just as obviously, this is the form 


180 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 
The chant continues: 


Here may the stains of all sins be washed out: here 
may human nature, created in thine image, and 
reformed to the honour of its Principle, be cleansed 
from the entire squalor of the old man: that every 
one who enters into this sacrament of regeneration 
may be reborn into the new childhood of truc 
innocence. Through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son: 
who shall come to judge the living and the dead 
and the world by fire. Amen. 


When the consecrated water has been sprinkled over the 
congregation, the pricst takes vessels of the two holy oils called 
the Oil of Catechumens and the Oil of Chrism—one for the 
anointing of catechumens and the other for conferring the 
power of the Holy Spirit—oil being a symbol of healing and 
mercy. These he pours into the Font in the form of a cross, 
and finally spreads the oil over the whole surface of the 
water. 

All is now ready for the initiation of the catechumens, for 
whom the whole liturgy has thus far been a kind of final 
instruction in the arcana of the Faith. The rite of the Blessing 
of the Font has sufficiently explained the mystery of Baptism 


rather than the content of the symbol. Mediaeval artists were not aftaid to 
cepresent the conception of Christ by the Spirit in the figure of the Dove with 
its beak in a tube which passed under the skirts of the Virgin. Once again, 
mythology is not sexual, but sexuality is mythological, since the union of the 
sexes prefigures the transcending of duality, of the schism whereby man’s 
experience is divided into subject and object, self and other. 

1 Thereby, incidentally, insulating the water from air, as it is to remain in 
the Font for the whole succeeding year. It was usually necessary in the Middle 
Ages to keep the lid of the Font locked, since the water was frequently stolen 
for magical purposes. The same precaution was observed in regard to the Host 
kept in the tabernacle of the altar, so as to preserve the Body of Christ from the 
desecration of the Black Mass offered in honour of the Devil. This diabolical 
rite was celebrated with a stolen Host by an unfrocked priest upon the body of a 
naked woman. The text of the Mass was read backwards, and the Host ritually 
defiled. 


From Easter to Pentecost 181 


that little more needs to be said of it. Clearly, it involves the 
most extraordinary complex of symbols, since the water is all 
in one the Womb of the Virgin, the stuff of the world, the 
emblem of Purity or Voidness in which the past leaves no 
stain, and the depths into which the neophyte descends with 
Christ in his death, and from which he rises with Christ in his 
Resurrection. All in all, Baptism represents the involution and 
evolution of the Spirit, the descent into and ascent from the 
waters being the whole “play” of God in dis-membering and 
re-membering himself, in dying into multiplicity and rising 
into Unity. 

Fully celebrated, the rite of Baptism is an impressive cere- 
mony, involving not only the actual immersion of the candi- 
dates but also a preliminary anointing upon the “gates of the 
senses’ —the eyes, ears, nose, lips, hands and feet—and the 
placing of “the salt of wisdom” upon the tongue. Strictly 
speaking, the candidates should be thrice immersed in the 
Font so that the water covers their heads, and at the same time 
the priest gives them the new Name, which is “in Christ”, 
conjoining it with the Name of the Holy Trinity, saying, “N, 
I baptize thee in the Name of the Father and of the Son and of 
the Holy Spirit.”! After immersion the “new Christs” are 
again vested in white, and given candles lit from the New 
Fire.? 

Official Catholicism takes the position that the reception of 
the physical sacrament, with certain exceptions, is the sine 
qua non of salvation and confers regencration “automatically” 
(ex opere operato) whether the candidate actually understands 


1 However, it has long been considered ritually sufficient to pour the water 
thrice upon some part of the body, usually the forehead. 

® Since ancient times this sacrament has suffered a great deal of curtailment 
in the richness of its symbolism. The inevitable prudery of the early Church 
soon made an end of the proper custom of plunging the candidates into the 
waters naked—signifying the casting-off of every possession to which the mind 
has clung, every device for the protection of the ego. For the eo is, as a matter 
of fact, nothing but “clothing” —that is, habit, the repeated mecting of the present 
atid the “new” with a mind conditioned wholly by the past. 


182 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


what is happening or not.! This doctrine is a strange twisting 
of a marvelous insight—the insight that no man, no cgo, can 
possibly attain the Godhead by its own effort or accumulation 
of knowledge. That the true Self of man is the divinity is an 
“automatic truth’—which is to say that it is so, whether it is 
realized or not. What is necessary for Baptism is not at all the 
acquisition of knowledge but rather the getting rid of it— 
“knowledge” in this sense meaning the taking seriously of the 
conventional vision of life. It requires, too, not the making of 
an effort, but the giving up of every cffort—in the sense of effort 
made to cling to the past, to hold on to death. But the tragedy 
of merely formal Baptism is not that it is given to people with- 
out understanding, but that it is given without un-understand- 
ing, and remains the empty enactment of a myth to which the 
keys have been lost. 

When the initiations have been completed, the priest and his 
ministers return to the high altar, and, prostrating themselves 
before it, begin the Litanies— 


Kyrie eleison 
Christe eleison 
Kyrie eleison 


calling upon the Holy Trinity for its mercy, and upon all the 
angels and saints for their prayers of intercession. About 
half-way through the Litanies, the sacred ministers leave the 
sanctuary to vest themselves in white for the celebration of the 
Mass. Since the ceremonies began a little before midnight, 


1 The exceptions being the Baptism of Blood (ic. the martyrdom of an 
unbaptized person on behalf of the Faith) and the Baptism of Desire, said to 
have been received by such as would have accepted Baptism had they ever had 
the opportunity of receiving it, or of being exposed to the teaching of the Faith. 
A sacrament is said to be cftective and valid ex opere operato, by the deed done, 
as distinct from ex opere operantis, by the deed of the doer. Thus the validity of 
the sacrament depends neither upon the personal sanctity of the priest nor upon 
the full comprehension of the recipient. This is, of course, a shadow of the 
metaphysical principle that however much the universe may seem to be divided 
into parts, its Keality remains undivided. 


From Easter to Pentecost 183 


FIG. Il THE RESURRECTION 


Spanish woodcut, ¢. 15th century 


it would now be close to dawn, and the rising sun would be 
greeted by the bells of the church pealing out once more, as the 
priest begins the Mass intening— 


Gloria in excelsis Deo! 


For the newly initiated this is the first Mass in which they have 
ever participated. Having descended with Christ into the dark 
waters and risen again from them, they are now ready to 
partake of the mystery which represents their identity with the 
Risen Body—projected out of eternity into time as the Bread 
and Wine forming human Aesh and blood. 

In the Eastern Orthodox Church the solemnity and glory of 
Easter js stressed even more than in the West, though the 
Liturgy lacks the formal and structural interest of the Roman 
rite. However, what it lacks in this respect is made up in the 


184 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


sheer splendour of a celebration which turns night into day, 
converting the church into a veritable image of heaven by the 
brilliance of gold vestments and icons shining in the light of 
innumerable candles. As in the ancient West, the rite begins 
at midnight. It starts with the symbolic act of opening the 
Holy Door which, in the Eastern Church, closes off the 
entrance to the sanctuary and the altar. For in the Eastern Rite 
it is still very clear that the Mass is a mystery; it is not, as in 
the West, celebrated in open view but behind the sconostasis, the 
screen which divides the sanctuary from the main body of the 
church. The Holy Door stands at the centre of this screen as a 
type of the jansa coeli, the Gate of Heaven which, viewed from 
the opposite direction, is also the Jaws of Death and Hades, and 
thus the Active Door of the entrance to Paradise, guarded by 
the Cherubim, as well as the Narrow Gate of the necdle’s eye. 

At the moment of the Resurrection it is thrown open, and 
remains open throughout the whole weck of Easter. Thereupon 
a procession of the priest and people, all carrying lighted 
candles, passes out of the church, makes a circuit of the 
building, and returns to the porch outside the main entrance 
doors. The priest censes the doors in the form of a cross, singing 
with the choir: 


Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down 
death by death, and bestowing life upon those in the 
tomb. 

Like as the smoke vanisheth, so shall they vanish, 
and like as wax that melteth at the fire. 

Even so let the ungodly perish at the presence of 
God, but let the righteous rejoice. 

This is the day which the Lord hath made: we 
will rejoice and be glad in it. 


Upon this day those who are in the tomb, in the past, vanish 
like smoke and melt like wax—a dissolution which, to the 
ungodly, is “perishing” but to the “righteous” life and joy. 


From Easter to Pentecost 185 


The doors are then opened, and all return into the church for 
some hours of continuous singing and rejoicing before the 
actual commencement of the Mass. 


Let us purify our senses and we shall behold 
Christ, radiant with the light ineffable of the 


Resurrection... . 


Now are all things filled with light: heaven and 
earth, and the places under the earth. All creation 
doth celebrate the Resurrection of Christ, on whom 
also it is founded. 


Yesterday, O Christ, I was buried with thee, and 
today I rise again with thy rising. Yesterday I was 
crucified with thee: do thou thyself glorify me, O 
Saviour, in thy kingdom. 


O Christ, who didst not break the Virgin's gate 
by thy birth, having kept intact the seals; thou hast 
opened unto us the gates of Paradise. 


O...sacrifice living and unslain! When, as 
God, thou hadst of thine own will offered up 
thyself unto the Father, thou didst raise up with thee 
also Adam, the father of our race, in that thou 
thysclf didst rise from the grave. 


We celebrate the death of death, the annihilation 
of Hades, the beginning of a life new and cternal.! 


As Easter is preceded by forty days of sorrow—Len:—it is 
followed by forty days of rejoicing, leading up to the Feast 
of the Ascension. Christmas and Ascension mark the 
beginning and the end of the appearance of Christ on carth, 
and as the former is the mystery of the birth of God in man, 

1 From the Canon of the Easter Liturgy, attributed to St. John of Damascus. 


For a translation of the full text, see Hapgood, Service Book of the Holy Orthodox- 
Catholic Apostolic Church (New York, 1922), pp. 226-41. 


186 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


the latter is the mystery of the birth of man in God—for the 
point of the Ascension is always that Christ carries back into 
heaven the human body which he received from the Virgin. 
The myth also makes the point that the further purpose of the 
Ascension is the sending of the Holy Spirit, which is to be 
celebrated ten days later at Pentecost, an event which cannot 
occur until Christ himself has “gone away”. For this reason 
Ascension and Pentecost are so closely related that the two 
must be understood together, for they illumine one another 
mutually.} 

The Old Testament “antitype” of these events is really the 
building of the Tower of Babel, the story in Genesis of the 
attempt of men to build a tower whose top would ascend to 
heaven—an arrogance which the Lord God punished by the 
“confusion of tongues”, which is ordinarily held to be the 
origin of the fact that men speak different languages. Contrari- 
wise, when Christ truly ascends to heaven he sends upon his 
Apostles the Holy Spirit with the “gift of tongues” —the power 
to speak a language which all men will understand. The first 
three gifts of the Holy Spirit are traditionally said to be Wisdom, 
Understanding, and Counsel, and in general the reception of 
the Holy Spirit is connected with the actual realization, the 
inward experiencing, of all that the myth signifies in an external 
and figurative way. Babel is bybris—pride—the futile attempt 
of the ego to reach heaven, to comprehend reality, by its own 
efforts and in its own terms, which is to say by verbal know- 
ledge. The attempt to define reality conceptually and verbally 
leads, then, to nothing but confusion, since whatever is 
described or conceived is “by definition’—that is, finite and 
conventional. 

The Ascension of Christ and the carrying of manhood into 
heaven with his own Body involves, of course, an extension 
of the truth already signified in the Resurrection—that what 
has hitherto been known as the material, bodily universe of 


1 For the consecutive story, see Acts I: 1 to 2: 21. 


From Easter to Pentecost 187 
Ne Sy 


t 
Mh 


J 


EA 
= “ 


aU 
e wh Ss 
Riv Y 
Ase 

4 : 


= 


——< es 


FIG. I2 THE ASCENSION 


Spanish woodcut, ¢. 15th century 


“things”, is, in the light of the Eternal Now, divinity itself. 
But this transfiguration of the world is not realized while it 
remains “in symbol” only—that is to say, so long as the myth 
is not realized, so long as the Resurrection and Ascension 
scem to have happened only to Jesus of Nazarcth. It is for this 
reason that the Spirit, the real understanding, cannot come 
until Jesus departs. The mission of Christ is not, therefore, 
fulfilled until the historical Jesus has vanished into eternity, 
until man finds God supremely revealed in the Now, and no 
more in the mere record of the Gospels. It is really astonishing 
that official theology should have failed to sec this point when 
the myth itself points it out with such marvelous clarity, 
telling that the Apostles receive Wisdom and Understanding, 
and the gift of interpretation, only in the moment when the 
historical Jesus has disappeared. 


188 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


This may explain the fact that to this day the Holy Spirit 
has played a very minor part in Christian symbolism as 
compared with the Father and the Son, remaining, as it were, 
the submerged and occluded Person of the Trinity. Patristic 
writers speak frequently of the “divine economy” whereby the 
Three Persons of the Trinity have different functions—as that 
the Father is God “above” us, the Son is God “with” us, and 
the Spirit is God “in” us. For the Third Person of the Trinity 
is precisely that “breath of God”, the rwach Adonai, which was 
breathed into the mouth of Adam, so that to be enlightened 
by the Holy Spirit is to realize the divinity and eternity of the 
true Self} of that which once és, as distinct from that which one 
was. But before such an understanding comes to pass God is 
apprehended in the letter rather than the spirit, in the mythical 
image rather than the actuality.! 

Pentecost, coming fifty days after the Passover, was the 
Jewish Feast of Weeks, the celebration of fruition, of the 
harvest. Now the Passover celebrated not only the deliverance 
from Egypt, but also the first-fruits of the harvest, for which 
reason Christian imagery refers constantly to Christ as the 
“first-fruit” of the New Creation. The first to rise from death 
rises in the very scason when the buricd grain first rises again 
into fruition. “But now is Christ risen from the dead, and 
become the first-fruits of those that slept.”? At Pentecost all 
the fruits are gathered in, and the work of Christ is complete 
because the Resurrection is now inclusive of all men and of the 


total universe. Ascended into heaven, Christ is no more Jesus 
but “all-in-all”, for 


when he ascended up on high, he Ied captivity 
captive, and gave gifts unto men. Now that he 


1 For the more strictly theological aspects of the identification of the Holy 
Spirit with that rvach or pueuma which is the third component of the Pauline 
trichotomy of man, see my Supreme Identity (London and New York, 1950), 
esp. pp. 79-84. 

2 Corinthians 15: 20. 


From Easter to Pentecost 189 


ascended, what is it but that he also descended first 
into the lowest parts of the earth? He that descended 
is the same also that ascended up far above all 
heavens, that he might fill all things.? 


Since, then, Pentecost is the time of “gathering in” we may 
well expect to find that “when the day of Pentecost was fully 
come” the Apostles “were all with one accord in one place”, 
because “I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me”. And 
then, because the great awakening is always “in a moment, in 
the twinkling of an eye”,—“suddenly there came a sound from 
heaven as of a rushing, mighty wind; and it filled all the house 
where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven 
tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them.” And 
they were all filled with the Holy Spirit.”* The immediate 
result was that there descended upon them the “gift of tongues” 
—glossolalia—-so that when they spoke every man heard them 
in his own native language. This gift is the sign that all which 
has hitherto come to pass, the entire mystery of Incarnation and 
Atonement, is now no more understood “in the letter” but “in 
the Spirit”. For when the mind is no longer spell-bound, the 
confusion of tongues gives place to the gift of tongues—the 
power to use the Word without being enthralled by it. But, of 
course, this power belongs only to him who is the Word, so 
that the sending of the Spirit is the realization of Christ not 
merely with us but in us. His Ascension into Heaven is his 
“withdrawal” from the circumference of things, from the 
external world, to the centre—to be the inmost reality of all. 

It is for this reason that Pentecost is regarded as the origin, 

' Ephesians 4: 8-10. 

2 The tongue of Aame just above the head is immediately recognizable to 
anyone familiar with the symbolism of Kundalini-Yoga as the final liberation 
in which the spirit ascends out through the Sun-door in the dome of the skull— 
architecturally represented in East and West alike as the point, spire, or other 
ornament surmounting the dome. See Coomaraswamy, art. “Symiolism of the 


Dome” in Indian Historical Quarterly, vol. xiv, 3 (1938). 
9 Acts 2: 1-4. 


190 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


the birthday, of the Church—Ecclesia—those “called forth” 
from the world by the Word and “gathered together” in union 
with him to be “one Body” with Christ. For the proper sense 
of the word “Church” is not a building or institution: it is the 
“communion of saints”, of those who realize themselves to be 
the One Christ in present truth, and “many selves” in past 
seeming only. Thus the Church is also known as the Mystical 
Body of Christ, for which reason Catholicism has always 
insisted that spiritual authority resides in the living Church 
rather than in the “dead letter” of Scripture. But the Church has 
authority only in so far as it remains truly the Church, the 
company of those who realize effectively that they are one with 
the Author by whose Word the universe of time, space, and 
duality is exfoliated from eternity. Apart from this, the Church 
remains no more than a myth, a form or image of a truth which 
is unrealized, so that its authority becomes conventional rather 
than actual. 

Because the Church is a Body it has members, which is to 
say a structure or organic form. It is a confusion to speak of the 
members of Christ’s Body as the mere individuals who 
“belong” to the Church, for, strictly speaking, one cannot 
belong to the Church and remain an individual. The members 
of the Body are therefore the various “orders” of the Church. 
These orders are the various “vocations” or “callings” of men, 
which, in the Church, become so many different works 
performed by the hands of Christ. Basically there are two types 
of Order—Holy and Secular, clerical and lay, for whether 
priest or artisan every Christened person regards his work as 
that which he does as Christ, so that the work must always be 
worthy of its Author. It is in this sense that, on the one hand, 
the priest is said to have authority and, on the other, the artist 
is said to have originality, since the work of both is to be done 
by the Author and Origin of the world. 

The primitive Church existed in a non-Christian society, 
and it was not until after the time of Constantine that the full 


From Easter to Pentecost 19! 


structure of a Christian socicty could be developed clearly. 
For when Church and State are united, it appears that the 
Order of the Church is threefold rather than twofold. For the 
Secular Order is then further separated into Rulers and People, 
so that three groups formed the structure of mediaeval Christian 
socicties—Lords Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and Commons— 
corresponding precisely to the three castes of Hindu socicty, 
Brahmana, Kshatriya, and Vaishya, as well as to the threefold 
nature of man—spirit, soul, and body. The Christian rites for 
the coronation of kings make it very clear that the temporal 
monarch is in some sense being ordained, for he is sacramentally 
anointed and has the hands of the bishop laid upon him in the 
same manner as at the ordination of a priest. Thus the office 
of a “Most Christian King, ruling by Divine Right under 
God” is to be an instrument of the divine ordering of the 
natural world. 

In the full concept of a Christian society there is, therefore, 
no real division of Church and State. The whole society is 
incorporated within the Church, and its visible structure is 
conceived as an earthly image of the Holy Trinity, or—perhaps 
more correctly—of the Incarnate Word. For, as we saw, the 
Christ has two natures, divine and human, the latter being 
further divided into soul and body. From still another point 
of view the Second Person of the Trinity is threefold in that his 
divine nature comprises male Logos and female Sophia, in 
which case the human nature would count as a single clement 
—the Flesh. Thus it is not uncommon in mythology to find 
conceptions of the Spiritual and Temporal powers as respect- 
ively male and female, with the union of Church and State 
regarded as a marriage.! 

As to the Holy Order of the Church, it consisted from 


1 On this whole theme see Coomaraswamy’s Spiritual Authority and Temporal 
Power, American Oriental Scries XXII (New Haven, 19.42). Also René 
Guénon, Autorité spirituelle et Poswoir temporelle (Paris, 1930). On the threefold 
structure of socicty compare, too, E. J. Urwick, The Message of Plato (London, 
1920). 


192 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


ancient times of seven distinct offices, generally held to comprise 
the following: 


Major Orders: 1. Bishops 
Priests 
Deacons 
Subdeacons 
Exorcists 
Readers 


7. Doorkeepers 


Minor Orders: 


aye yn 


For many centuries, however, the last three have fallen into 
abeyance, and in the Roman Catholic Church both the 
Diaconate and Subdiaconate are usually no more than 
stepping-stones to the Priesthood. Each order is held to include 
the powers of every lower order, and the whole hicrarchy 
constitutes a series of steps corresponding, like the courts of a 
temple, to various levels of insight or degrees of initiation. 
Thus the Doorkeeper protects the Church from the profane, 
and admits only those who sincerely desire that preliminary 
instruction represented by the office of Reader. The Doorkeeper 
has his “type”, in divinis, in the Keeper of the Gate of Heaven— 
St. Peter—who opens the “needle’s eye” only to those small 
enough to enter, to those who are “no longer anyone”. When, 
upon secking admittance, St. Peter asks who it is that applies 
for entrance, the answer must always be, “No morc I, but 
Christ”. 

Having made up his mind, on the basis of preliminary 
instruction, to enter the mystery, the applicant must next be 
purified—so that the office of Exorcist stands for the cutting off 
of his past, of his devil with its barbed tail which is still caught 
in the narrow door. Thus initiated, he may ascend the steps 
to the altar. At Solemn Mass the Subdeacon stands upon the 
floor of the Sanctuary, at the foot of the altar steps, while the 
Deacon stands above him on the first step itself. Their office 
is to serve the Priest, standing on the top step or pavement, in 


From Easter to Pentecost 193 


his offering of the Sacrifice. The Subdeacon sings the Lesson 
and pours the water into the Chalice; the Deacon sings the 
Gospel and pours in the wine. 

The Priest's order represents identity with Christ himself, 
since it is the Priest alone who may actually celebrate the Mass 
and grant Absolution from sin. Lastly the Bishop is a sort of 
Chief Priest, who has the special function of conferring the 
several orders and of ruling the Church as a whole. In the 
Sanctuary, his proper place is the throne behind the altar, 
facing the people.! 

In common and loose speech “the Church” often refers to 
the Holy Orders or to the actual church building, which is 
understandable, since both have a structure symbolizing the 
Church in its proper sense as the whole Body of Christ. The 
earlier Christian temples were built in the style of a basilica, or 
court of a king—usually a wide, rectangular hall terminating 
at the East end in an apse. The bishop’s throne was placed at 
the extreme end of the apse, against its semicircular wall, with 
the seats of the assisting clergy upon cither side. They faced the 
people across the altar, which stood at the entrance or chord 
ofthe apse, whose entire floor was raised above that of the main 
court of the temple. The altar itself was usually a stone table 
or a cubic block, raised on steps, and before it and to cither 
side towards the people stood two Iecterns, one for the book of 
Lessons and the other for the book of Gospels. This remains 
the essential ground-plan of Eastern Orthodox churches, save 
that the altar within the apse is screened off from the main body 


1 Since mediaeval times, however, the altar has been pushed to the extreme 
East end of the Church, so that the Episcopal Throne is more usually found to 
one side of the Sanctuary. The English word “bishop” is derived from biscop, 
a sloppy way of saying the Gracco-Latin episcopus, lit. “over-seer”. While an 
episcopus was normally understood, in ancient Greck speech, to be a guardian, 
overseer, or ruler, it is of considerable interest that the word has also the precise 
opposite sense of bamartanein, to sin or “miss the mark”. It means a “hitting of 
the mark”, or a “being on the mark”—a sense which is far more appropriate to 
the highest of the Holy Orders, though I am not aware that anyone has ever 
called attention to this. 


194 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


of the church by the éconostasis, the screen adorned with icons, 
while two smaller apses stand on cither side of the main apse. 
One is a sacristy for the vestments and vessels of the Liturgy, 
and the other is for the prothesis—the table at which the bread 
and wine are prepared before being brought to the altaz. 

In the West, churches have undergone a far more complex 
development, reaching its height in the superb Romanesque 
and Gothic cathedrals of Europe. The usual plan of such 
churches 1s cruciform, after the pattern of the Latin Cross with 
the long descending arm, and the main body of the church is 
within the central “upright” of the cross—divided into three 
sections, the Sanctuary, the Choir, and the Nave. If one 
enters such a church by the main door, at the West end or 
“foot” of the cross, there will be found within the porch or 
narthex a small fountain or stoup for holy water—blessed for 
the special purpose of defeating the arts of the Devil. As the 
faithful enter, they dip their fingers in the stoup and make 
the sign of the Cross upon themselves, repeating in figure the 
Baptism by which they enter the Body of Christ. Beyond the 
narthex, and extending as far as the centre of the whole cross, 
is the Nave. This term is of doubtful etymology, and may be 
derived simply from the Greek naos, a temple, or from the 
Latin navis, a ship, and in the latter case it would be by 
association of the Church with the Ship or Ark of Salvation. 
Be this as it may, the Nave is that part of the church proper to 
the laity, and at its extreme West end there stands the Baptismal 
Font, that “immaculate womb” out of which man is born into 
the divine life. 

The East end of the Nave is usually the “crossing”, the 
physical centre of the church above which stands the central 
tower or dome. To either side stand the two arms of the cross, 
the North and South Transepts, which are normally chapels 
with altars dedicated to certain saints—such as the Mother of 
God or the Patron Saint of the church. Beyond the crossing, 
steps ascend to the Choir (or Chancel), often divided from the 


Fram Easter to Pentecost 195 


Nave by a screen corresponding to the iconostasis—a_ barrier 
shielding the mystery of the inner courts. 

Passing through the Choir Screen, one enters the “upper 
arm” of the cross, occupied by the Choir and Sanctuary. In 
most Western churches the Choir is set out according to the 
monastic plan—that is to say, with rows of stalls running 
lengthwise so that the monks face one another across the 
church. A second Aight of steps divides the Choir from the 
Sanctuary, and above these steps and between the flanking 
pillars one will normally find the Rood Beam, supporting a 
huge Crucifix, so named because the Cross is the Holy Rood, 
Rod, or Stem of the Tree of Life. To the centre and back of the 
Sanctuary stands the high altar, two steps higher than the 
floor of the Sanctuary itself. Usually it is a rectangular stone 
block, incised on the mensa or top with five Greek crosses, 
one at the centre and one in each corner. Upon it, and to the 
back, stands a crucifix Aanked by six candlesticks. Immediately 
in front of the crucifix is the Tabernacle, often a short, hollowed- 
out “pillar” of stone with bronze doors in which the Sacrament 
of Christ’s Body is kept at all times. Lamps hang from the 
roof before the altar, one white lamp in honour of the Host 
within the Tabernacle, and seven red lamps—following the 
words of the Apocalypse, “And there were seven lamps of fire 
burning before the Throne, which are the seven Spirits of 
God”. 

Because the altar is the “point of passage” between time and 
eternity it is very properly regarded as a tomb. While it is not 
altogether true, as is gencrally supposed, that the first Christian 
altars were the tombs of the martyrs in the Catacombs, it has 
for centuries been customary to lay the altar-stone over a 
repository containing relics of the saints. The attribution of 


1 Revelation 4: 5. Presumably the Seven Gifts of the Holy Spirit— Wisdom, 
Understanding, Counsel, Might, Knowledge, Holy Fear, and True God- 
likeness. Based on Isaiah 11: 2, this is, however, a purely homiletic invention, 
and it might seem more reasonable to equate the Seven Spirits of God with the 
Seven Rays of the Sun. See above, p. 50. 


196 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


miraculous power to such relics reflects the truth that what has 
departed from “this” life has become divinized, though here, 
as elsewhere, the death is that of “self” rather than of the 
physical body. In the Eastern Church the altar is expressly 
identified with the Sepulchre of Christ and the Throne of God 
—simultaneously—with the lower linen altar-cloth representing 
the winding-sheet, and the upper brocaded cloth the glory of 
the Throne. 

This material house of Christ’s Body exhibits the essential 
elements of the Axlc-Tree motif which we have already noted 
in connection with the Tree of Eden, the Cross, and the 
Kundalini symbolism of Indian Yoga. For if one looks at the 
ground-plan of such a church (as in the accompanying figure), 
it is immediately obvious that here is the outline of a cross, 
tree, or human figure, stretched between the Waters, at the 
feet, and the Heavens, at the head, suggested by the dome- 
shape of the apse. The path from the Font to the Altar repre- 
sents the whole course of the spirit’s ascent into liberation—from 
the material waters into which it descended at Creation and 
Incarnation. Rising from the Waters, it passes by the Way of 
the Cross—marked by representations of the “Stations of the 
Cross” on the pillars of the Nave—to the Sanctuary within the 
“head”, answering to the symbolism of the “lotus in the skull” 
or the “sun in the firmament”, the point at which the union of 
humanity with divinity is fully realized. In the church this 
point is the Altar, the place of the miracle of transubstantiation 
where the elements of material life—bread and wine—become 
God. Indian and Christian mythology again reveal their 
common structure, for as the Serpent Power (Kundalini) of 
human consciousness ascends the spinal-tree to the sun-lotus 
in the head, where it realizes its divinity, so the faithful in the 
Church ascend from Baptism to the Mass—the sacrament of 
Union celebrated in the “head” of the church towards the East, 
where the sun rises. This confluence of symbols is further 
emphasized by the fact that when the consecrated Host is 


From Easter to Pentecost 197 


EAST WINDOW 
HIGH ALTAR- - - - - | - -CREDKNCE 


ROOD BFAM< ~ 


CHOIR SCRBENS | > 


N |, CHAPEL 


FONT- -- 


FIG. 13 TYPICAL GROUND-PLAN OF A CIIURCII 


exposed for adoration, it is set upon the altar in a monstrance— 
a golden image of the sun raised upon a pedestal. 

It is unimportant that these two mythological traditions may 
have obscure origins in primitive sun-worship, for the Christian 
and the Hindu alike recognize that the astronomical sun is 
used as a figure. The yogis who stare for hours at the actual sun, 
or at their navels, are just as much victims of the “mere letter” 
as Christians who gaze in adoration at the Host in the mon- 
strance. In both traditions, the sun, the navel, the altar, and the 
monstrance arc figures of the central point, the Eternal Now, 
in which man’s consciousness must come to rest if he is to be 
liberated from time. In this sense, the focal point is the “sun- 
door” through which one passes from time into eternity, having 


198 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


FIG. I4 MONSTRANCE FOR BENEDICTION AND EXPOSITION OF THE 

SACRAMENT. FIG. 15 THE “SPINAL-TREE” OF KUNDALINI YOGA SYMBOLISM, 

showing the seven chakras, with the thousand-petalled lotus at the head 

(inscribed with the pranava aum, the Supreme Name) and the sleeping 
serpent coiled about the phallus at the base 


its numerous images in the aperture in the crown of the skull 
through which, in Hindu mythology, the spirit is liberated at 
“death”, the lantern at the crown of the dome, the Tabernacle 
Door upon the altar, and the East window in the apse which 
should properly carry the figure of Christ ascending or reigning 
in glory. 

By a common convention the East window is of the lancet 
form, high and narrow and thus “male”, corresponding to 
spirit, while the West window is of the rose form, circular 


From Easter to Pentecost 199 


FIG. 16 FIG. 17 


FIG. 16 CROSS FROM THR CEMETERY OF ST. AGNES IN ROME, (Early 

Christian.) Fic. 17 BUDDINST WHEEL OF THE LAW (Dharmachakra) ftom 

Sanchi, India. A single glance will show the obvious similarity between 

the four figures, showing the perennial motif of the Axle-Tree ascending 

from the earth to the sun, and through the heart of the sun—the Sun- 
Door—into the World beyond 


and “female”, corresponding to Prima Materia, the womb of 
creation. Thus the whole edifice of the church is the image of 
Christus Pontifex, Christ the Bridgemaker, between heaven 
and earth, Creator and creation, the spirit and the flesh, the 
airy heights and the watery depths—of the “one and only noble 
Tree” planted in Golgotha, the Place of the Skull, which is 
again the dome of the firmament, this world, and ascending 
by the Sun-Door—“I am the Door”—to the “world without 
end”. 


200 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


We have considered the Church as the Mystical Body, the 
Communion of Saints, the Secular and Holy Orders, and the 
Temple. It remains to say that the Church is not only a struc- 
ture, an organism, but also an action; for that which is done 
by the Communion of Saints in the Temple is the work or 
Sacrifice—sacer, holy, facere, to make—the work of hallowing 
the world. This is why the Church is sometimes called “the 
extension of the Incarnation”, for its work is to be and do what 
the Christ is and doecs—the reconciliation of God and the world, 
the infinite and the finite, the eternal and the temporal. The 
operation by which this is achieved is the system of the 
Seven Sacraments: 


1. Baptism 

2. Holy Chrism or Confirmation 
3. The Mass 

4. Penance or Absolution 

. Holy Matrimony 

6. Holy Order 

7. Extreme Unction 


wa 


The concept of a sacrament is of special importance because 
it is an almost perfect definition of a mythological symbol. For 
a sacrament is no mere sign, no mere figure for a known reality 
which exists in our experience quite apart from its sign. A 

“known reality” is, in this sense, something remembered, a fact 
or an idea, which, because of its complexity, is conveniently 
indicated by a sign of greater simplicity. Thus a sacrament 
is not an allegorical action, a way of representing something 
which the participants “understand” in some other and more 
direct manner. The “material part” of a sacrament, the 
“matter” which it employs and the “form” in which it is 
employed, always signifies what is otherwise unknown. That 
Is to say, it signifies the real and present world which cannot 
be remembered and is never, therefore, an object of knowledge. 
Apart from the sacrament, it is only possible to “know” this 


From Easter -to Pentecost 201 


Reality, God, by “becoming” it. But since “no man can sce 
God and live”, it is possible to dispense with the sacrament 
only “after death”. Theologically, this is confused with 
physical death, but from the metaphysical standpoint, “after 
death” is the point—now—at which there is no “T”. 

There is a certain order or gradation in the Seven Sacraments, 
such as one finds in the hierarchy of the Holy Orders and in the 
courts of the Temple, for they mark the essential steps or stages 
of the Christian life. By Baptism one is initiated or incorporated 
into the Mystical Body and made “no more I, but Christ”, 
since, as we have seen, to be born of the Font is to be born 
of the Virgin. Technically, Chrism or Confirmation should 
accompany Baptism, but with the growth of infant Baptism 
it became customary to defer it until a child had reached the 
“age of reason”. Consisting in the anointing with the Oil of 
Chrism and the laying-on of hands by the bishop, it represents 
the other half of the mystery of incorporation into Christ, for he 
was not only born of the Virgin but also conceived by the 
Holy Spirit. To be en-Christed, a man must be born again of 
“water and the Spirit”, and Chrism is being born of the Spirit. 
The fact that it is deferred until the “age of reason” suggests 
that its inward sense is the conscious realization of what 
Baptism means—not the mere verbal comprehension, but the 
effective experiencing of regeneration. 

Because Baptism and Chrism, washing and anointing, 
transform man into Christ, he enters into that Communion- 
by-Sacrifice of the divine and the human which involves 
union with both God and humanity. He is thus ready to 
participate in the Mass, so that after Chrism he is admitted to 
First Communion. 

The Sacrament of Penance or Absolution exists in the 
scheme as a sore of renewal of Baptism for those upon whom 
the original initiation did not altogether “take”. Baptism was 
always understood to involve the total “forgiveness of sins”, 
but because the Christian consciousness has so persistently 


202 Myto and Ritual in Christianity 


confused an event which happens in eternity with a merely 
temporal occurrence, it has seemed possible to commit sin 
“after” Baptism. This is only to say that the Sacraments do not 
work while they remain myths alone, and are taken to signify 
happenings in time. Nor do they work when misapplied, when 
their power is expected to join forces with relative good against 
relative evil—a battle which is inconclusive by definition. 
Obviously, then, Baptism does not “take” when it is expected 
to take sides, and when the “sin” from which it delivers is 
confused with relative evil, and the grace which it confers with 
relative good. So long as this confusion prevails, the effects of 
Baptism will seem to be disappointing. Penance will continue 
to exist to reinforce Baptism in its misapplied role, and, 
incidentally, to increase the confusion. 

Commonly called “Confession”, the Sacrament of Penance 
consists in making a confession of one’s “sins” to a priest or 
bishop, involving the expression of a sincere intention not to 
commit them again, and in receiving from him—as from Christ 
—the authoritative Absolution, “I absolve thee from all thy 
sins in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Spirit”. No Catholic Christian, feeling himself to have 
committed “mortal” sin, will dare to receive the Host without 
first seeking Absolution! With a certain practical wisdom 
of the “boys will be boys” type, the Church has made Absolu- 
tion extraordinarily easy to obtain, and priests are carefully 
schooled to be loving and understanding rather than scolding 
in their treatment of penitents. This is, indeed, “worldly 
wisdom” in the very best sense, but it has no relation at all to 


1“Mortal” sin is theologically defined as that which involves the death of the 
soul, in the sense that it immediately incurs the penalty of eternal damnation. 
The characteristics of such sin are: (1) that it constitute deliberate disobedience 
to the known will of God; (2) that it be committed in full freedom of choice; 
and (3) that the actual matter of the sin be of grave import—lacking which the 
sin is regarded as “venial”. Yet when mortal sin is identificd with “evil actions” 
in their relative sense, there will always remain the astonishing contradiction of 
rewarding a temporal sin with an eternal punishment. 


From Easter to Pentecost 203 


metaphysical sin—deliverance from which is so clearly the 
meaning of the other Sacraments, as of the entire Catholic 
myth. 

In the Western Church, the sacraments of Matrimony and 
Holy Order are alternatives, representing what in other 
traditions are the active and contemplative lives, or the 
vocations of householder and ascetic. They follow Baptism, 
Chrism, and the Mass as the sacraments of vocation, of the 
hallowing of the work to be done by the members of the Body. 
There are, however, some differences here between the Chris- 
tian and other traditions, for if Holy Order is to be regarded— 
as in practice it was—as one of the three “estates” of the social 
order, it must not be confused with the vocation to the home- 
less life of the ascetic, who is beyond caste and outside society. 
It would seem that in a healthy society the vocation to the 
homeless life should follow the vocation to the life of house- 
holder, and not be an alternative. The Eastern Church observes 
this principle, at least in token, by permitting priests to marry 
if they do so before ordination. But when the Western Church 
demands celibacy of its priesthood, it confuses the Sacerdotium, 
the Brahmana Caste, with the vocation to Religion, in its 
strict sense of the ascetic rule and the homeless life of poverty, 
chastity, and obedience. The Roman Church prohibits the 
priesthood to marry on the ostensible ground that it would 
constitute a distraction from the vocation, but the same 
objection could be made with equal force to the vocation of 
physician or artist. The real reason is rather that the hands 
which consecrate the Host must not be “defiled” by contact 
with “Woman”. 

Modern Christian apologists tend to “tone down” this 
objection to the marriage of priests, and at the same time to 
stress the fact that Holy Matrimony “ennobles” the mystery of 
sex and procreation. But if one studies the writings of Early 
Christian and Mediaeval theologians, there can be no doubt 
whatsoever that historical Christianity regards sexuality with 


204 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


unanimous disgust, and permits the sacrament of Holy 
Matrimony as a concession to the weakness of human nature. 
As St. Paul said, “It is better to marry than to burn”. Other 
traditions, too, have perhaps made the same mistake of blaming 
Maya for enthralling men’s minds when, as a matter of fact, 
she is only the “screen” upon which the spell is projected by 
the Word. A man who bruises his nose by trying to walk into 
a picture should blame, not the picture, but his ignorance of 
the convention of perspective. But so long as the convention 
“fools” him, he blames the materia against which he banged his 
nose rather than the “Word”, the concept, which beguiled his 
mind. Thus man’s attitude to woman is always a measure of 
his self-understanding: the less he understands, the more he 
projects upon her the contents of his own unconscious. 

The Christian mentality has been so peculiarly hostile to the 
Flesh—despite the fact that “the Word was made Flesh”, and 
“God so loved the world”—because the Western mind has 
been so unconscious of its own depths. This is why Christianity 
is taken more literally than the other great mythological 
traditions, and why even sophisticated Christian philosophers 
will insist upon the eternal reality of the ego-soul, and tend to 
project both God and Satan into the world of external objects. 

But it is to the credit of Christianity that it has never regarded 
woman as not having even a soul, and that, whatever its 
attitude to sexuality, the concept of Holy Matrimony has 
protected women and children alike from the extremes of 
callousness and cruelty which were so common in the Gracco- 
Roman world. For this, our culture must be gratcful indeed, 
even though this compassionate concern for woman was 
moved by love for the soul rather than for the body, for woman 
in so far as she is the same as man, rather than in the respect in 
which she differs from him." 


1 This is, of course, a problem of immense subtlety—such that even to begin 
to discuss it adequately would require a separate volume! Modern theologians 
make a good deal of the point of Christian “materialism”, of reverence for the 


From Easter to Pentecost 205 


Of the seventh Sacrament, Extreme Unction, we shall have 
more to say when, in the following chapter, we come to the 
Four Last Things—Death, Judgement, Hell and Heaven— 
and follow the Christian soul in its departure from this world. 
It is enough to say here that Unction is in one way the crown 
of the Sacraments, in that it is held to confer immediate 
admission, upon death, to the Beatific Vision and the life of 
Heaven. In other words, the sacramental grace of Unction is 
such a powerful incorporation of manhood into God that in 
many cases those who have received it and then recovered from 
sickness have felt it necessary to spend the rest of their lives in 
the cloister—or at least in daily attendance in the church. 

In a more general sense, however; the principal sacrament 
is the Mass—not only because it embodies the Sacrifice of 
Christ, but also because it is the regular, diurnal sacrament 
which is independent of special occasions, the perpetual action 
of worship whereby the Church identifies itself with the Son 
and sacrifices itself to the Father. In this sense, the Mass 
involves all that the Church “does”; it is the action of the 
Church, since the transformation of bread and wine into 
Christ is the whole work of realizing the unity of creation 
with its Creator. For it is the anamnesis, the re-emembering, of 
the One whose dismembermentis the formation of the world. 


body, and insist chat the Christian attitude to sexuality is a part of this reverence 
—adducing the sound reason that “lust” is often a mere exploitation of the body 
to find escape from feelings of spiritual and psychological disquiet. An appetite 
for food may be exploited in just the same way, not to mention a thirst for wine, 
and both eating and drinking are quite as essential co human continuity as 
reproduction. The unwisdom of exploiting the appetites does not, therefore, 
explain the very special antagonism of the Church to “luse”. Certainly other 
spiritual traditions have manifested a similar prudery, but they have not 
attempted to force it upon society as a whole, or to regard it as anything more 
than a strictly voluntary discipline for those of the ascetic vocation, who have 
abandoned the life of houscholder. It should be added that the special attitude 
to woman involved in the cult of Chivalry is of Manichacan rather than 
Christian origin. 


IC §XC 
NIIKA 


EY UANS 


The Four Last Things 


AFTER the long summer scason of Pentecost is over, the 
cycle of the year returns again to Advent, which, like Janus 
whose month begins the secular year, looks backwards and 
forwards at once—back to the First Advent of Christ in 
the cave of Bethlehem, and forward to the Second Advent 
when he is to come again with glory, “to judge the living 
and the dead and the world by fire”. Advent is, then, the 
season of the Four Last Things in which the Church turns 
its mind to the contemplation of Death and Judgement, Hell 
and Heaven, to the mysteries of what is called Eschatology 
—the science of ends. For although the Christian myth is 
presented as history, as the narrative of the “mighty acts of 
God”, the fact that it is by no means a merely “historical” 
religion is most plainly shown in its constant expectation of 
the end of the world. Christianity is an eschatological, not 
a historical, religion—for its whole hope is directed towards 
206 


The Four Last Things 207 


Dies illa, “that Day”, upon which time and history will come 
to an end. 

It is well known that the first Christians lived in almost daily 
anticipation of the Second Advent and the End of the World, 
for, if one takes the words of the Gospels literally, Christ made 
it plain that it was to be expected in the immediate future. 
But as the years and centuries passed and a temporal “Last Day” 
failed to arrive, the expectancy which had been directed 
towards it was gradually shifted to the event of physical death. 
In the first century the Christian was in constant watchfulness 
for the Son of Man in the clouds of heaven, but by the Middle 
Ages he was watchful against the possibility of sudden death, 
lest it should find him, like the ghost in Hamlet, “unshrived, 
unhouseled, unaneled”—without the last rites of Confession, 
Communion, and Unction. And now that, with liberal 
Protestantism, the very life after death has become shadowy 
and doubtful, Christianity has become a historical religion of 
this world, finding the significance of life in time rather than 
beyond time. 

Because of his literal understanding of the Christian myth, 
Western man has an attitude to death which other cultures 
find puzzling. The Christian way of thought has made so 
deep an impression upon our culture that this attitude prevails 
even when the intellectual assent to Christian dogma exists 
no more. For it is no casy matter to cast off the influence of our 
history, to be rid of a habit of thought and emotion which 
has prevailed for close to two thousand years. Western man has 
learned a peculiarly exaggerated dread of death, because he has 
seen it as the event which will precipitate him for ever into 
either unspeakable joy or unimaginable misery. Few have 
dared to be quite certain as to the outcome, for though one 
might hope for the mercy of God, it was a very serious sin to 
presume upon it. The sense of uncertainty was, furthermore, 
part and parcel of Christian fecling for the insidious subtlety of 
evil, so that the more one approached sanctity, the more one 


208 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


was aware of diabolical motivations, and of the near impossi- 
bility of a pure intent. Many sold their souls to the Devil just 
because this very uncertainty seemcd more insupportable than 
damnation itself. 

For it has always seemed that there is a certain and simple 
way to be damned. But the way of salvation is as narrow as a 
tightrope, and the balance always in doubt. However casy of 
access the Sacraments, however simple to say, “Lord, I believe, 
help thou mine unbelief!’—there always remained the prob- 
lem of sincerity, and of the pure intent, since if one failed to 
receive the Sacraments “worthily” they imparted damnation 
instead of salvation. Thus, if I ask myself why I believe, 
why I receive the Sacraments, and if I think by a logic which 
must answer the question “why” in terms of past causes, what 
I am and what I do is ever the fruit of what I was and 
what I did. Thus I never escape the Old Adam, nor succeed 
in being more than a wolf in sheep’s clothing. I can believe 
that I repent sincerely and that I love genuinely upon the sole 
condition of not asking questions too persistently, of not 
examining my conscience too clearly. It was thus that Luther 
saw the impossibility of obtaining salvation through works. It 
is interesting to wonder what would have happened if he had 
asked himself as persistently why he had faith. 

Historical Christianity is thus a religion in which anxiety 
plays a far greater part than faith, and in which this anxiety is 
even valued as a virtue because it is a constant check to pre- 
sumption and pride. Our culture has thus evolved a species 
which might be called homo sollicitus, “anxious man”, always 
remembering that sollicitus means oscillating, wobbling, or 
trembling. “Work out your own salvation with fear and 
trembling.”? It is thus of special importance that this agitation 
or oscillation is the characteristic behaviour of an organism 
confused by logical paradox.” In our case this is precisely the 


1 Philippians 2: 12. 
? See the excellent essay on the psychological significance of logical paradox 


The Four Last Things 209 


paradox of self-consciousness, which we have shown to be 
analogous to the “I am lying” paradox of Eubulides. Anxiety 
stands as a virtue between the two opposed sins of presumption 
and despair—even though Christ said, “Be not anxious— 
Nolite solliciti”, knowing, perhaps, that the illusion of self- 
consciousness and its attendant anxiety is the whole significance 
of Lucifer! For Lucifer is the Dark Christ—Anti-Christ— 
which is to say, the divine nature under the thrall of its own 
spell, wobbling, oscillating, or trembling between the pairs of 
opposites. And Lucifer’s anxiety must impress the Christian 
mind as a virtue so long as it seems that salvation is a matter of 
choice between mutually related opposites, such as good and 
evil, and so long as it seems that the Man to be saved is the 
ego-soul. 

From one point of view the Catholic rites of death are the 
most eloquent expression of this anxiety. From another, they 
contain the whole mystery of overcoming anxiety. This double 
interpretation is possible because of the very nature of the 
opposites—good and evil, life and death, Heaven and Hell. 
In reality, in Christ the Cornerstone “who maketh both one”, 
the opposites are reconciled. But in seeming, in the situation 
where there seems to be a real distinction and a real choice 
between them, the equivalent of reconciliation is oscillation, 
so that while above there is peace, below there is trembling. 
Similarly, the rites of death convey peace when understocd 
inwardly, but anxiety when taken in the letter. 

When, therefore, a Christian comes to the point of death, 
he sends an urgent request to the priest to come to him with 
the Viaticum, the Rites of Passage, between this world and the 


by Gregory Bateson in Ruesch and Bateson, Communication (New York, 1951), 
ch. 8. 

1 CE James 2: 19, “The devils also believe, and tremble”—since trembling is 
the necessary consequence of sin, of missing the mark and confusing the present 
Self which is alive and free with the past self which is dead and determined. 
One trembles, oscillates, because of the irresolvable paradox created by the 
necessity of performing a free act with determined motives. 


210 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


“next”. Whereupon the priest gocs to the Tabernacle of the 
Altar, attended by an acolyte carrying bell and candle. He 
removes a Host from the ciborium, the cup in which the 
Sacrament of Christ's Body is reserved, and places it in a small 
gold vessel called a pyx. This he ceremoniously veils, and with 
the bell and the light proceeding him goes to the house of the 
dying person. Upon entering he says, “Peace be to this house”, 
and sprinkles holy water around with the words of the psalm, 
“Thou shalt purge me with hyssop and I shall be clean; thou 
shalt wash me and I shall be whiter than snow”. 

By the bed of the dying person there has been set a small 
table with crucifix and candles. Here the priest lays down the 
pyx, and, putting a purple stole about his neck, prepares to 
hear the last confession of the departing soul—for which 
purpose all others are bidden to withdraw. And when the 
sick man has fully unburdened himself to “God Almighty, 
to the Blessed Virgin Mary, Blessed Michael the Archangel, 
Blessed John the Baptist, the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, 
to all the Saints, and to you, my Father”, confessing that he has 
sinned in thought, word, and deed “by my fault, by my fault, 
by my most great fault”, the pricst wipes out the spiritual stain 
with the formula of Absolution—“By the authority of our 
Lord Jesus Christ committed to me, I absolve thee from all thy 
sins in the Name >] of the Father and of the Son and of the 
Holy Spirit.” 

This done, the priest removes the Host from the pyx and 
holds it up before the dying man, saying, “Behold the Lamb 
of God, behold him who taketh away the sins of the world! 
Lord I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my 
roof, but speak the word only and my soul shall be healed”. 
He then lays it upon the tongue of the departing, with the 
solemn words, “Receive, brother, the Viaticum of the Body 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall guard thee from the 
malign Enemy, and bring thee unto life eternal”. 

After the Viaticum there follows Extreme Unction. The 


The Four Last Things 211 


priest makes the sign of the cross thrice upon the departing, 
with the words: 


In the Name of the Father >, and of the Son >, 
and ofthe Holy Spirit», may there be extinguished 
in thee every power of the Devil by the imposition 
of our hands, and by the invocation of all the 
holy Angels, Archangels, Patriarchs, Prophets, 
Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and all 
the Saints. 


He then moistens his thumb in the vessel of the Oleum 
Infirmorum, of olive oil consecrated by the bishop for the healing 
of physical and spiritual disease, and makes the sign of the 
cross with the oil on seven parts of the body, namely, the eyes, 
ears, nose, mouth, hands, feet, and thighs, saying each time— 
for example—“By this holy Unction >, and by his most 
tender compassion, may the Lord forgive thee in whatsoever 
way thou hast sinned by sight.” If the miracle of physical 
healing, which is sometimes to be expected from this Sacra- 
ment, does not occur, and if the person is clearly at the very 
point of death, the priest begins the Litany for the dying, 
calling on the Mother of God, the Angels, Patriarchs, and 
Saints to pray for him. And then, as his eyes begin to close in 
death, the priest says: 


Go forth, Christian soul, from this world in the 
Name of God the Father Almighty, who created 
thee; in the Name of Jesus Christ, the Son of the 
living God, who suffered for thee; in the Name 
of the Holy Spirit, who was poured out upon thee; 
in the Name of the holy and glorious Mother of 
God, the Virgin Mary— 


and so on, through the whole shining hierarchy of Angels, 
Archangels, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Powers, 
Cherubim, Seraphim, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, 


212 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Monks, Hermits, Virgins, 
and Saints, concluding— 


today let thy place be in peace, and thine abode 
in holy Sion. Through the same Christ our Lord.! 


At the moment of expiration the departing is urged to 
repeat the Name of Jesus, and to say, “Into thy hands, O Lord, 
I commend my spirit”. And when the light of life has gone out 
at last, and the soul gone on its way to the Centre of the 
Universe, those remaining at the bed sing together: 


Makc speed to aid him, ye Saints of God; come 
forth to meet him, ye Angels of the Lord; receiving 
his soul, presenting him before the face of the Most 
Highest... . Rest eternal grant unto him, O Lord; 
and let light perpetual shine upon him. 


As it fades from the light of day into the intense brightness of 
the “Day all days illumining”, the soul is immediately faced 
with its Particular Judgement. For Judgement comes in two 
stages—first, the Particular Judgement of the individual soul, 
and second, upon the Last Day when, at the sound of the 
Trumpet, all the bodies of the dead rise from their graves, the 
General or Last Judgement. 

As soon, then, as the soul has left this world it goes with its 
guardian angel and its appointed devil of temptation before 
the Throne of Heaven. Hardly visible for light, there sits in the 
centre the white and radiant figure of the Father Almighty, 
surrounded by the eyed wings of the Cherubim and Seraphim. 
Hovering above him is the Dove of Fire, the Holy Spirit, 
with his seven descending Aames. To his right is enthroned 
Jesus the Christ, and to his left the Virgin Mother, while 
lower thrones on either side scat the Holy Apostles and 
Martyrs. In the centre, before the Throne of God, stands the 

1 The entire Order for the Commendation of the Soul will be found in che 


Rituale Romanum, which provides much more than this should the agony of 
dying be prolonged. 


The Four Last Things 213 


Archangel Michael, armoured and golden-winged, with the 
sword of divine wrath in his right hand, and the scales of 
divine judgement in his left. Here the virtues of the soul are 
weighed against anything that remains of unrepented and 
unforgiven sin. Mediaeval portrayals of the weighing vary in 
their symbolism, sometimes representing the soul as a vessel 
to be balanced against a bat-like demon,! and sometimes 
making the guardian angel at one end of the balance struggle 
against the attendant demon at the other.” 

The object of the weighing is to decide whether the soul shall 
be sent immediately to Heaven or Hell, or delayed in Purgatory. 
When the soul has died in a state of “perfect contrition” for all 
sins it goes straight to Heaven, because the fire of contrition is 
said to have burned away not only the possibility of ever- 
lasting damnation but also the temporal penalties due to each 
sin. When the contrition has been imperfect, or when the 
soul—although forgiven—has not made adequate penance and 
satisfaction for its sins, the temporal penalties still remain to be 
exacted. For the Roman Church teaches that sin incurs both 
an eternal and a temporal punishment. The eternal punishment 
is wiped out by the Sacrifice of Christ, provided, of course, 
that its effects have been mediated to the particular soul through 
the sacraments. But the temporal punishment remains, and 
this must be remitted either by suffering in Purgatory or by 
works of piety and charity performed by the soul during its 
lifetime, or by others on its behalf after it has died. Masses and 
prayers offered for the departed have, then, the effect of shorten- 
ing their sojourn in Purgatory. 


1 As on the tympanum of Bourges Cathedral, where the vessel of the soul is 
strangely like the vessel of the Ab, or Heart, shown in ancient Egyptian 
versions of the Judgement. In the latter, the Heart is weighed against the 
Feather of Truth, and must balance with it, presumably because the heart is 
expected to be without weight. But, as might be expected, the Christian versions 
of the balancing suppose that the good must outweigh the evil. 

2 As on the tympanum of Autun Cathedral, where the soul in the pan of 
the scales is the upper part of a human figure. 


214 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


If the weighing shows that the soul must be consigned to 
Purgatory, it is delivered temporarily to the tortures of the 
demons, or to the fires which burn upon the mountain of 
Purgatory standing above Hell on the other side of the earth. 
Purgatory, as its name implies, is primarily a place of burning, 
where a fire unbelievably hotter than anything known on 
earth consumes the remaining imperfections of the soul. The 
Golden Legend says that a single drop of sweat from a person 
suffering in Purgatory will instantly burn its way through a 
living hand, as if it had been shot through with an arrow. Yet 
the punishments of Purgatory are not always by fire. Some 
souls are sent to haunt the scenes of their crimes upon earth, 
or to undertake various labours symbolically connected with 
their misdeeds. Although their tortures are of an agony far 
more extreme than we can imagine, they nevertheless enjoy 
the consolations and ministrations of the angels, as well as the 
clear certainty of eventual Heaven. But as to those consigned 
to Hell we shall have more to say later. 

The mitigation of the punishments in Purgatory is the 
immediate purpose of the obsequies now to be offered for 
the soul by the Church cn earth, consisting primarily of the 
Requicm or Mass for the Dead. If the soul has actually been 
committed to Hell or Heaven, the effects of the Mass will, of 
course, redound to others able to profit from them. For the 
merits of picty and charity are transferable, and it is taught that 
there is a Treasury of Merits accummulated by the saints far in 
excess of their own personal needs. Such surplus merits may 
be applied by the Church for the remission of temporal 
punishments duc to the less holy, and are known as Indul- 
gences. Thus the Church may authorize Indulgences involving 
the renussion of so many days’ punishment in Purgatory in 
return for the saying of certain prayers or visiting certain 
shrines.! 


1 This incredibly legal and commercial trade in rewards and punishments is 
not recognized in the Eastern Orthodox Church, and would scem to be a 


“£ a10uN00] ‘6$1 -d ‘3xa) atp UT UONdIDs9q ‘aWOY It ‘URINIeT UYOl IS Jo EDTISeg ay UT SIesOU jepIsdy 
NVYILVT AHL JO SSOUD LvVaSUYD AHL °S 


‘fzz -d 9xai oy ur uondussag “g$$1 ‘sappy ay) paysnaig Aq Junured ayo woy Suraeiuq 
LNaWwsoanf Lsv1 AHL “9 


afk > HENS FINA, 


aye oGbiaen2? dey we Renan Se 


. 


The Four Last Things 215 


After death, then, the body of the deceased is laid in its 
coffin and taken to the church. Here it is set upon a bier before 
the altar, and covered with a black or purple pall, six large 
candles being placed around it. If the deceased is a priest, the 
head is pointed towards the altar, and away from the altar if a 
layman. Here the body rests until the time of Mass, and it may 
be that the faithful come to offer their prayers or to recite the 
Breviary Office for the Dead on the soul’s behalf: For the Mass, 
the clergy come vested in black, and during the procession to 
the altar the choir sings the Subvenite— 


Make speed to aid him, ye Saints of God; come 
forth to meet him, ye Angels of the Lord.... 


The Mass itself begins with the singing of the beautiful introit 
Requiem aeternam— 


Rest eternal grant unto them, O Lord; and let 
light perpetual shine upon them— 


a refrain which is repeated again and again throughout the 
rites. For the Sequence Hymn, between the Lesson and the 
Gospel, they sing the celebrated Dies irae, the hymn which 
incarnates the whole mood of Christian dread in the face of 
the Last Things: 

Dies irae, dies illa 

Solvet saeclum in faviila, 

Teste David cum Sibylla, 


Day of wrath, that day, when the world 


dissolves in glowing ashes, as witness 
David with the Sibyl. 


rather late development in the West. It is difficult not to be rather cynical about 
it, and to sce it as a clever way of ruling people and keeping up their interest 
in and dependence upon an established priesthood. An institution which 
flourishes through the mediation of salvation, or any other desidcratum, will not 
flourish for very long if it gives results too quickly. To remain necessary to the 
public, the process of attainment must be drawn out for as long as possible. 
Otherwise the Church will be (what it really should be) a bridge over which 
men will pass without building a house upon it. 


216 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


Quantus tremor est futurus, 
Quando judex est venturus, 
Cuncta stricte discussurus. 


How great shall be the trembling when 
the Judge shall come to try all things 
exactly. 


Tuba mirum spargens sonum 
Per sepulcra regionum, 
Co get ones ante thronum. 


The Trumpet swelling its wondrous 
sound through the place of the tombs, 
will gather all before the Throne. 


Death, it continues, and the whole world of nature will be 
struck aghast when all creatures arise to plead before the Final 
Judgement. The Book will be brought forth, containing the 
exact record of all things mect for the world’s judgement, and 
the Judge from his Throne will bring to light every hidden 
secret so that nothing remains unavenged. And the remainder 
of the hymn is taken up with what is doubtless the most 
fervently abject plea for mercy in all the poetry of the world. 

It is difficult, if not impossible, to convey the peculiar 
atmosphere of this hymn in an English translation and without 
its traditional music, which suggests not so much an apocalyptic 
and sensational shaking of the universe as a quietly contempla- 
tive awe. For the Dies irae conveys the mood of the Church 
rather than of the individual. The quality of personal terror 
comes out more strongly in, say, Isaac Watts’s hymn on The 
Day of Judgement: 


Such shall the noise be, and the wild disorder 

(If things eternal may be like these earthly), 

Such the dire terror when the great Archangel 
Shakes the creation; 


The Four Last Things 217 


Tears the strong pillars of the vault of Heaven, 

Breaks up old marble, the repose of princes, 

Sces the graves open, and the bones arising, 
Flames all around them. 


Hark, the shrill outcrics of the guilty wretches! 

Lively bright horror and amazing anguish 

Stare through their eyclids, while the living worm lies 
Gnawing within them. 


Thoughts, like old vultures, prey upon their heart-strings, 

And the smart twinges, when the cye beholds the 

Lofty Judge frowning, and a flood of vengeance 
Rolling before Him. 


Hopeless immortals, how they scream and shiver, 

While devils push them to the pit wide-yawning, 

Hidcous and gloomy, to receive them headlong 
Down to the centre! 


The Requiem continucs with its strange alternation of hope 


and dread, and yet somchow manages, in the end, to overcome 
anxicty with a mood of total serenity. At the Offertory, while 
the ministers prepare the holy elements, the choir continues the 
mood of dread: 


O Lord Jesus Christ, King of glory, deliver the 
souls of all the faithful departed from the pains of 
Hell, and from the deep pit. Deliver them from the 
mouth of the lion, that Tartarus may not swallow 
them, and that they fall not into darkness; but let 


Michael, the holy standard-bearer, bring them into 
the holy light. 


But at the Communion the smoke of Tartarus has cleared 
away to reveal the brightness of the Eternal Day— 


May light eternal shine upon them, O Lord, 


with thy saints for evermore, for thou art gracious. 


218 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


Rest eternal grant unto them, O Lord; and let light 
perpetual shine upon them, with thy saints for ever- 
more, for thou art gracious. 


When the Mass proper has ended, the ministers come down 
from the altar to the bier, and all the choir and clergy gather 
about the body carrying lighted candles for the ceremony 
called the Absolution of the Dead. The priest stands at the end 
of the bier towards the altar, and at the other end the subdeacon 
takes his place with the processional cross. Incense is prepared 
while the choir sings the responsory Libera me: 


Deliver me, O Lord, from everlasting death in 
that dreadful day when heaven and earth shall quake, 
when thou shalt come to judge the world by fire. 
I tremble and am sore afraid, at the judgement and 
the wrath to come; when heaven and earth shall 
quake. O that day, that day of wrath, of calamity 
and woe, a great day and exceeding bitter! When 
thou shalt come to judge the world by fire. Rest 
eternal grant unto him, O Lord; and let light 
perpetual shine upon him. 


And then the priest walks around the bier, sprinkling it with 
holy water and swinging over it the thurible of incense. After 
some final prayers, the body is taken to its resting’ place, to the 
accompaniment of the serenely joyous anthem In Paradisum: 


May the Angels lead thee into Paradise; may the 
Martyrs receive thee at thy coming, and bring thee 
into the Holy City, Jerusalem. May the choir of 
Angels receive thee, and with Lazarus, once a 
pauper, mayest thou have rest cternal. 


And the body is at last put to rest in its sepulchre to the 
words of the Canticle of Zacharias, the Benedictus, with the 
antiphon: 


The Four Last Things 219 


I am the Resurrection and the Life; whosoever 
believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he 
live; and whosoever liveth, and believeth in me, shall 
not die in eternity. 


While the soul has gone to its destiny—Heaven, Purgatory, 
or Hell—the corruptible body waits through the centuries in 
its grave for the dawn of the Last Day, which is to come at 
a ume known only within the most secret counsels of the 
Holy Trinity—perhaps tomorrow, perhaps a thousand or ten 
thousand years away. Yet—sometime—there will come a day 
when there rises in the East, not the familiar sun, but the Sun 
of Justice, the Lord Christ, riding upon the clouds of heaven 
with myriads of angels. As he appears, the whole firmament 
will be shattered like glass by the shrilling Trumpeter of 
Heaven, and its sound, ringing through all the sepulchres of 
the earth and the very depths of the sea, will lift every body from 
its grave, reassemble corrupt and scattered members, and cause 
each one, reunited with its soul, to stand up and face the Judge 
of the World. Priests, buried with their heads to the East, 
will stand up and face their focks along with Christ, and yet 
be judged with them as to whether they have faithfully fulfilled 
their ministry. 

From the presence of the Terrible Judge there will go forth a 
fire of such heat that the whole earth will be reduced to ashes 
and the oceans dissolved in steam. The sun and the moon will 
be darkened, and the stars will fall from heaven. And then 
the Recording Angel will open the Book of Life wherein are 
written the names of all those to be saved and called to stand 
upon the Right Hand of the Judge. But all those not found in 
the Book shall be made to stand upon his Left Hand. To 
those upon the right he will say, “Enter thou into the joy of 
thy Lord!” But to those upon the Ieft he will say, “Depart 
from me, for I know you not!” In that moment every secret 
of all hearts will be made utterly plain, for the resurrected shall 


220 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


be naked in body and soul, and utterly defenceless before that 
Refining Fire which, to the pure in heart, is glory, but to the 
impure the most unspeakable torment. 

By now the earth and the former heavens will have altogether 
dissolved, and out of the burning blue on high there will 
appear the Bejeweled City of the Mystical Rose, the New 
Jerusalem, “coming down from God out of heaven, prepared 
as a bride adorned for her husband”. At the same time, the 
fathomless abyss below will reveal a lake of fire and sulphur. 
With the support of the old carth withdrawn, the swarming 
and blackened bodies of the damned will plunge down and 
down endlessly into that pit where they must writhe and shrick 
in unmitigated torture for ever and ever. Far above the smoke 
and stench of the inferno, Michael and his legions will fling 
Lucifer and his diabolic host into the uttermost depths of the 
pit to cat and be eaten, to torment and be tormented, on and 
on for the ages that will never end. 

The Mediaeval mind exercised its most lively and creative 
imagination in conceiving the horrors and abominations of 
what is, thus far, the most dreadful product of the human 
mind. By comparison, its imaginative descriptions of the 
delights of Heaven were extraordinarily tame. In contempla- 
ting Hell, however, the Christian consciousness has indulged 
itself in a sado-masochistic orgy which makes all other hells, 
hot or cold, relatively cosy. One must remember that other 
traditions, such as the Buddhist and Hindu, have never 
contemplated an abode of everlasting punishment, so that their 
so-called “hells” are in fact purgatorics. While the symbol of 
everlasting torment has its special mythological significance 
if it be understood in the sense of samsara, a circle from which 
there is no exit so long as one takes the path of its circumference, 
the Christian imagination has not conceived it in this way. 
It has considered Hell as torment in a dimension of linear 
time without end, from which there is no possibility whatso- 
ever of deliverance. It is true that some of the Fathers, in 


The Four Last Things 221 


particular Origen and St. Gregory of Nyssa, taught the doc- 
trinc of “apocatastasis”, of the ultimate restoration of all souls 
to the state of blessedness after many acons of time. But this 
doctrine has been condemned in both the Eastern and Western 
Churches. 

This profoundly sinister conception is by no means “merely 
Mediaeval”. It remains, in all its literal horror, the explicit 
doctrine of the Catholic Church to this day, and has been 
defended by one who is, in other respects, among the most 
inspired and perceptive theologians of modern times, Matthias 
Scheeben. His great work, The Mysteries of Christianity, which 
is so obviously the production of a highly subtle, reasonable, 
and sensitive mind, nevertheless contains the following 
remarkable passage: 


As concerns the punishment itself, it must be clearly 
conceived ... as a state which is inversely proportionate 
to the glorification of the bodies of the blessed; it must be 
a punishment that qualitatively and quantitatively is so 
great and terrible that it immeasurably surpasses all the 
forebodings and concepts of natural reason. It must be 
the result of a supernatural force which penetrates and 
devours the body without destroying it, and through the 
body dreadfully racks and tortures the soul fettered to it. 


He adds that the physical fire of Hell 


differs from natural fire in this respect, that its fame is not 
the result of a natural, chemical process, but is sustained 
by divine power, and therefore docs not dissolve the body 
which it envclops, but preserves it forever in the condition 

of burning agony.} 
Such is the measured philosophical language which justifies 
the hideous fantasies of Matthew Paris, St. Salvius, Cranach, 


1 Scheeben, Mysteries of Christianity. Trs. Cyril Vollert, S.J. (London and 
St. Louis, 1947), pp. 692-3. 


222 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


Bosch, and Breughel in every respect save their insufficiency of 
realism and the grotesque humour of the Flemings. For the 
imagination may descend to what depths of sadistic fantasy it 
will, yet always fail to portray the ultimate and concrete 
ghastliness of the reality. With Cranach the Elder one may 
visualize the damned in their fits of convulsion upon flaming 
rocks, being gnawed and lusted upon by dog-like fiends. Or 
with Bosch and Breughel one may simply suggest outrages 
of unimaginable depravity by depicting the damned half, 
transformed into the obscene gargoyles which infest them— 
bat-winged bladders with barbed spines for noses, cross-breeds 
of ape and horseshoe crab, reptilian birds with suckers in place 
of beaks, armed fish with rotting sides and drooling mandibles, 
writhing deformities of misplaced limbs with mouths between 
the buttocks—a whole world of animated slime and orgiastic 
cruclty as yet, I believe, unplumbed even by modern 
Surrealism. One may go this far and, if possible, farther, yet 
still hardly begin to suggest a state of punishment both 
spiritual and physical which highly intellectual and cultured 
people even now believe to be a certain reality. 

This conception, with which the Western mind _ has 
tormented itself for many centuries, is admitted by most 
theologians to be the necessary consequence of its opposite—the 
everlasting and supernal bliss of the saints.! The justice, the 
logic, ofa God who is absolute and eternal Goodness and Love 
requires that there should be the visitation of a proportionably 
absolute and cternal Wrath upon those who are not on his 
side with the fullest sincerity and enthusiasm. Nothing of a 
middle way is contemplated, since “he who is not with us is 
against us”. This is, indeed, straight and realistic thinking in 
comparison with the strictly sentimental conception of the 


1 This is the view of Schceben, sbid., p. 692, “The miraculous resuscitation 
of the body and its permanent conservation for eternal punishment is in- 
separably related to the resurrection and conservation of the body for the 
reception of everlasting reward. If the latter did not occur, the former would not occur 
either.” (Italics mine) 


The Four Last Things 223 


Last End as a state of pure Goodness which simply annihilates 
its opposite, or includes all souls in its bliss. 

For the whole significance of this part of the myth is that 
Absolute Goodness of necessity implies Absolute Evil, not 
merely logically but psychologically. This is the law of 
“enantiodromia” whereby every extreme turns into its opposite, 
whereby Satanism is actually created by Puritanism and 
deviltry by sanctity. Thus the conception of the everlasting 
Heaven of goodness, love, and delight is no less monstrous 
than that of Hell. For it is essentially the same conception. We 
should not, then, be surprised to find theologians admitting 
that the sufferings of the damned in Hell are contemplated with 
delight by the blessed in Heaven, who sec all things in the 
mirror of God’s omniscience. Of course—because psychologi- 
cally the sterile monotony of unalloyed pleasure or of un- 
remitting saintliness must have its compensation. This is why 
the conception of Hell had to be invented by men who bent 
the full force of their conscious energies towards “being good”. 
Not in Heaven, but here on earth, the inhumanly “good” 
already regard the torments of the damned with secret delight— 
a fact which comes out so clearly in Mediaeval art where the 
depiction of Hell shows far more creative imagination and 
life than that of Heaven. 

An instructive example is the painting of the Last Judgement 
by Breughel the Elder (1558). To the right of the Judging 
Christ goes a procession of the blessed which is for the most 
part a multitude of heads as characterless as an army at drill 
and as dead as a cobbled street. But to the left, where the 
damned are shoveled into the gulping maw of Hell the 
picture is alive in rather the same sense as the carth bencath a 
large stone: it crawls and swarms with strange organisms. One 
may admit that Breughel may have had satirical intentions. 
One may invoke the glowing mosaics of Monreale and the 
luminous glory of Chartres to protest the real triumph of 
Mediaeval man’s depiction of the Absolute Good. But the 


224 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


triumph, like the permanent bliss of Heaven, could not be 
sustained. By the end of the Middle Ages the “beautiful” art of 
the Church—of Michelangelo, Fra Angelico, and Rafael— 
was concerning itself with the beauty of a world relative and 
natural rather than a world absolute and eternal. So far as 
the Christian imagination produced truly iconographic and 
devotional images at this time, they were not the marvelously 
anatomical studies of Michelangelo but the tortured Christs of 
Grunewald and the Baroque. 

For picty could not sustain itself at the level of the formally 
sublime. By the time of the Renaissance aud the Catholic 
Counter-Reformation Christian devotion was less and less 
inspired by the radiant, uncarthly images of Christ and the 
Saints in glory. It turned to feast itself upon vivid, realistic 
images of the Passion. It produced the Spiritual Exercises of 
St. Ignatius, with their concentration of the imagination upon 
the horrors of Hell and the sufferings of the Saviour. It turned 
from the sublimely intellectual mysticism of the Victorines and 
St. Bonaventure to the mysticism of desolation typified in 
St. John of the Cross. It let loose the full fury of the Inquisition. 
And the turnabout was not only Catholic, for the Protestant 
picty of the same period was just as preoccupied with morbidity, 
and its inquisitions upon Papists no less cruel. For this was also 
the period of Calvin’s damnation by predestination, of the 
fascination with death in the picty of Tudor and Stuart 
England, of Paradise Lost, and of the Puritans’ unprecedented 
revel in spiritual gloom. 

As an historical movement this was really an exaggeration, 
a breaking-loose, of a tendency which had existed throughout 
the Middle Ages, where there is already sufficient illustration 
of the truth of the ambivalence of psychic energy, of the fact 
that the perfectly good God necessarily creates the perfectly 
evil Devil by way of unconscious compensation, which, just 
because it is unconscious, is the one thing that theology cannot 
admit. Thus we may return, for example, to the end of the 


The Four Last Things 225 


thirteenth century and consider the sculptured Last Judgement 
on the tympanum of Bourges Cathedral as a peculiarly vivid 
illustration of this ambivalence. One must bear it in mind that, 
to a very considerable extent, the attainment of perfect sanctity 
was identified with a suppression of lust. However, this does 
not go along with a simple avoidance of or indifference to lust 
and its objects. It requires a positive and energetic opposition 
to so great a natural force, leading to a kind of fury, of divine 
wrath, against everything that incites to lust. Yet as this 
increases it becomes lust. The blessed delight in the punishments 
of the damned because the infliction of pain is the symbolic, 
“unconscious” substitution for sexual conquest.! Thus the 
sculptor of Bourges can outwardly edify but secretly delight, 
because convention permits him to show the bodies of the 
damned naked. What is ostensibly a scene of the punishment 
of the lost by devils is in fact a portrayal of satyrs about to begin 
a sadistic orgy with a group of nymphs. By such a roundabout 
course a sculpture which might have adorned one of the more 
depraved Roman brothels turns up in the guise of ecclesiastical 
art. 

Taken literally, the state of the blessed in Heaven is actually 
no less frightful than that of the damned in Hell. Here again 
we must remember that really profound theological minds 
have taken it literally, expecting in all scriousness a future 
resuscitation of the decomposed body to be the instrument of 
the soul’s enjoyment of perpetual bliss. They maintain that the 
life of the soul-and-body in Heaven will be at once eternal, in 
the strict sense, and everlasting. For the supreme delight of 
Heaven is to be the Beatific Vision of God himself: Looking 
into the immeasurable depths of this Vision, the soul will sce 
time as God sces it—all at once, past, present, and future 
embraced in a single moment of perception. Yet because the 


1]t should be added—not necessarily an unconscious substitute, for it is 
sometimes just another form of the same thing, a conscious exuggeration of 
sexual activity. 


226 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


soul-and-body remains by nature finite and creaturely it will 
continue to dwell in the dimension of timc, though by reason 
of its intimate union with the supernatural powcr of God it will 
not perish in time. It will contemplate the “moment” of eternity 
for an everlasting time. The body, with its senses inconceivably 
sharpened and amplified, will expericnce thrills of ecstasy and 
rapture beyond the wildest dreams of imagination, and will 
remain thus transported for always and always and always. 

It will enjoy not only the infinitely satisfying Vision of God 
itself, but also the loving companionship and the incomparably 
varied beauties of the Saints and Angels, as well as everlasting 
fellowship with those whom it has loved upon earth. 


And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the 
first heaven and the first carth were passed away; 
and there was no morc sea... . Behold, the 
tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell 
with them, and they shall be his people, and God 
himself shall be with them, and be their God. And 
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and 
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor 
crying, neither shall there be any more pain; for the 
former things are passed away.! 


For the life of Heaven is by no means to be that of a disem- 
bodied soul floating through a radiant sky. There is to be 
“a new heaven and a new earth”, a re-creation of the original 
Paradise Garden—the Rose Garden of Our Lady—a world 
of skies and landscapes, of intensitics of light and colour, 
scent and texture, beyond anything yet scen under the fantastic 
spell of hemp and poppy. For out of his inexhaustible 
omnipotence God will create beauty upon beauty, wonder 
upon wonder, playing for ever with his children around the 
Tree of Life as if it were perpetually Christmas Day. 

This is a beautiful conception—so long as one does not 


1 Revelation 21: 1, 3-4. 


The Four Last Things 227 


think or feel about it too deeply, so long as one takes it just as a 
glimpse and then turns away. It can, perhaps, be supposed 
that the divine omnipotence will arrange some miracle to 
prevent the terrible monotony of everlasting pleasure, and to 
make it possible for the mind to accumulate memories 
indefinitely without going mad. Yet it would seem that such 
miracles belong in the class of creating square circles, a class of 
jeux d’omnipotence of which the better theologians have never 
approved. In fact the delightful shock of wonder and the 
possibility of everlasting newness depend upon the miracle of 
forgetfulness. To be entranced eternally the blessed would have 
to forget eternally, so that the dance of omnipotence would 
not wear out the floor of memory with its tracks, so that the 
writing would not become illegible by reason of the crowded 
page. Now to forget is to die, since what we call physical 
death is above all else the destruction of a system of memories, 
of an “I”. Such considerations lead us to a profounder under- 
standing of the myth of the Four Last Things. 

The everlasting Heaven turns out to be no more than another 
form of Hell for the very reason that it is everlasting and is 
constituted by one ofa pair of opposites. It never attains to God, 
to the Hand which holds the Dividers at the Pivot. Endless, it 
never reaches man’s True End. The farther those on the Right 
are separated from those on the Left, the sooner they swing 
around the Pivot to find Hell beyond Heaven. For the End 
lies nowhere on the circle, nowhere in time, but only at the 
Pivot itself. Because we speak in figures of time and space it 
must seem that beyond the duality of Right and Left there is a 
further duality of Pivot and Circumference, Eternity and Time. 
Yet this is the illusion of language, for whatever is described 
is of the Circumference, described about the Centre. Some 
angel has taught us to use the circle for zero, for apart from, 
away from, its Centre the Circumference is nothing. And 
perhaps the same angel has led us to see that the Point of the 
Centre is no mere infinitesimal abstraction of a position 


228 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


without magnitude, but the very concrete necessity of an 
undefined Principle—without which nothing can ever be 
defined. Hence St. Bonaventure’s inspired notion of God as 
the “circle whose centre is everywhere and whose circumference 
is nowhere”. 

The difficulty of geometrical mythology is that its abstract 
quality seems to deprive its meaning of rich reality, for it is hard 
to feel that a mere point can be creative. The living myths say 
more because they say it with living, concrete images; yet they 
say the same thing. Consider St. John’s vision of the Heavenly 
City: 

Her light was like unto a stone most precious, 
even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal;! and had a 
wall great and high, and had twelve gates, and at 
the gates twelve angels, and names written thereon, 
which are the namcs of the twelve tribes of the 
children of Isracl. On the East three gates; on the 
North three gates; on the South three gates; and on 
the West three gates. And the wall of the city had 
twelve foundations, and in them the names of the 
Twelve Apostles of the Lamb.” And he that talked 
with me had a golden reed to measure the city, and 
the gates thereof, and the wall thereof? And the 
city licth foursquare, and the length is as large as the 
breadth: and he measured the city with the reed, 


1 Austin Farrer in his Rebirth of Images relates the jasper stone to the Zodiacal 
sign of Virgo, so that the whole city (“ber light”) 1s an emblem of the Virgin 
Mother, who is also the Void (“clear as crystal”) in which the past leaves no 
stain. Cf. Rev. 21:27, “There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth.” 

2 Though, as we shall see, the city is conceived as a cube it is divided 
twelvefold as the circle. The common mythological motif of the mandala or 
“magic circle” very frequently combines circle and square. 

3 Again the measuring of the Mother with the Golden Rod of the Stem of 
Jesse. As life, creation, comes from the putting of the phallus to the womb, 
which is said to be “knowing” a woman, so, at the deeper level, the Void 
appears as the intelligible world of things by measurement, division, description 


—by the Word. 


The Four Last Things 229 


twelve thousand furlongs. The length and the 
breadth and the height of it are equal.!... And 
the building of the wall of it was of jasper: and the 
city was pure gold, like unto clear glass. And the 
foundations of the wall of the city were garnished 
with all manner of precious stones. The first 
foundation was jasper; the second, sapphire; the 
third, a chalcedeny; the fourth, an emerald; the fifth, 
sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, chrysolyte; 
the eighth, beryl; the ninth, a topaz; the tenth, a 
chrysoprasus; the eleventh, a jacinth (hyacinth); 
the twelfth, an amethyst.” 


And the twelve gates were twelve pearls; every 
several gate was of one pearl:? and the street of the 
city was pure gold, as it were transparent glass. And 
Isaw notemplectherein: for the Lord God Almighty 
and the Lamb are the temple of it.4 And the city had 
no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in 
it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb 
is the light thereof.® 


Perhaps the full force of this passage lies in the last lines, 
describing the disappearance of the luminarics marking the 
years and months and days. Time has gone. The opposites 
have likewise gone, for it is a common mythological image to 


1 Likewise the Holy of Holies was a cube, symbol of completion or per- 
fection. Interestingly enough, the cube unfolded becomes the Latin Cross! 

2 With some variations these are the twelve stones of Aaron’s breastplate, 
representing the twelve tribes and the twelve zodiacal signs. St. John’s “jasper” 
is presumably a very clear amber—image of a void filled with light. 

8 A strange image indeed, unless one considers the gates as the minute holes 
through which pearls are strung. Thus we should have here another form of the 
“needle’s eye”. Hindu imagery likens the lives of men to pearls or beads upon a 
string, the string—which alone can pass the gate—being the afman, the true Self 
which is not this “I”. 

4 For in the state of eternal life there is no further necessity of the Church, 
of the symbol communicating life to the dead. 

& Revelation 21: 11-23. 


230 Myth and Ritual in Christicnity 


let the sun and the moon stand for the right and left eyes, 
whereby the ordinary man sees the world as dual. On the 
other hand, the divine man sces life with the Third Eye, 
revealing it to him as “non-dual”. Thus, “if thine eye be 
single, thy whole body shall be full of light”) Furthermore, 
the whole image of the city is of the form of a mandala—that ts, 
of a foursquare circle or sphere, which, though a universal 
symbol, appears most commonly in Buddhist art as a figure of 
the reconciliation of all opposites in the “Void” (sunyata)— 
symbolized in Buddhism by the vajra or diamond, and in the 
Apocalypse by the jasper-stone. 

The mandala form appears likewise in the vision of Dante, for 
whom the company of the blessed is the Mystic Rose, imaging 
the triple circle of light in which he finally beholds the Trinity 
—the Point in the midst of the Rose, which seems to be em 
braced by what it embraces.” Visually as well as symbolically, 
the obvious function of the mandala is to “frame” its own centre, 
like the rings around the bull’s-eye of a target, or to indicate a 
centre sending forth cfluence like the sun or a flower. The 
strects from the twelve gates, the four arms of the Cross, and 
the petals of the rose lead the cye to the centre at which they 
meet, and from which they originate. Where it is not satisfied 
with the human form itself, man’s imagination everywhere 
tends to represent the Ultimate End by this encircled Point, 
this beginning and end of rays—point in that it endlessly 
escapes definition, circle (or square, or cube) in that it embraces 
the world in every direction. 

This, then, is the image of the Centre of Heaven—the 
Beatific Vision ringed about with the nine choirs of angels and 
the transfixed hosts of Patriarchs and Prophets, Apostles and 
Martyrs, Doctors and Confcssors, and the whole company 
of blessed ones—all together making up that Mystic Rose 
which is, in turn, the Virgin of Virgins, Matrix of the World, 
Miya’, radiating from and returning into its Origin. Imagery 


1 Matthew 6: 22. 2 Paradiso xxx. 10. 


“Sez cd xay ayy ut uendnosaq Aimmuad ywuaaityp ‘teapowped saSinog jo wourdusA at woy 21295 
ISOl AHL 40 NOILYNWVG FHL ‘2 


8. CORONATION OF THE VIRGIN 
(“Die Kronung Mariae durch die Dreieinigkeit.” French (?) Master J. M. 
1457. Basel Museum.) A mandala representing the ultimate fulfilment of the 
drama of creation. The crowning of the Virgin by the Holy Trinity is the 
final divinization of Nature, of the created or manifested Universe, so that 
the Trinity becomes in some sense a Quarternity. The central scene is sur- 
rounded by an inner ring of angels and an outer ring of Apostles, Prophets, 
Martyrs, Virgins, and other Saints. The four corners are occupied by the 
Tetramorph, the symbolic figures of the Four Evangelists and the Four Fixed 
Signs of the Zodiac. 


The Four Last Things 231 


describes this Centre as a destination, an end, towards which 
man travels through time, and which lies beyond the Last Day 
of the future when the arrow of the soul will either plunge 
into its Mark, or miss it for ever. But we must not mistake that 
which is beyond the future for that which is in the future. Only 
Hell is in the future, for the more effectively man is able to 
prognosticate, the more he must be anxious and tremble. For 
the future has no other content than the disappearance of the 
past, which is what we think we are; it is by definition a time 
in which the past has no place. And thus the more accurately 
and realistically men consider the future, the more they are 
depressed. 


He that observeth the wind shall not sow; and he 
that regardeth the clouds shall not reap.... Truly 
the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the 
eyes to behold the sun: But ifa man live many years, 
and rejoice in them all, yet let him remember the 
days of darkness, for they shall be many. All that 


cometh is vanity. 


Nevertheless popular Christianity has always been an 
expression of the hope that, in the future, beyond “the days of 
darkness” there will lie “the life of the world to come”. In 
Heaven God is central, but on earth he is extreme—far out on 
the edges of time, the First Cause and the Last End. We have 
come from God in the forgotten past, and are on our way back 
to him in the distant future, so that here and now our life is one 
of exile and pilgrimage. 

To thee we exiles, childrei. of Eve, lift our crying. 
To thee we are sighing, as mournful and weeping, 
we pass through this vale of sorrow. ... Hereafter, 
when our earthly exile shall be ended, show us Jesus, 
the blessed fruit of thy womb, O gentle, O tender, 
O gracious Virgin Mary.” 
1 Ecclesiastes 11: 4, 7-8. ? Final Antiphon B.V.M., Salve Regina. 


232 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


Whether in the poetry of the Salve Regina or the doggerel of 
“There is a happy land, far, far away”, this is the dominant 
myth of Western culture both Christian and Humanist—the 
myth of the impoverished present, empty of content. The 
significance of life is felt to lie in its past history and its future 
promise, so that the time in which we live seems almost to be 
nothing—a hairline at most, Aeeting, momentary, ever beyond 
our grasp. As time goes on and, with the passing centuries, 
Heaven recedes so far as to be implausible, we are forced 
against every habit of will and imagination to see that time 
takes us nowhere, so that—as always—the opposites change 
places and hope becomes despair. 

At the present time it is hard to say whether the Christian 
myth is to stay with us as an effective power. Certain signs of 
revival do not warrant hasty conclusions, for there is all the 
difference in the world between genuine faith in God, on the 
one hand, and the tormented intellectual’s faith in faith, on 
the other. As I have observed clsewhere,? much of the present 
“return to religion” is based, not upon a veritable trust in God, 
but upon the feeling that faith in the Christian God is a social 
and psychological necessity. But Christianity cannot survive 
in the role of a “therapeutic illusion”, nor as a mere refuge of 
authority and certainty for those who shrink from the bleak 
consequences of logical thought, and still less as a nostalgic 
self-indulgence for those who need it as a pretext for the 
physical beauty of the Liturgy. 

I do not feel that the Christian myth has anything left to tell 
Western man unless he understands it outside-in. He must 
discover that what seemed to be the far-off edges of time, where 
God is Alpha and Omega, are the present, and that the 
pilgrimage from earth to Heaven is nota journey into the future 
but into the Centre. He must realize that the “death” through 
which we must pass before God can be seen does not lie ahead 
of us in time. “Death” is the point at which “1” come to an end, 

1 The Wisdom of Insecurity (New York, 1951), ch. 1. 


The Four Last Things 233 


and beyond which lies the unknown, and this point is not 
“on” but “in”. “The kingdom of God is within you.”! For if I 
explore myself a little way, I come to a point where I do not 
understand or recognize myself any more. The “I was” which 
I know becomes the “I am” which I never see. The roots of my 
consciousness disappear into an unknown region where I 
am as foreign to myself as to the pulse of my heart and the 
currents of my nerves. For what is most truly and inwardly 
myself is ever beyond that small area of knowledge and 
control which is called the ego. Paradoxically, the most 
central and fundamental region of my being scems to be most 
“other”—like the God of theistic imagery. Thus while I think 
of the ego as my actual self, I am off-centre. I am “beside 
myself”, so that the coursing of my blood and all the deeper 
processes of body and mind seem to be the work of someone or 
something else, giving a sensation of strangeness and “the 
creeps” when I feel them. 

This basic “shift” in the position of God from the periphery 
of the world to the centre requires also a shift of faith. We have 
to recognize that the totally undefinable and incomprehensible 
“something” which is our most inward self is—in all important 
respects—beyond our control. For the self which knows and 
controls is never, at the same time, the known and controlled.” 
This is the most important lesson in the world for a civilization 
which aspires to omnipotence, to the control of everything. 
For every attempt to establish total control on the part of the 

1 As one would expect, the “social-gospellers” interpret Luke 17: 21 as 
“The kingdom of God is among you”—in terms of the “fellowship” of the 
Church. This is in line with the current theological fashion for avoiding all 
“mystical” interpretations because of the inability to distinguish between what 
is truly inward and what is merely subjective and “psychological”. 

2 “Self-control” is always a form of “feed-back” mechanism. But in every 
such mechanism there is a lag between the initial action and the return of 
information making it possible to correct the action, so that literally instane 
tancous control of the controller is ever impossible. Furthermore, the feed-back 


mechanism is self-correcting in relation to its environment rather than in 
relation to itself. 


234 Myth and Ritual in Christianity 


conscious ego starts a vicious circle. Thus our culture becomes 
a system of controls in which the solution of each problem 
simply multiplies the number of problems to be solved, as in 
the myth of the Hydra monster who grows seven new heads 
for each one cut off. The complete control of life is impossible 
for the reason that we are part of it, and that, in the last 
analysis, the system is not a thing controlled but a thing 
controlling. 

We are therefore compelled to have faith in something 
which is at once ourselves, in the most basic sense, and 

. aey? 
not ourselves, in the sense of the ego, the remembered “I”. 
But this faith cannot have any tangible content, such as a 
system of beliefs, for the simple reason that the fundamen- 
tal Self cannot be defined.? Therefore it is not to be verbalized 
positively as a believing in or about. It is to be expressed 
negatively, as a wot trying to control and to grasp, as a 
“letting-go” and not as a “holding-to”. Furthermore, such 
“letting-go” faith must come about not as a positive work 
to be done, but through the realization that there is really 
nothing else to do, since it is actually impossible to grasp 
the inmost Self. 

The positive consequences of this faith in terms of love, joy, 
and illumination are strictly gratuitous. They emerge unpre 
dictably and uncontrollably from the inner depths. The 
“letting-go” removes the obstacle to their coming, but the 
actual coming, the Second Advent, is “like a thief in the 
night”, and we “know not the day nor the hour”. Generally 
speaking, they follow immediately upon the act of release. 
The apparent delay is usually due to the fact that one is trying 
to force their arrival, so that the release is not actually complete. 

1 Gadel has now proved that no system can explain its own axioms without 
self-contradiction, in an elaborate mathematico-logical verification of the point 
that a knife cannot cut itself. 

2 And this, furthermore, is the proper sense of the “supernatural”—that 


which transcends “nature”, where nature is understood as classification, genera, 
species, etc. 


The Four Last Things 235 


And the mind stops “forcing” only through the clear convic- 
tion of its uselessness.! 

As soon as one gets used to looking at the Christian images 
from this outside-in point of view, it becomes obvious thar, in 
this way, they make sense as they never did before. God returns 
to his temple, the heart, the centre of all things—of man, of 
time, of space. Heaven is no longer in the place of Hell, the 
“outer darkness” of the most distant spaces and far-off times, 
but appears in the place of the most intense reality—the now. 
Christ actually rises from the dead, and is revealed in this 
moment, and is no more locked up in the tomb of the remote 
past, in the dead letter of the written Gospels. The Mass is for 
once effectively sacrificed, for the Body of Christ, the Church, 
is really willing to be broken, finding no further need to hold 
itself together with definitions and claims. The Faith becomes 
actual faith, which is self-surrender, as distinct from all 
anxious clinging to dogmatic rocks and doctrinal idols. The 
authority of the Church becomes self-evident, which is to say 
that the Church actually realizes authority, so that there is no 
more necessity to prove it, to convince itself, by exaggerated 
proselytism and preposterous claims of spiritual monopoly. 
The dispensation of the Law, in which virtue is forced, 
actually gives way to the dispensation of Grace, in which 
virtue happily “happens”, and is not grotesquely imitated. 

So understood, the marvelous symbols of Christianity might 
still—one is tempted to say, might begin to—have a message for 
Western man, that anxious and restless eccentric who has 
“no time” because he has reduced his present to an abstract 
dividing line between past and future, and who confuses his 
very self with a past which is no more and a future which is not 

1 This is not the place to enter into a detailed account of the psychology of 
mystical faith and spiritual experience—a subject which I have discussed in a 
number of works entirely devoted to it, such as The Meaning of Ilappiness 
(2nd edn., Stanford, 1953), Belvold the Spirit (New York, 1947), The Supreme 


Identity (London and New York, 1950), and The Wisdom of Insecurity (New 
York, 1951). 


236 Myth and Ritual in Choristianity 


yet. He, too, needs to be turned outside-in, to live in the real 
world which he thinks is abstract, instead of in the abstract 
world which he takes for reality. And for this he must know 
that the true place of Bethlehem, Calvary and Olivet is no 
more in history, and that Death, the Second Advent, and 
Heaven are not in a time to come. His “sin”, his missing of the 
point, can only be forgiven ifhe repents—turns back—from his 
past, as from the future which it implies, and returns again 
to his Creator, the present reality from which he “ex-ists”. 
Whereupon the life which had seemed momentary would be 
found momentous, and that present which had seemed to be 
no time at all would be found to be eternity. 


GLOSSARY 


A 
ABSOLUTION 
The form of words whereby a priest or bishop absolves or frees a penitent 
from the penalty of everlasting damnation incurred through sin. 


ACOLYTE 

Originally one of the seven Holy Orders (see Chapter VI). One who 
serves or assists the clergy at the altar, and in the various ritual and 
ceremonial functions of the Church. 


ADONAI 

A Hebrew word meaning “the Lord”, cognate to the Greek Adonis 
and possibly to the Egyptian Aton or Aten. When the Hebrew scriptures 
are read aloud, the word is always used in place of the written Tetra- 
grammaton (q.v.) YHvH—the unutterable Name of God. 


ALLELUIA 

In Hebrew “Hallelujah”—“Sing praise to YHvH.” An exclamation of 
praise, adoration and joy, constituting the eternal sony of the saints and 
angels in heaven. Actually a “non-sense” sound, expressive of a state of 
consciousness beyond any sense which words can express. It is not sung 
in the Church between Scptuagesima and Good Friday inclusive, but 
is particularly connected with the joy of Easter. As a part of the Proper 
of the Mass, the Alleluia is a verse sung immediately after the Gradual 
(q.v.), and during the Lenten season its place is taken by the Tract. 


ANAMNESIS 

A Greek word signifying the “re-collection” of Christ’s Sacrifice, some- 
times translated “memorial”. In particular, it is that part of the Canon 
(q.v.) of the Mass in which the action of Christ at the Last Supper is 
repeated, in obedience to the commandment, “Do this in remembrance 
of me”. 


ANTIPHON 

From the Greek “contrary sounding”, as when a choir is divided into two 
parts so as to sing antiphonally, one part responding to the other through 
the alternating verses of a psalm or canticle. More particularly, an 
antiphon is a verse, changing with the season, which is sung at the 
beginning and at the end of psalms and canticles (q.v.). 


237 


238 Glossary 


APOCALYPSE 

In Greek, the exposure of hidden things, or revelation. The opposite 
is ““anacalypse”. Thus it is the Greek title of the last book of the New 
Testament, called Revelation in the English Bible. This book belongs to a 
class of Jewish literature called “apocalyptic”, books looking forward toa 
catastrophic intervention of God in the course of events, usually written 
in symbolic language so as to be understood only by those “in the know”. 


APOSTOLIC SUCCESSION 

The tradition of faith, sacrament, and worship handed down from the 
original Apostles—those “sent forth” into the world by Christ himself. 
To be in the Apostolic Succession is to receive both the faith and order 
of the Church from the supposedly unbroken line of bishops descending 
from the Apostles themselves. 


APSE 
The space enclosed by the semicircular East wall of a church sanctuary, 
or other semicircular alcove. 


ARK OF THE COVENANT 

A receptacle placed in the Holy of Holies (q.v.) of the Hebrew Temple. 
It consisted of a box surmounted by a throne, the back and arms of which 
were in the form of outstretched wings. The box was said to contain the 
Stone Tables of the Law written by Moses, a vessel of the “bread from 
heaven” or marina found by the Israelites in the Wilderness, and the 
nebushtan, or brazen serpent. The Ark is believed to have been made 
under the direction of Moses himself, and to have been preserved in the 
Temple of Jerusalem until at least the sixth century B.c. 


ATONEMENT 
The reconciliation or “at-one-ment” of God and man achieved by the 
Sacrifice of Christ. 


AVATAR 
The Sanskrit word for an incarnation of Vishnu, of the Supreme Reality, 
in human form. 


B 
BAPTISM 
The sacrament (q.v.) of initiation into the Christian Mystery, consisting 
of being immersed in water, or in having water poured upon the body, 
in the Name of the Holy Trinity. Its effect is spiritual regeneration, or 


Glossary 239 


rebirth, whereby man is “en-Christed” (christened), involving both 
union with Christ and the remission of sin. 


BASILICA 

The Greek word for the throne-room of a basilevs, or king. Thus a 
cathedral-church (q.v.) patterned after such a throne-room. The word 
is now used as a ticle for certain major shrines of the Catholic Church, 
the first of which is St. Peter’s in Rome. 


BENEDICTUS 

The Canticle (q.v.) of Zacharias, father of St. John the Baptist, found 
in Luke 1: 68. Its regular place in the worship of the Church is in the 
Office of Lauds (q.v.) and also at the Burial of the Dead. The opening 
words are, “Blessed (Lat., benedictus) be the Lord God of Israel; for he 
hath visited and redeemed his people”. The word is also used for that part 
of the ordinary of the Mass which is sung immediately after the Sanctus 
(q.v.)—"Benedictus qui venit—Blessed is he that cometh in the Name of 
the Lord. Hosanna in the highest!” 


BHAGAVAD-GITA 

Sanskrit, “The Lord’s Song”. Perhaps the most celebrated scripture of 
the Hindus, being an epitome of Hindu doctrine attributed to Krishna, 
the great Avatar (q.v.) of Vishnu. 


BREVIARY 

The book of the divine office (q.v.) recited daily by all clerics of the 
Catholic Church, whether ordained or simply in religious orders—i.e. 
monks or friars below the rank of Subdeacon, commonly called lay 
brothers. Also used in religious orders for women. The Breviary is usually 
published in four volumes, one for each of the seasons. 


C 
CANON 
The Greek word for a rule, standard or level, used ecclesiastically in the 
following senses: (1) Canon of the Mass. The central section of the 
ordinary, or unvarying part, of the Mass, sometimes called the Prayer of 
Consecration whereby the priest effects the transubstantiation of the 


240 Glossary 


Bread and Wine. (2) Canon of Scripture. The books of the Old and 
New Testaments, sanctioned by the Church as the authentic Word of 
God. In the Roman Catholic Church this includes also the books of the 
Apocrypha, called deutero-canonical because they were admitted to the 
Canon at a later date. (3) The Canonical Hours. The regular Hours 
(q.v.) of the divine office (q.v.). (4) Canon. A cleric living under a rule, 
usually attached to the staff of a cathedral (q.v.). 


CANTICLE 

A song. The word is applied to scriptural hymns other than the psalms 
employed in the serviceof the Church.In the plural, Canticles,it is another 
name for the Song of Songs attributed to Solomon. The main canticles 
used in the Church are the Benedicite, or the Song of the Three Children 
found in the book of Daniel; the three Gospel Canticles—Benedictus 
(Luke 1: 68) sung at Lauds, Magnificat (Luke 1: 46) sung at Vespers, and 
Nunc dimittis (Luke 2: 29) sung at Compline; the Venite, which is 
Psalm 95, used as a Canticle at Lauds; and the Te Deum, an ancient 
hymn of praise, purely Christian in origin, sung on occasions of solemn 
thanksgiving. 


CATHEDRAL 
A church designated as the “seat” (Gk., cathedra) of a bishop, and in 
which is therefore to be found an episcopal throne. 


CATHOLIC 

The Greek term for “universal”, “all-inclusive”, and “complete”’— 
literally, “according to the whole”. As a matter of fact, almost all 
Christians claim to belong to the Catholic Church, though the term 
Catholic must be understood not only as the Church inclusive of all 
Christians, but also as the Church inclusive of all the fulness of faith, 
order, and worship handed down in scripture and tradition. In popular 
use it designates those Christians in communion with the See or Epis- 
copal Jurisdiction of the Pope, who is the Bishop of Rome. But the 
designation Catholic, in its fullest sense, is also claimed by the Eastern 
Orthodox and the Anglican Communicns. 


CENSER 

Also called thurible. A vessel of brass, gold, or silver, usually hung on 
chains, for the burning of incense. The acolyte (q.v.) who carries it is 
termed the Thurifer. 


Glossary 241 


CEREMONY 

Strictly speaking, this term should be distinguished from rite (q.v.), 
for ceremonial is the adornment of a ritual action by such marks of 
reverence as the carrying of candles, the performance of reverential 
gestures such as kneeling, genuflection, kissing, etc. 


CHALICE 

The golden or silver goblet in which the wine is consecrated at Mass. 
The usual form is that of a plain cup, having a stem with a boss at the 
centre, and a wide, heavy base. Uniform with it is the Paten or plate 
upon which is laid the Host (q.v.). 


CHANCEL 

From the Latin cancellarivm—the screen dividing the choir and sanctuary 
of a church from the nave. Thus it comes to mean that part of the church 
which lies behind the choir-screen. 


CLERGY, CLERGYMAN, CLERIC 

Originally from the Gk. cléros, a lot, as in casting lots. Applied to the 
clergy as those “drawn” to perform a sacred function. Thus, through the 
Lat. clericus, we get clear, clever, or, in other words, literate. The terms 
date from a time when the only literate persons—clerks—were either in 
holy or religious orders. 


COLLECT 

Lat., oratio. The “prayer of the day” used at Mass, before the Lesson 
(q.v.), and at each of the Canonical Hours (q.v.). The collect changes 
with the feast or the season, is usually quite brief, and is always intro- 
duced with the formula: Dominus vobiscum (The Lord be with you), to 
which is answered, Et cum spiritu two (And with thy spirit), and then 
Oremus (Let us pray). 


COMMON 

A section of the proper or variable part of both Mass and Office used 
upon feasts of the saints when either the particular feast or the particular 
saint has no specific proper assigned. On such occasions one uses the 
Common (or “all-purpose”) propers provided for Martyrs, Doctors, 
Virgins, etc., as the case may be. 


COMMUNIO 
That part of the proper or variable section of the Mass which is sung at 
the time of Communion (q.v.). 


242 Glossary 


COMMUNION 

(1) The reception of the Body and Blood of Christ under the forms of 
Bread and Wine. Communion is normally received by the faithful at 
Mass, and always by the celebrating priest. It may also be received outside 
Mass, as when the priest takes it to the bed of one sick or dying. (2) A 
group of Christians in Communion with one another, who, by reason 
of unanimity in matters of faith and order, will celebrate Mass and 
receive Communion together. Those outside such a Communion are, 
from its standpoint, ex-communicate. (3) Communion of Saints. The 
koinonia or fellowship of all members of the Body of Christ, of all realizing 
him as their Head or real Self. 


COMPLINE 
v. Hours. 


COPE 
v. Vesture. 


CREED 

Lat., Credo, a summary of the articles of faith. The Catholic Church has 
three Creeds: (1) The Nicene-Constantinopolitan, dating from the fourth 
century, which is sung at Mass after the Gospel for the day. (2) The 
Apostles’ Creed, of uncertain but early date, in general a shorter form of 
the Nicene. Recited in the divine Office (q.v.). (3) The so-called 
Athanasian Creed or Quicumque vult, from the first words, “Whosoever 
would be saved”, dating from the ninth century, and recited on certain 
occasions at Matins. 


D 
DEACON 
From the Greek diakono, to minister or serve. Deacons occupy the third 
rank of the Holy Orders (v. Chap. VI) and their traditional function is to 
assist the priest at Mass and in other sacraments, to sing the Gospel at 
Mass, and to have care of the sick and needy of the Church. 


E 
ELEVATION 
The ceremonial climax of the Mass, when, immediately after the conse- 
cration of the sacred elements, the priest genuflects and elevates first the 
Host (q.v.) and then the Chalice (q.v.) in the sight of the people. This 
act is accompanied by the solemn ringing of bells, at the altar and in the 
church tower, and with the offering of incense. 


Glossary 243 


EMBEK DAY 

The Ember Days occur four times a year, being set aside as special days 
for the ordination of priests and deacons, and for the prayers of the 
people for the clergy. 


EPISTLE 

(1) The books of the New Testament which are the epistles or letters of the 
Apostles, such as St. Paul, St. John, and St. James, to the early congre- 
gations of the Church. (2) The portion of such an Epistle read at Mass, 
by the Subdeacon, immediately after the Collect (q.v.) and before the 
Gradual (q.v.). 


EXORCISM 
The casting out of devils from a person, church or house, or from any 
object intended for holy use. 


F 
FONT 
Lat., fons, fountain. The receptacle for the baptismal waters, usually a 
large stone bowl mounted upon a pedestal and placed by the West door 
of the church. Sometimes a sunken bath or stone-lined pool. 


G 

GLORIA 

(1) The hymn Gloria in excelsis Deo (Glory be to God on high) sung 
at Mass immediately after the Kyrie (q.v.). (2) The doxology (ascription 
of glory) Gloria Patri sung at the end of each psalm in the divine office 
(q.v.). “Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit. As 
it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, unto all the ages of 
ages. Amen.” 


GOSPEL 
The god (good) spell (tidings), or ev” (good) -angel (message), constituted 
by the life and teaching of the Christ, and recorded in the Four Gospels. 
More particularly, the portion of the Gospel solemnly sung by the Deacon 
at Mass. 


GRADUAL 

That section of the proper or variable part of the Mass which is sung 
immediately after the Lesson or Epistle (q.v.), while incense is blessed 
and other preparations made for the singing of the Gospel. 


244 Glossary 


GREGORIAN CHANT 

The traditional music of the Catholic Church, otherwise known as 
Plainchant. So named from the particular encouragement and advance- 
ment of its use by Pope Gregory the Great (d. 604) in the sixth century. A 
type of unharmonized, modal chanting designed to be sung unaccom- 
panied and to follow the natural rhythm of the spoken word. 


H 
HOLY OF HOLIES 
The inmost sanctuary of the Hebrew Temple, containing the Ark of the 
Covenant (q.v.). It was constructed in the form of a perfect cube, 
symbolizing the wholeness of God, and was entered but once a year, and 
by the High Priest alone. 


HOLY WATER 

A mixture of water and salt, both of which are solemnly exorcized and 
blessed for the banishment of devils and for the infusion of divine grace. 
Its primary use is for the rite of the Asperges, the sprinkling of the people, 
which occurs immediately before High Mass each Sunday. Otherwise it 
is placed in a stoup or small basin at the entrance of churches, and kept 
by the faithful in their homes. It is used on almost all occasions when 
objects are specially blessed for holy use. Sprinkling with holy water is 
usually accompanied by the recitation of the words from Psalm 51 
(Vulg., 50) Asperges me byssopo, “Thou shalt purge me with hyssop and 
I shall be clean; thou shale wash me and I shall be whiter than snow”. 


HOST 

Lat., bostia, victim. The round wafer of unleavened bread which is 
consecrated in the Mass to become the Body of Christ—the sacrificial 
Victim. These mass-breads are of two kinds, large and small. The large 
is the one elevated in the sight of the people, broken at the Fraction, and 
used for the Communion of the celebrating priest. The small are for the 
Communion of the congregation. Normally they are made with wheat- 
flour and water, with a little salt, and before baking are embossed with 
some sacred emblem, such as the crucifix or the sacred monogram 1HC. 


HOURS 
The daily Hours of Prayer constituting the divine office (q.v.) and 
contained in the Breviary (q.v.). While the phrase “the Hours” often 


Glossary 245 


refers to those Offices named after the hours themsclves—Prime, Terce, 
Sext, and None—the Hours may be taken to mean all eight Offices. 
These are: Matins (the “night-office’, properly sung between midnight 
and 3 a.m.), Prime (between 3 and 6 a.m.) followed by Lauds, Terce 
(between 8 and 9 a.m.), Sext (between 11 a.m. and noon), None 
(between noon and 3 p.m.), Vespers (between 3 and 6 p.m.), and 
Compline (abour 9 p.m.). In religious communities silence is observed 
after Compline, and continues until the end of breakfast the following 
day. The actual times at which the Offices are sung varies from place to 
place in accordance with custom and convenience. 


I 

ICON 

Gk., eikon, image. Specifically a holy picture of Christ or of the saints 
or angels, such as are particularly venerated in the Eastern Orthodox 
Church. Usually an icon shows the figure of the sacred personage painted 
in accordance with archaic Byzantine traditions against a background of 
gold, representing the encompassing presence of God. In later times 
such icons were overlaid with sheet gold and embellished with precious 
stones. 


ICONOGRAPHY 
The science of sacred pictures and images—their execution, symbolism, 
and identification. 


INTROIT 

The words of the proper or variable part of the Mass which are sung at 
the beginning of the rite, before the Kyrie (q.v.), while the clergy say the 
prayers of Preparation and the altar is censed. The introit usually consists 
of a part of one of the psalms, with an antiphon (q.v.). 


K 
KYRIE 
Gk., kyrios, lord. That part of the Latin Mass which is sung in Greek 
immediately after the Introit (q.v.). The words are Kyrie eleison (Lord 
have mercy), Christe eleison (Christ have mercy), Kyrie eleison (Lord 
have mercy). Each petition is repeated thrice, and addressed respectively 
to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. 


246 Glossary 


L 
LAUDS 
v. Hours. 


LESSON 

(1) Any liturgical reading from the Scriptures. (2) The portion from one 
of the Epistles (q.v.) or from the Old Testament or Apocrypha sung at Mass 
by the Subdeacon immediately after the Collect (q.v.) for the day. 


LITANY 
A form of prayer consisting of short versicles and responses (q.v.) said 
or sung between the priest or a cantor and the congregation—e.g. the 
Litany of the Saints, sung on Holy Saturday, or the Litany for the 
Dying. 


LITURGY 

Gk., leitos, public, ourgos, work. (1) The entire rite (q.v.) of the Church’s 
official and public worship, comprising the Mass, the divine office, and 
the administration of the Seven sacraments. (2) The Mass in particular, 
normally termed the Divine Liturgy in the Eastern Orthodox Church. 
In the Eastern Church it is customary to “make the Liturgy” rather than 
to “say” or “hear” Mass, reflecting the proper sense of Christian worship 
as an action done by the whole Church, as distinct from a form of words 
said by the hierarchy in the presence of the people. 


M 

MASS 

Lat., missa, from the words of dismissal “Ite missa est”, a problematic 
uttcrance meaning something like “Go, the mass is done”, or “Go, it is 
sent forth” (Lat., mitto, send). Thus the Mass is the celebration of the 
Lord’s Supper as the central act of Christian worship, on which see 
Chap. V. The order of Mass is as follows (see other articles in Glossary 
for specific terms): 


Mass of the Catechumens: Mass of the Faithful: 
Introit Offertory 
Kyrie Preface 


Gloria Sanctus and Benedictus 


Glossary 247 


Mass of the Catechumens: Mass of the Faithful: 
Collect Canon (of Consecration) 
Lesson or Epistle “Our Father” 

Gradual and Alleluia (or Tract) Fraction and Kiss of Peace 
Gospel Agnus Dei 

Nicene Creed Communion 


Post-Communion Collect 
Dismissal and Blessing 


The traditional and proper celebration of Mass is in the form known as 
High Mass, which is sung, and requires three clerics—priest, deacon, and 
subdeacon—taking their appointed parts. So-called Low Mass is a 
mediaeval innovation wherein the Mass is said bya priest alone, so as to 
become a sort of private devotion for the priest. This latter custom emerged 
from the “chantry-system”, chantries being small side-chapels provided 
so that every priest might say one Mass a day so as to assign the full 
measure of its benefits to some such cause as the repose of a particular 
soul in Purgatory, or the recovery of a sick person. Such treatment of the 
Mass arose from a quantitative philosophy of the divine Grace, and 
represented the decay of the liturgical or corporate nature of Christian 
worship. 


MATINS 
v. Hours. 


MISSAL 

The mass-book placed upon the altar for the Mass, containing all the 
words to be sung and said, and the rubrics describing the ritual and cere- 
monial actions to be done. Modern missals are actually “omnibus 
volumes” containing what were originally a number of separate books— 
the Sanctorale containing the parts, such as the Canon, to be said by the 
celebrant, the Graduale containing the propers or variable parts to be sung 
by the choir, the book of Lessons and Epistles to be sung by the sub- 
deacon, and the book of Gospels to be sung by the deacon. 


O 
OCTAVE 
The week following certain feasts, consisting of eight days inclusive of 
the feast itself, during which the proper parts of Mass and Office appro- 
priate to the feast continue to be said. 


248 Glossary 


OFFERTORY 

(1) The opening action of the Mass of the Faithful, being the presentation 
of Bread and Wine at the altar. The Host is offered upon the Paten, or 
plate, and the Wine is offered in the Chalice, mixed with a little water 
specially blessed at this time, except in masses for the dead. Anciently 
both the Bread and the Wine were brought to the altar by the whole 
congregation, with other gifts. (2) The words of the proper or variable 
part of the Mass sung at this time by the choir. 


OFFICE, THE DIVINE 

The daily recitation of the Psalms by all clerics, in the form of the 
canonical Hours (q.v.). Probably instituted by St. Benedict in the sixth 
century, this custom is called the Opus Dei, the “work of God”. Together 
with the Mass, the divine office constitutes the essential “prayer of the 
Church”, showing that the Catholic philosophy of prayer is something - 
quite other than the popular notion of the individual addressing his 
petitions and aspirations to God. For the Psalms are understood to be the 
“songs of the Holy Spirit”, so that in reciting them man speaks to God 
with the veice of God. The point is that one cannot and does not pray 
as an individual, but only in so far as one is “no longer I, but Christ”, 
as a member of the Mystical Body. 


P 
PASSION SUNDAY 
The fifth Sunday in Lent, and the second before Easter, inaugurating the 
two-week season of Passiontide. 


PATRISTICS 

The study of the lives and writings of the Church Fathers—i.e. the 
great theologians and historians of the Eastern and Western Churches 
during the first ten centuries. 


PERSON 

When God is said to be three Persons and one God the English“Person” 
is a translation of the Greck bypostasis, for which we have no exact 
equivalent. By analogy, ice, water and steam are three hypostases of a 
single “substance”, or, in Greek, ousia. In the same way, the three Persons 
of the Trinity are said to be “of one substance” (bomoousios), which is 
God, yet nevertheless each of the three is a distinct hypostasis. 


Glossary 249 


PREFACE 

The Canon of the Mass (q.v.) is introduced with a recitation by the priest 
which is called the Preface. It is sung to a very ancient chant, and opens 
with the words, Vere dignum et justum est—‘It is uly meet and just, and 
availing to salvation, that we should at all times and in all places give 
thanks unto thee, holy Lord, almighty Father, eternal God. . . .’ The 
Proper Prefaces involve the insertion of some extra sentences into this 
formula at certain feasts and seasons. It ends with a reference to the praise 
of God by all the angelic hosts, and there follows at once the Sanctus 


(q.v.). 


R 
RESPONSE 
The reply of the choir and/or congregation to a versicle (q.v.) sung by 
the priest or deacon, usually brief in form—e.g. V. The Lord be with 
you. R. And with thy spirit. V. Hearts on high! R. We lift them up to the 
Lord. 


RESPONSORY 
An antiphon (q.v.) containing repeated phrases. 


RITE 

Originally the Sanskrit rita, Lat., ritus. The action or deed constituting 
worship, together with the accompanying form of words which declare 
its meaning. “Rite” is thus almost equivalent to “liturgy” (q.v.). To be 
distinguished from ceremonial (q.v.), which is the ornamentation of 
ritual. Christian liturgy comprises a number of different rites, associated 
with the great historical centres of Christendom, such as Rome, Byzan- 
tium, Alexandria, etc. 


RITUALE 

A manual containing the forms of administering sacraments other than 
the Mass, with the exception of those administered by a bishop—which 
are contained in the Pontificale. It contains also the various forms of 
blessing and exorcism, as well as other devotions. 


S 
SACRAMENT 
Gk., mysterion, Lat., sacramentum. A divinely instituted action with some 
material object which, though performed by the human agency of the 
Church, is in fact an action of God. Thus every sacrament comprises 


250 Glossary 


(a) the matter (e.g. the water in Baptism), (b) the form—the way in 
which the matter is used and the words which must accompany such 
use, and (c) the spiritual power or grace which the sacrament confers. 
See Chap. VI. 


SANCTUS 

Gk., trisagion. The angelic hymn, Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus—Holy, holy, 
holy, Lord God of hosts. Heaven and earth are full of thy glory. Hosanna 
in the highest”. In che Mass it follows the Preface and, with the addition 
of the Benedictus (q.v.), immediately precedes the Canon, Te igitur. 


SARUM BREVIARY 

Anciently Sarum or Salisbury was one of the great centres of the English 
Church, and had its own special rite or liturgy (q.v.), contained in the 
Sarum Missal and the Sarum Breviary. See “Breviary”. 


SHEKINAI 

(Hebrew)—the glory or radiance of yuvu, which especially shone 
around the Ark in the Holy of Holies (q.v.). In later Hebrew theology 
the shekinah is substantially identical with yiivit himself: 


STOLE 
y. Vesture. 


T 
TETRAGRAMMATON 
The four Hebrew letters of the Name of God, vivir, or Jod, He, Vau, He, 
tead in Hebrew from right to left thus: 771°. 


U 

UPANISHADS 

Ancient Hindu scriptures compiled between about 800 and 400 B.c., 
and containing the foundations of the central doctrines of Hindu meta- 
physic, known as the Wedanta—the “end” or “fulfilment” of the Veda. 
Veda or “the Vedas” is the divine knowledge (root, vid-, to know) con, 
tained in the most ancient mythological and ritual texts of the Hindus, 
dating from at least 1500 B.c. 


USE 
An English synonym for Rite (q.v.). 


Glossary 251 


Vv 
VERSICLE 
Literally a verse. A short exhortation or prayer uttered by the officiant at 
any service, to which the choir and/or congregation gives a response 
(q.v.). E.g. V. O God make speed to save us. R. O Lord make haste 
to help us. 


VESPERS 
v. Hours. 


VESTURE 

The ritual vestments of the Church are ecclesiastical adaptations of 
various types of secular clothing worn in the Graeco-Roman world. 
‘Thus the vestments of the priest at Mass are the alb (Gk., chlamys), a long 
robe of white linen, the amice, a white linen hood, the cincture, a 
linen girdle, the stole (Lat., orariut), a long band of silk hung around 
the neck which was formerly a cloth for wiping the mouth, the maniple, 
a short band of silk worn over the left wrist, originally a ceremonial 
handkerchief, and the chasuble (Lat., casula, “little house”), an almost 
circular “poncho” of silk hanging from the neck-hole to below the knees. 
In place of the chasuble the deacon wears the dalmatic, and the sub- 
deacon the tunicle, both of which are types of Byzantine tunic. Act other 
functions than the Mass a common vestment is the cope, a large silken 
cloak with a formal hood worn hanging from the shoulders. The modern 
surplice, not unlike a night-shirt, often decked out with lace, is a bar- 
barous vestment from Northern latitudes, originally used to cover up fur 
undergarments in cold weather. Silk vestments change in colour, in 
accordance with feasts and seasons (except in the Eastern Church). White 
is for feasts of Christ and the Virgin, and of all saints other chan martyrs; 
Red is for feasts of the Holy Spirit and of martyrs; Purple is for pene- 
tential seasons—Advent and Lent; Green is for “‘ferial” days, when there 
is no special feast; Black is for Good Friday and for masses of the dead. 


INDEX 


Abaddon, 43 
Abel, 91 
Abraham, 90, 91, 103 
Absolution, 193, 201-3 

of the Dead, 218 
Acosmism, 22 
Acuve Door, 168, 184 
Acts of Jobn, 167 
Adam, 78, 81, 82, 85, 86, 89, 90, 

167, 185 

creation of, 49 

head of nature, 50 

sin of, 175 

the Second, 55, 133, 168 
Adonai, 29, 96 
Adonis, 159 
Advent, 85-101 

Second, 206, 219, 234 
Agnosia, 128 n 
Aion, 20n 
Albert the Great, St., 16 n, 61 
Allegory, 17 
Alleluia, 139 
Alpha and Omega, 17, 149, 232 
Altar, 195-6 

stone, 195 
Ambrose, St., 79 n 
Amergin, 137 
Anamnesis, 81, 95n, 108, 205 
Ancient of Days, 28 
Angelico, Fra, 224 
Angels, 35 -45, 87, 122 

Fall of, 87 

Guardian, 39 

sources of doctrine, 40 n 
Anna, St., 11 
Annunciation, 39, 116-18 
Anti-Christ, 209 
Antiphons, the Great, 96 
Anxiety, 208 -9 
Aphrodite, 102 


Apocalypse, 148, 195, 228-30 
A pocatastasis, 221 
Apocrypha, 25 
Apollo, 121 
Apostles, 91, 189 
Apostolic Succession, 146 
Apse, 193 
Apuleius, 177 n 
Archangels, 36, 37, 38 
names of, 39 & n 
Aristotle, 19, 62 
Ark of the Covenant, 56 
of Noah, 87, 194 
Ascension, 24, 88, 91, 94, 126, 173, 
185-7, 188-9 
Ash Wednesday, 140 
Ashtaroth, 43 
Ashvagosha, 130 n 
Asmodeus, 43 
Ass, 143 & n 
Assumpuon of the Virgin, 6, 103, 
110-12 
Astarte, 102 
Asuras, 44 
Auman, 128 n, 229n 
Atonement, 126, 141, 144 
Atus, 159 
Augustine of Hippo, St., 24, 76 
Authorities (Angelic), 37, 38 
Authority of the Church, 20-1, 25, 
235 
spiritual and temporal, 190-1 
Autun Cathedral, 213 n 
Avatars, 136, 158 
Axis Mundi, 159 
Axle-Tree, 107, 165, 196-9 


Babel, Tower of, 186 

Babylon, 98 

Baptism, 46, 139, 
201-2 


178-82, I71, 


253 


254 


Bapusm, of Christ, 126 

of Blood, 182 n 

of Desire, 182 n 
Baroque, 224 
Basilica, 193 
Bateson, Gregory, 208 n 
Beatific Vision, 36, 42, 205, 225-31 
Bede, 170 n 
Beelzebub, 43 
Being, 61 n 
Belief, 21, 25, 208, 234 
Belphegor, 43 
Bethlehem, 93, 115, 119 
Bhagavad-Gita, 160 
Bible, The, 21, 28 n, 86 

see also Scriptures 
Bindu, 99 n 
Bishops, 192-3 & n 
Black Mass, 180 n 
Blood, symbolism of, 140 

of Christ, 146, 151 n 
Bo Tree, 159 
Body, The, 77 n, 143 n 

of Christ, 146-50 

Mystical, 25, 190 
Bonaventure, St., 61, 224, 228 
Book of Life, 216, 219 
Bosch, Hieronymus, 222 
Bourges Cathedral, 213 n, 225 
Brahman, 61, 148 
Brahmana Caste, 191, 203 
Bread, 146-50 

as Christ’s Body, 176 
Breviary, 25, 87 n, 89 n 
Breughel the Elder, 222, 223 
Bride of Christ, 104 
Bribadaranycka Upanishad, 47 n 
Bru malia, 123 


Buddha, The, 117n, 130n, 131, 143 n, 


159 
Buddhism, 16n, 44, 471, 60, 108, 
220, 230 
Mahayana, 21 


Caduceus, 79 
Cain, 91 


Index 


Calvin, 224 
Campbell, Joseph, 58, 160 n 
Cana, 126 
Candlemas, 127-8 
Caste, 191 
Catacombs, 195 
Catechumens, 139, 180 
Catholic Church, Roman, 6 
Catholicity, 136 
Celibacy, 203 
Ceres, 102 
Chaburah, 145 
Chalice, 146, 151 n 
Chamucl, 39 n 
Chandogya Upanishad, 47 n 
Chaos, 47, 69, 108 
Chartes, 223 

Virgin, of, 110 
Cherubim, 37, 38 & n 
Chivalry, 205 n 
Choir (Chancel), 194-5 
Chrism, 201 
Christmas, 89, 119-25, 185 
Church, 25 

authority of, 190 

building, 193-9 

nature of, 190 

and State, 193-9 
Circumcision, 125 
City of God, 111 n, 143, 228, 230 
Clement of Alexandria, 16 n, 50 
Communion, First, 201 

see also Mass 
Communion of Saints, 190 
Compass, 48 n, 109 n, 178 

see also Dividers 
Confession, 202, 210 

see also Penance 
Confirmation, 201 
Conscience, 208 
Constantine, 190 
Contrition, 74 
Coomaraswamy, A. K., 13-15, 17, 

19, 20n, 4$N, 97n, 163 n, 
189 n, 191 n 

Cornerstone, 96 & n, 176 & n, 209 


Index 255 


Counter-Reformation, 224 Easter, 49, 88, 170-85 
Cranach the Elder, 221, 222 Name, 170 & n 
Creation, The, 24, 46-52 Eckhart, Meister, 16 n, 61, 113 
of the Angels, 35-6 Economy, Divine, 188 
of Man, 49 Eden, Garden of, $1, 159 
Six Days of, 47-50 Egg, Cosmic, 48 
Creeds, The, 25 Ego, 16, 65-6, 68, 77, 84, 98, 163, 
Cross, $5, 78, 157-61, 230 164, 204, 233 
Latin, 229n nature, of, 70-8 
Types of, 158 see also Soul, Nefesh, Psyche 
Wood, of, 6, 79, 156, 158, 161 Egypt (asa Type), 91, 97, 169 
see also Tree of the Cross Flight into, 124-5 
Crucifix, 164-5 Ekakshana, 99 n 
Crucifixion, 95, 154-61 El-Elyon, 29 
Cube, 228 n, 229n Elijah (Elias), 24, 94 
Cusa, Nicolas of, 16 n Elisha, 94 


Cyril of Alexandria, St, 133, 134.n — Elizabeth, St., 100, 119 
Emmanuel, 96 
Damnation, Everlasting, 17, 42-3, Enantiodromia, 223 


65, 213, 220-5, 231 Enclosed Garden, 105 

Dante, 12, 31-2, 99 n Enoch, 24, 91 
Dark Night of the Soul, 154, 175 n Ens, 27n 
David, 93, 96, 103 Eostre, 170 
Day of God, 47 Epiphany, 123, 126 
Deacons, 38, 192-3 Episcopus, 193 n 
Death, 148-9, 206, 207-12, 227, 232 Equinox, 
de Givry, Grillot, 43 n Vernal, 88, 170 
Demons, 42-3 Erigena, John Scotus, 16 n, 61 
Devil, The, 39 Eschatology, 206-7 

see Lucifer Eternity, 60 
de Voragine, Jacobus, 103 n and Everlastingness, 225 

see Golden Legend Eubulides, 74, 209 
Diamond, 163 Eucharist, 145 & n 
Dies Irae, 215-16 see also Mass, Liturgy 


Dionysius the Areopagite, St., 16n, Evangelists, The Four, 38 & n 
24, 40n, 6In, 68n, 121, 154, Eve, 


175m creation of, 52 
Diurnal, 87 n type of Mary, 56 
Dividers, The, 108, 114, 227 Evil, 

see also Compass Absolute, 223 
Dome, 189 n Angelic, 43-4 
Dominions, 37, 38 Origin of, 41 
Doorkeepers, 192 see also Lucifer 
Dove, 180n Exodus, The, 24, 91-2 
Dualism, 17, 44 Exorcism, 171 


Dulia, r10 n Exorcists, 192 


256 Index 


Exsultet, 174 Gadel, 234 n 
Eye, 230 Golden Legend, 121, 124 n, 214 
Ezekiel, Vision of, 37, 40n Golgotha, 199 
Goliath, 94 

Faith, 21, 232-5 Good Friday, 55, 154-66 
Fall, The, 24, 52-4, 73 Graal, 166 & n 

of Adam, 81, 89 Grace of God, 45, 95, 141, 235 
Farrer, Austin, 83 n, 161 n, 228 n Greek Philosophy, 62 
Fasting, 140 Gregorian Chant, 153 
Father, God the, 30, 61, 110 Gregory of Nazianzus, St., 134 

see also God, Trinity of Nyssa, St., 221 
Fire, Blessing of New, 172 Grunewald, 224 

Tongues, of, 189 & n Guadaloupe, Virgin of, 110 
Firmament, 48 & n Guardian Angels, 39 
First Cause, 33 n, 231 Guénon, René, 191 n 
First-Fruits, 188 Guilt, 141 
Fish, 83 & n 
Flesh, The, 191, 204 Hades, 70n 
Flood, The, 144, 178 Descent into, 91, 97, 166-9 
Font, 194, 197 Hare’s Tail, 169 

Blessing, of, 47, 177-80 Heaven, 27 n, 225-31 
Fraction, 151 Kingdom of, 132 
Francis of Assisi, St., 143 n Hebrew Mythology, 62 
Frazer, Sir James, 9 Hegel, 62 
Free-will, 33 & n, 40-1, 51 Hell, 43, 48, 167 
Freud, Sigmund, tos n see also Damnation 


Hermes Trismegistus, 137 
Herod, 91, 124 
Hilbert, 63 n 
Hinduism, 16 n, 44, 69, 108, 148, 
220, 229Nn 
History, 
Christian view of, 129-132 
and myth, 66-7 
Holiness, 34 
Holy of Holies, 56, 116, 229 n 
Holy Saturday, 86 
Holy Week, 143-82 
Host, The, 146, 197, 203 
see also Bread, Body of Christ 


Gabriel, St., 39, 56, 117 
Gentiles, 124 
Gethsemane, 152, 166 
Gilson, Etienne, 20 
Glory of God, 28 

see also Shekinah 
Glossolalia, 189 

see also Tongues, Gift of 
Gnosticism, 160 
God, 27-35 

belicf in, 21 

the Father, 61 

Goodness of, 45, 75, 71-6, 222-3 

224 


idea of, 67-9, 70, 75 Hosts, Lord of, 29 
otherness, of, 233 Hours, Canonical, 89 n 
the Son, 87, 118, 128 Hugh of Cluny, 176 n 
see also Logos, Son, Word Hyle, 161 


see also Spirit, Trinity Hyperdulia, 110 n 


Index 2$7 


Iconostasis, 184, 194 

Idealism, Subjective, 68 

Idolatry, 21 

Ignatius Loyola, St., 224 

Immaculate Conception, 31 n, 110 

Immortality, 70 n 

Inanna, 102 

Incarnation, The, 30, 81 & n, 89, 126 
dogma, of, 128-37 
story of, 118-23 

Incense, Nails of, 173 

Indulgences, 214 & n 

Infinity, 60 

Initiauon, Christian, 139, 171, 180 
see also Baptism 

Innocents, the Holy, 123 

Isaac, 91 

Isis, 8, 102 

Islam, 16 n, 44 

Israel, 91, 95 

Ivhistory of, 86-94, 125 

Ixory Tower, 105 

Ixion, 65 n 


Jacob, 91 
Jami, 149 n 
Janus, 84, 206 
Jasper-stone, 228-30 
Jataka Tales, 162 
Jerome, St., 115, 130 n 
Jerusalem, 94, 143 
the New, 220 
Jesse, Rod, Stem or Tree of, 93, 96, 
102, 107, I14, 159, 228 n 
Jesus, 87 
and God the Son, 30 
historical, 81, 187 
Name of, 93 n, 117 & n, 125, 130 
Jews, The, 91, 124 
Joachim, St., 115 
John the Baptist, St., 100, 119 
John of the Cross, St., 224 
John of Damascus, St., 103 n, 111, 
133, 185 n 
John the Evangelist, St, 107 
Apocalypse of, 228 


John the Evangelist, St., 
chronology of gospel, 142 1 

Jonah, 94 

Jophiel, 39 n 

Joseph, St, 5, 116, 219, 160 

Joseph of Arimathaca, St., 154, 166 

Joshua, 93 n, 117 0 

Judaism, 16n 
Satan in, 44 

Judas Iscariot, 55, 167 

Judgement, the Last, 219-20 
Particular, 212-14 

Jung, C. G., 10-15, 18, 110 n, 168 n 
on symbols, 19 

Justice of God, 35 


Kabala, 16 n, 147 n, 160 
Kings, Coronation of, 191 
Krishna, 131, 136, 143 0 
Kshatriya Caste, 191 
Kundalini, 79-80, 196, 198 
Kundalini-Yoga, 189 n 


Lamb, Sacrifice of, 92, 147, 148 
Lao-tzu, 143 n 
Last Day, the, 98, 207, 231 
Last Things, the Four, 206-36 
Lateran Cross, 160 n 
Latria, 110 
Law of Moses, 86, 95, 235 
Lazarus, 94 
Lent, 138 & n, 140 & n 
Leo, St, 133 n, Ison 
Lila, 80 
Lily of the Valley, 105 
Liturgical Reform, 150 n 
Liturgy, 25,145 & n 

see also Mass 
Lituus, 80 n 
Logos, 30, $1 n, 61, 69, 108, 118 n, 

191 

see also Word 
Lot’s wife, 98 
Love, God as, 31, 34-5 
Lucifer, 80, 81, 83, 85, 169, 177 n, 

209, 220 


258 


Lucifer, the Divine in, 82 
Fall of, 41-5 
as self-consciousness, 72 
as Serpent, 52 

Lust, 205 n, 225 

Luther, 76, 208 


Magi, 123-4, 126 
Magnificat, 119 
Malice, 42, 73 
Mammon, 43 
Man as God’s Image, 28 
Mandala, 12,228 n, 230 
Manichaeism, 205 n 
Manna, 93 
Maritain, Jacques, 20 
Marriage of Church and State, 191 
Mass, 25, 86, 95, 139,143, 145-51, 
205, 235 
Black, 180 n 
Presanctified, $5, 154-66 
Requiem, 214-18 
Solemn, 192-3 
Matrimony, Holy, 203-4 
Matthew, 125 n 
Mary Magdalene, St., 171 
Mary the Virgin, St., 91 
see also Virgin 
Maundy Thursday, 152 
Maximus of Turin, St., 134 
May, 80, 108, 113-14, 204, 230 
mother of Buddha, 130 n, 143 n 
Maya-Shakti, 102 
Melchizedek, 91 
Memory, 60, 149, 227 
Mensa, 195 
Mephistopheles, 43 
Meta-linguistics, 58 n 
Metanoia, 98, 141 
Metaphysic, 15, $7- 63 
Metaphysics, 15, 58-63 
Michael, St., 39, 213, 220 
Michelangelo, 224 
Missal, 86 & n, 89 n 
Mithras, 8 


Index 


Moment, the Eternal, 29 n, 66-7, 
113, 120, 132, 148, 168-9, 187, 
197, 225, 226, 236 

Monism, 135 n 

Monreale, 223 

Monstrance, 197-8 

Moon, 107, 230 

Morality, 71, 141 

Mortal Sin, 202 & n 

see also Sin 

Moses, $4, 56, 86, 90, 91, 93, 96, 125, 

169 
Law of, 71 

Mundaka Upanishad, 165 n 

Mystery, 139, 145, 154 

Mysticism, 1, 22, 235 n 

Myth, 58, 63 

Mythology, 6-20, 27 n, $9, 64 


Naclaatus, 134 
Name(s) of God, 28, 29 

see also Jesus 
Nativity Story, 119-25 
Nature, 59 
Nave, 87, 194 
Navel of the World, 160, 197 
Nazareth, 116 & n 
Nefesh, 50 n, 71 :n, 77:0, 81n 
Nehushtan, $4, 56, 79 & n 
Neoplatonism, 16 n 
Nestorians, 129 
Neurosis, 18 
New Testament, 24, 94 
Nidhug, 79 
Niflheim, 160 
Nirvana, 120 n 
Noah, 87, 144 
Nyoi, 80n 


Odin, 159 
Offertory, 151 
Office, the Divine, 25, 153 
Oils, Holy, 180, 211 
Old Testament, 24, 86, 90, 157 
Omnipotence, 33, 75-6 

and Free-will, 33 


Index 


Omnipresence, 32 
Omniscience, 32-3, 75-6 
Order, Holy, 190-3, 203 
Origen, 221 
Orphism, 16 n, 48 
Orthodox Church, Eastern, 6, 31, 
203, 214n 
church building, 193-4 
Easter in, 183-5 
Osiris, 8, 158 


Palm Sunday, 140, 143-5 
Pan, 44 
Panselinos, 40 n 
Pantheism, 150 n 
Paraclete, 154 
Paradise, 55, 168, 226 
Paradise Lost, 224 
Paris, Matthew, 221 
Pascha, 92 
see also Easter, Passover 
Paschal Taper, 173-9 
Passion, The, 90, 138-69 
Passover, The, 92, 142 & n, 145, 
147,174 n, 188 
Pastoral Staff, 80 & n 
Pawistics, 24 
Paul, St., 71, 76, 77 n, 132 n, 204 
Paulinus of Nola, 123 
Pearl, Gates of, 229 & n 
Penance, Sacrament of, 201-3 
see also Confession 
Pentateuch, 125 n 
Pentecost, 88, 186, 188-9 
Person(s), the Divine, 29-31, 81 n, 
128 & n, 129n 
unity of Man with Christ’s, 134 
Peter, St., 96 n, 192 
Philo of Alexandria, 16 n 
Philosophia Perennis, 14, 18, 21, 29, 
113, 1§0n 
Phoenix, 38, 160 n 
Pisces, 83 
Plato, 16 n, 19 
Play, the Divine, 17, 31, 33 n 
Plotinus, 16 n 


259 


Plutarch, 99 n 
Pneuma, 84 

see also Spirit 
Poetry, 64 
Point, the One, 227-8, 230 
Ponufex, Christus, 199 
Powers (Angelic), 37, 38 
Praeconium, Paschal, 173-7 
Prayer, 153 n 
Prediction, 64 
Presanctified, Mass of, 154-66 
Pride, 186 
Priests, 192-3 

Marriage, of, 203 
Prima Materia, 46-7, 69, 104, 108, 

113, 160, 198 
Primitive man, 9 
Prince Five-Weapons, 162-3 
Principalities, 37, 38 
Proclus, 16 n 
Prophecies, The, 86, 177 
Prophets, 86 
Protestantism, 6, 21, 25, 85-6, 88, 
207, 224 

Prothesis, 194 
Psalms, The, 25 
Psyche, 0 n, 77 n, 810 

see also Ego, Nefesh, Soul 
Purgatory, 48, 213-14 & n 
Purification BVM, 125, 127-8 
Puritanism, 224 
Purusha, 128 n 
Pyx, 210 


Quetzalcoatl, 165 n 
Quietism, 164 


Rafael, 224 
Ramakrishna, 131 
Raphael, St., 39 
Readers, 192 
Regents, the Four, 161 
Relics, 195-6 
Renaissance, 224 
Repentance, 74, 98 
see also Metanoia 


260 


Reproaches, 156-7 
Reservation of the Sacrament, 151 0 
Resurrection of Christ, 24, 88, 92, 94, 
126, 170-1 
concept of, 71 n 
General, 219, 225 
Righteousness of God, 45 
Rock, Water from the, 93 
Roman Catholic Church, 6, 203 
Rood Beam, 195 
Rose, the Mystic, 101, 107-8, 116 n, 
220, 230 
Garden of Our Lady, 226 
of Sharon, 105 
window, 12, 198 
Ruach Adonai, 50, 71 n, 84, 188 
see also Spirit 
Ruysbroeck, John of, 16 n, 112 


Sabaoth, 29 
Sacraments, 25, 200-5, 208 
nature of, 181-2 & n 
and symbol, 200 
Sacred Heart, 165 n 
Sacrifice, 95, 200 
of the Lamb, 49, 51.1 
of the Mass, 147-50 
Sadducees, 71 n 
Sahasrara, 80 
Salem, 91 
Salt in Baptism, 181 
Salvation, 81 
Salvius, St., 221 
Samadhi, 128 n 
Sammavel, 84 
Samsara, 220 
Sanctuary, 194-6 
Sanskrit, 69 
Sarah, 91, 103 
Satan, 
see Lucifer 
Satanism, 43, 223 
Saturday in Holy Week, 171-82 
Scheeben, Matthias, 221, 222 n 
Scholasticism, 24 


Index 


Science, $7, $8, 63 
Scorpio, 38 
Scriptures, the Holy, 25, 90 
Self-consciousness, 73-4, 84 
Sephiroth Tree, 160 
Septuagesima, 138 n 
Sepulchre, the Holy, 196 
Seraphim, 37 
Serpent, 52, 78, 80, 107 
as Christ, 56 
see also Nehushtan 
Set, 158 
Seven (the number), 50 
Seven Rays, 50 & n, 195 n 
Sexuality, 203-4 & n 
Symbolism, of, 104-5 & n 
division of, 52 n, 178 & n 
Shadrach, 94 
Shekinah, 28, 43, 45 
Sheol, 70n 
Signaculum, Dei, 38 
Simeon, 127 
Sin, 43, 84.0, 99, 141, 193 & n, 201- 
203, 236 
Mortal, 202 
Punishments of, 213 
Venial, 202 n 
Sisyphus, 65 n 
Sodom, 98 
Solomon, $4 
Solstice, 
Summer, 88 
Winter, 87, 121, 123 
Son, God the, 30, 41, 110 
see also Logos, Word 
Son of Man, 82 n, 98 
Song of Songs, 105-6 
Sophia, 30-1 & n, 33 0, 90, 103, 
104, III, 112, 118M, 191 
Soul, 16, 50 & n, 77, 204 
see also Ego, Psyche, Nefesh 
Spear, 165 
Spheres, the Seven, 49 
Spirit (in Man), 29, 50, 52.9, 77.0 
see also Pneuma, Ruach 


Index 


Spirit, God the Holy, 13, 25, 30, 46, 
88, 113, I16, 1§4, 179, 186, 
188-9, 201 

Sevenfold, 29, 195 & n 

Star, Morning, 177 & n 

Star of the Sea, Our Lady, 47 

Sticky-Hair, 162-3 

Subdeacons, 192-3 

Sufism, 16 n 

Suicide, 147 

Sun, 164, 197-9, 230 

Birth of the, 87 
of Justice, 89, 123 

Sun-Door, 189 n, 199 

Sunyata, 117 n 

Supernatural, 27 n, 62, 234 n 

Supper, the Lord’s, 145-6 

see also Mass 

Surrealism, 222 

Susanna, 94 

Sword, 29, 108, 114 

Symbol, nature of, 18-19, 200 

Symplegades, 168 

Syncretism, 22 


Tabernacle of the Altar, 195, 210 

T’ai Chi, 69,97 n 

Taliesin, 136 

Tammuz, 159 & n 

Tantalus, 65 n 

Tao, 69 

Taoism, 16 n 

Tar Baby, 163 n 

Tathagata-garbha, 117 n 

Tathata, 61 

Tenebrae, 153-4 

Tertullian, 79 n 

Tetragrammaton, 28 

Theology, 58-63, 81, 109 
and Incarnation, 128-37 

Things, notion of, 58-62, 64, 68-9 

Thomas the Apostle, St., 171 

Thomas Aquinas, St., 24, 61 

Thomassinus, 135 n 

Throne, Episcopal, 193 & n 

Thrones, 37 


261 


Thursday in Holy Week, 151-4 
Tiamat, 108-9 
Time, 27 n, 29 & n, 66-7, 131, 229- 
230, 231-2 
Tobias, 94 
Tongues, Gift of, 186 
Transubstantiation, 150 & n 
Tre Hore, 166 n 
Treasury of Merits, 214 & n 
Tree of the Cross, 24, 79, 157-61, 
195 
of Eden, 116, 196 
of Knowledge, 24, 51-5 
of Life, 26, 51, 54, 55,155» 157-61, 
226 
Trinity, the Holy, 30-2, 188, 191 
and Monism, 135 n 
Trisagion, 36 
Trumpet, the Last, 219 
Types, Theory of, 86-96, 157 


Unconscious, The, 27 n, 66, 110 n, 
168 n 
Collective, 10 
Source of wisdom, 12, 18 
Unction, Holy, 205, 210-11 
Upanishads, 160 
Uriel, 39 


Vaishya Caste, 191 
Vajra, 163 
Vak, 69 
Vedanta, 21, 60 
Venial, Sin, 202 n 
Venus, 177 n 
Viaticum, 209-12 
Victorines, 224 
Virgin, St. Mary the, 8, 31 n, 39, 41, 
93 -4, IOI-21, 230, 231 
Assumpuon, £03, 110-12 
Birth of, 115 
Bride of Chiist, 104 
childhood, of, 116 
Immaculate Conception, 110-11, 
112 
Mary (name), 107, 115 


262 


Virgin, St. Mary the, as Matter, 107 
as Maya, 108 
Mediatrix of Graces, 102, 110 
Prima Materia, 46-7 
Queen of Heaven, 102, 107 
and Sophia, 104, 111 
and Virgo, 228 n 
veneration of, 110 & n 

Virgin Birth, The, 97 

Vishnu, 80 

Void, The, 230 

von Hiigel, Baron, 20 


Water, 46-7, 107, 135, 177-9, 197 
upper and nether, 48 

Waus, Isaac, 216 

Weeks, Feast of, 188 

White, Lynn, 213 n 

Whitsunday, 88 

Whorf, B. L., 58 n, 61 n 

Will, 167 

Windows, Church, 198-9 

Wine, 135, 146-50 


Index 


Woman, 203-4 
Womb, 47, 104, 112, 178, 179 n, 181 
Wood of the Cross, 79, 156, 158, 161 
Word, The, 27, 29, 30, 69, 109, 130, 
176 n, 189, 191, 204, 228 n 

see also Logos, God the Son, Sophia 
Worship, 25 
Wounds, The Five, 162, 176 
Wrath of God, 80, 84 
Ww-hsin, 128 n 
Wuemen kwan, 169 n 


Yakuts, 160 

Yang, 82 

Year, Christian, 87-8, 138 
Yggdrasil, 79, 159, 160 & n 
YHVH, 28, 70 

Yin, 82 

Yoga, 79, 196-8 


Zadkiel, 39 n 
Zodiac, 38 & n, 49, 161, 229 n 
Zobar, 16 n 


