ZEN 


4 


ZEN 
48 


A SHORT INTRODUCTION 
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS 
BY THE AUTHOR 


ALAN 
WATTS 


PREFACE BY 
SHINGE ROKO SHERRY CHAYAT 


ye New World Library 


Novato, California 
CIBRAWS 


om ,, New World Library 
14 Pamaron Way 
“an” Novato, California 94949 


Copyright © 1948 by Alan Watts, © 2019 by Joan Watts and Anne Watts 


All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part, stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means — electronic, 
mechanical, or other — without written permission from the publisher, except by 


a reviewer, who may quote brief passages in a review. 

Text design by Tona Pearce Myers 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication data is available. 
Originally published in the United States in 1948 by James Ladd Delkin, 
Stanford, California 

First New World Library printing, July 2019 

ISBN 978-1-60868-588-2 

Ebook ISBN 978-1-60868-589-9 


Printed in Canada on 100% postconsumer-waste recycled paper 


New World Library is proud to be a Gold Certified Environmentally 
Responsible Publisher. Publisher certification awarded by Green Press 


Initiative. 


To 


Ruth Fuller Sasaki 


CONTENTS 


Preface by Shinge Roko Sherry Chayat 
Foreword 


Introduction 


The Background in Indian Religion 
The Background in Chinese Religion 
The Momentous Harmony 

Direct Pointing 

Zen Meditation 

The Cultural Effects of Zen 


Conclusion 

Bibliography 

The Drawings and Symbols 
About the Author 


PREFACE 


WITH ITS RADICALLY SIMPLE and direct title, Zen was 
among the earliest books by Alan Watts to intrigue spir- 
itual seekers. This edition of Zen, appearing some sev- 
enty years after the original small printing, is sure to 
do the same for a new generation of readers. It offers 
a clear, concise, and informative introduction to a path 
that inspired Alan Watts from an early age and contin- 
ued to intrigue him throughout his life. 

Zen was published in England in 1947 under the 
title Zen Buddhism: A New Outline and Introduction. The 
American edition, published by James Ladd Delkin, 
came out in 1948, the same year as the second edition 
of Watts’s The Spirit of Zen. “Since writing The Spirit 
of Zen...many valuable sources of information on the 
general nature of Zen have been available to me,” Watts 


writes in his foreword to Zen, adding that the new book, 


ZEN 


“though brief, will in several important respects provide 
a corrective to the former volume.”* 

Among those “valuable sources” was D.T. Suzuki, 
as well as the Zen master Sokei-an Shigetsu Sasaki and 
his disciple Ruth Everett, who became Sasaki’s wife in 
1944, the year before his death. Ruth Everett was the 
mother of Eleanor Everett, who married Watts in 1938, 
two years after the first edition of The Spirit of Zen. 

Precocious and intellectually adventuresome, Watts 
had been delving into Buddhist teachings even while in 
boarding school at King’s School in Canterbury, En- 
gland. After reading Lafcadio Hearn’s Glimpses of Un- 
familiar Japan, he borrowed from a friend The Creed of 
Buddha by Edmond Holmes, which contained a pam- 
phlet written by Christmas Humphreys about the work 
of the Buddhist Lodge in London. Becoming a member 
and subscribing to the lodge’s journal, The Middle Way, 
he submitted his first writing on Zen for publication. 

As Alan’s daughter Joan Watts writes in The Col- 
lected Letters of Alan Watts, on the basis of that essay he 
“was invited to speak to the members, who were shocked 


to learn that Alan Watts was a mere lad of fifteen.”? 


bs See p. 17. 


T Watts, The Collected Letters of Alan Watts, p. xiii. 


Preface 


Humphreys became his mentor, and it was through him 
that Watts met D. T. Suzuki. At around the same time, 
he exchanged letters with Sokei-an Sasaki, who wrote to 
the brilliant young seeker, “It is very hard to judge the 
ultimate attainment of Zen without observing the daily 
life and establishing a close contact between teacher and 
disciple in order to make certain whether attainment is 
one of mere conception or that of really standing in its 
center....I am quite sure you are on the way of Zen and 
I hope some day in the future we will meet each other.”* 

That meeting took place in 1938, when Watts and 
his new wife, Eleanor, arrived in the United States. 
However, Watts himself never established the kind of 
connection with a Zen master that Sokei-an Sasaki had 
recommended, despite his mother-in-law’s long immer- 
sion in traditional training at Nanzen-ji and years later 
at Daitoku-ji (where Ruth was ordained and installed as 
abbot of Ryosen-an, a sub-temple there) and her associ- 
ation, along with Sokei-an, with the First Zen Institute in 
New York and Kyoto. 

For the young Watts, Zen was not only a corrective 
to The Spirit of Zen; it was a deeply personal response to 


what he saw as the shortcomings of Western metaphysics 


Watts, The Collected Letters of Alan Watts, p. 8. 


ZEN 


and, in particular, of Christianity. While writing Zen, 
Watts was preparing for ordination in the Episcopal 
Church, working as chaplain and living at Canterbury 
House at Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois, 
with Eleanor and their young daughters, Joan and Anne. 

From several letters of that period, it’s clear that 
Watts viewed his engagement with Christianity as a 
means toward changing the Church from within. The 
revelations of oneness he found in Zen paralleled what 
he considered the most important truth of Christianity: 
the mystery of God. He equated the mystical in Chris- 
tianity with the naturalness of Zen; the ineffability of 
God with the nowness of Zen awakening. Indeed, in an 
earlier book, The Legacy of Asia and Western Man (1937), 
he had called for “a Christianity reinforced by all that 
Asia (ie., Buddhism, Taoism, Hinduism, etc.) can give.”* 

Writing Zen while taking on all the rituals and trap- 
pings of ecclesiastical Christianity must have been ap- 
pealingly surreptitious. By the time of his ordination, he 
had grown impatient with the strictures of the Church and 
with what he felt was an untenable narrow-mindedness 
among its leaders. Two years after the US publication 


of Zen, he submitted his resignation to Bishop Wallace 


. Quoted in Watts, The Collected Letters of Alan Watts, p. 254. 


Preface 


Conkling with, as Joan Watts notes, “a barrage of crit- 
icism of the Church.”* She quotes a letter to his friends 
in which he wrote, “During the past years I have contin- 
ued my studies of the spiritual teachings of the Orient, 
alongside with Catholic theology, and, though I have 
sometimes doubted it, I am now fully persuaded that the 
Church’s claim to be the best of all ways to God is not 
only a mistake, but also a symptom of anxiety.”? 

Zen presents an eminently accessible overview of 
Buddhist teachings, calling for the cessation of grasping 
and rejecting the inherent dualism of any intellectual 
formula. Rather than trying to possess God, he wrote, 
it was necessary to allow God — and life — to possess 
you. For Watts, to be fully alive was the essence of Zen; 
it could not be defined. How could one convey that es- 
sence? Only through immediate insight into the nature 
of Reality. It could only be transmitted, as Buddha did 
while holding up a flower, silently. Words would always 
and immediately lead to concepts, creating an intellec- 
tual divide between the nowness of spiritual experience 
and any attempt to define it. 


Nonetheless, Watts was in love with words. Ever the 


* Watts, The Collected Letters of Alan Watts, p. 261. 
T Ibid. 


ZEN 


scholar of comparative religions, he offers in Zen a brief 
overview of the Hindu Upanishads, early Indian Ma- 
hayana Buddhism, Chinese Taoism and Confucianism, 
and the development of Zen monastic practice in Tang 
dynasty China and in Japan, noting that Mahayana Bud- 
dhism was “somewhat infected with the characteristi- 
cally Indian desire to escape from the world of form, but 
in China it lost this desire almost entirely.”* Zen Bud- 
dhism, for Watts, was “the synthesis of the contempla- 
tive insight of Indian religion, the dynamic liveliness of 
Taoism, and the down-to-earthness of Confucianism.”* 
In the process of writing Zen, Watts was keenly 
aware of how quickly one can get entangled in dualism, 
warning his readers not to form “the concept of a pure 
and unchanging consciousness separate and apart from 
the changing forms of thoughts and things.” He was en- 
couraging the “perpetual self-abandonment” to the pure 
Mind, “an identification of itself with its changing forms, 
which in Christian language would be called the divine 
love.” It’s not “that we have to make the pure Mind per- 
form this act of self-abandonment,” he noted; “it does it 


by itself all the time, in us and through us.”* 


* 


See p. 33. 
T See p. 37. 
$ See pp. 48-49. 


Preface 


Zen’s final section addresses the instantaneous ac- 
tion through self-abandonment found in the traditional 
Zen arts, whether in calligraphic brushstrokes or haiku, 
flower arranging or stone gardens, tea ceremony or ar- 
chery — and the deep training and discipline necessary 
for that instantaneous action to be authentic. 

It’s remarkable how in such a slender volume — 
what he called his little booklet — Watts could convey 
Zen’s challenges and its possibilities for life-changing 
breakthroughs. More than an outline or overview, Zen 
itself is like a haiku, a condensation of profundity that 
beckons to new understandings. 

— Shinge Roko Sherry Chayat 
Abbot of the Zen Studies Society, New York, 2019 


FOREWORD 


THE SUBSTANCE OF THIS ESSAY was first published 
in England in 1947 under the title Zen Buddhism: A 
New Outline and Introduction. The present American 
edition has been enlarged and revised with a view to 
providing an up-to-date and comprehensive outline 
of Zen Buddhism for the increasing number of stu- 
dents of a subject upon which all major works have 
long been out of print. Since writing The Spirit of Zen 
(London, 1936; reprinted 1948) many valuable sources 
of information on the general nature of Zen have been 
available to me, and the present work, though brief, 
will in several important respects provide a corrective 
to the former volume. 

I am indebted, as ever, to Dr. D.T. Suzuki for 


his translations of original material, the greater part 


ZEN 


of those quoted being his unless otherwise indicated. 
I am also indebted for much general information 
upon the subject to the late Sokei-an Sasaki, Abbot 
of Jofuku-in, who lived and taught for many years in 
New York, though I do not wish to make him respon- 
sible for any of the opinions given lest they should 
be in error. Some of this information I owe also to 
Mrs. Sasaki, who let me read many of the manuscripts 
of his lectures and translations, and discussed them 
with me, though, for the same reason, I must not 
make her responsible either. It is a pleasure to me, 
however, to have this opportunity of expressing thanks 
to them all. 

At the end of the book will be found a bibliogra- 
phy and an explanation of the drawings, symbols, and 
Chinese characters used as chapter headings. 

Alan W. Watts, 


Canterbury House, Evanston, Illinois, 1948 


INTRODUCTION 


THERE IS NOTHING THAT MEN DESIRE MORE than 
life — the fullness of life, Reality itself. In one form or 
another they try to possess it by every possible means, 
as happiness, as power, as joy, as wealth, as spiritual 
insight, and even as simple existence to which they 
cling with all their might for fear that it will be taken 
away. But one thing is certain: the harder you try to 


possess life, the faster it slips away from you, and the 


ZEN 


less you understand of its mystery. For life itself, what- 
ever it may be, cannot be grasped in any form, whether 
of matter, of emotion, or of thought. The moment 
you try to hold it in a fixed form, you miss it. Water 
drawn from the stream is no longer living water, for it 
ceases to flow. This is what the Buddha meant in say- 
ing that the cause of all human misery was srishna or 
selfish craving, because zrishna is the attempt to grasp 
life in some form, more especially in the form of one’s 
own personal existence. Man can only become alive in 
the fullest sense when he no longer tries to grasp life, 
when he releases his own life from the stranglehold of 
possessiveness so that it can go free and be itself. 

In practice, almost all religions are attempts to 
grasp the mystery of life in either an intellectual for- 
mula or an emotional experience. Wherever it may be 
found, higher religion involves the discovery that this 
cannot be done, and that therefore man must relax his 
fearful grip upon life or God and permit it to possess 
him as, in fact, it does all the time whether he knows 
it or not. Zen Buddhism is a unique example of this 


kind of higher religion, and because the word “Zen” 


20 


Introduction 


indicates this very spiritual state of full liveliness and 
non-grasping, it is really impossible to define Zen. 
Nevertheless, Zen has a philosophical and religious 
history by means of which we can arrive at some sug- 
gestion of its meaning. 

Asa specific form of Buddhism, Zen is first found 
in China, being the peculiarly Chinese version of 
the kind of Buddhism which, according to tradition, 
was brought from India by the sage Bodhidharma in 
or about the year 527 cE. Bodhidharma’s Buddhism 
was a variety of the Mahayana school, the Buddhism 
of northern India, which is to be distinguished from 
the Hinayana or Southern school of Buddhism now 
prevalent in Ceylon, Burma, and Siam. The latter is 
founded on the Buddha’s teaching as preserved in the 
scriptures of the Pali language, whereas the former 
recognizes, in addition to these, certain Sanskrit scrip- 
tures of supposedly later date which are of a deeply 
metaphysical character. 

Bodhidharma’s variety of the Mahayana was known 
as Dhyana Buddhism, pronounced “Ch’an” in Chinese 


and “Zen” in Japanese, and though the nearest English 


21 


ZEN 


equivalent of “Dhyana” is “contemplation” this term 
has acquired a static and even dreamy connotation 
quite foreign to Dhyana. Dhyana, Ch’an, or Zen means 
immediate insight into the nature of Reality or life. In 
China, Dhyana Buddhism was strongly influenced by 
Taoism and Confucianism, and, under the guidance 
of the practical mentality of the Chinese, emerged 
as the Zen we know today in the seventh century cE. 
The development of this distinctively Chinese form 
of Dhyana was largely the work of Hui-neng (or Wei- 
lang), whose Tan-ching or Platform Sutra is one of its 
most authoritative texts. From 713, when Hui-neng 
died, until the close of the thirteenth century, Zen flour- 
ished widely in China and exercised a profound effect 
on all branches of art and culture. Ei-sai brought it to 
Japan in 1191, where it may be found to this day in its 
most vital form and where, too, it has had an extremely 


far-reaching effect upon the national culture.* 


A somewhat different account of the history of Zen in China is 
given by Hu Shih in “The Development of Zen Buddhism in 
China,” Chinese Political and Social Review, vol. 15, no. 4. Peiping, 
January 1932. He traces its origin back to Tao-seng (d. 434), a 
disciple of a school of Taoist interpreters of Yoga represented by 
Hui-yuan (d. 416) and Tao-an (d. 385). According to Hu Shih, 


22 


Introduction 


In brief, Zen accounts for itself in the following 
way. Gautama Siddhartha became the Buddha, the 
Enlightened One, as the result of a profound spiritual 
experience, an immediate knowledge of Reality, which 
he realized while meditating under the famous Bodhi 
Tree near Gaya in northern India. This knowledge, 
being ineffable, could never be put into words, and all 
the Buddha’s verbal teaching was simply an indication 
or suggestion of its nature, a mere device (upaya) for 
awakening men to real insight. The knowledge itself 
was, however, directly and mysteriously passed on to 
Mahakasyapa, the Buddha’s chief disciple, on an occa- 
sion when, instead of preaching a sermon, the Buddha 
silently held up a flower before his disciples. All stood 
nonplussed save Mahakasyapa, whose understanding 
smile brought this recognition from his master: “I 
have the most precious treasure, spiritual and tran- 


scendental, which this moment I hand over to you, 


Bodhidharma arrived in Canton as early as 470, but, even so, found 
Tao-seng’s Dhyana school already in existence. The account given 
above follows Suzuki in his Essays in Zen Buddhism, vol. 1, but at 
present there is insufficient material at hand to enable the occiden- 
tal student to decide between Suzuki and Hu Shih. Suzuki’s account 


follows the official version of the Zen school. 


23 


ZEN 


!” 


O venerable Mahakasyapa!” Tradition asserts that 
this knowledge was handed down from Mahakasyapa 
through a line of patriarchs to Bodhidharma, who 
brought it to China, where it continued to be passed 
from teacher to teacher. Because this knowledge can 
never be written down Zen does not rely on scriptures, 
even though it may use them as devices. Words cannot 
convey it, just as they cannot describe colors to a blind 


man. Thus Zen is summed up as: 


A special transmission [of insight] outside the 
scriptures; 

No dependence upon words and letters; 

Direct pointing to the soul of man; 


Seeing into one’s own nature. 
To understand Zen adequately, however, we must 


realize that it is the fruit and synthesis of the most 


important trends in both Indian and Chinese religion. 


24 


| 
THE BACKGROUND 
IN INDIAN RELIGION 


INDIAN RELIGION HAS EVER BEEN CHARACTERIZED 
by the quest for “that One thing, knowing which we 
shall know all.” In the Upanishads this “One thing” is 
termed Brahman, the absolute Reality of the universe 
beyond all opposites. All ordinary things and experi- 
ences have opposites; life is opposed to death, pleasure 
to pain, joy to sorrow, light to darkness. These oppo- 


sites are necessary to one another, so that life is always 


25 


ZEN 


limited by death, and joy by sorrow. But Reality itself 
has no opposite; it is advaita, non-dual, and the soul 
of man is only delivered from death and sorrow by 
realizing its identity with Reality. For the Upanishads 
taught that Brahman is the true nature of ourselves and 
of all things. Not to realize this is ignorance (avidya) 
and unhappiness, but to know it is true knowledge 
(vidya) and a transcendental happiness which is eter- 
nal because, strange to say, it too has no opposite. 
Thus the religion of the Upanishads was more or less 
monistic, believing that all forms and objects were in 
fact manifestations of the One Absolute. 

Primitive Indian Buddhism also sought this Reality, 
but its way of approach was purely psychological. 
The Buddha felt that philosophical speculation about 
Reality was a waste of time and even a positive hin- 
drance. Reality or Nirvana lay beyond all definition, 
and nothing was of importance but an immediate and 
intimate experience of it, and this could only be had 
by getting rid of trishna. Reality is here and now, but 
it is concealed by attempts to grasp it in this form 


or that. 


26 


The Background in Indian Religion 


Later Indian Buddhism, which is to say Mahayana, 
linked both the psychological approach of primi- 
tive Buddhism and the metaphysical tradition of the 
Upanishads. But whereas the Upanishads described 
the non-dual Reality as the One, Mahayana felt this 
term misleading. One is opposed to Many and None, 
for which reason Reality must transcend even oneness. 
Mahayana went beyond monism, and certainly beyond 
any trace of that Spinozist pantheism so often, and, it 
may be said, erroneously, attributed to the Upanishads. 
To say that all things are one is to reduce everything 
to something which is still short of non-duality, since, 
as we have seen, one-ness has an opposite and so can- 
not be the Absolute. Furthermore, the very statement, 
“All things are Reality,” contains an implied opposi- 
tion between “all things” and “Reality.” In making 
such a statement we are uniting two things which are 
in no need of union. They are already united, and to 
try to create the union in thought or in feeling is to 
imply to oneself that it does not already exist. Nirvana 
(the state of Reality) zs Samsara (the state of ordinary 


life) and the very act of trying to realize that they are 


27 


ZEN 


one implies that they are not. In any case, Reality is 
not one; it is non-dual, having no opposite at all. 
Therefore Mahayana spoke of Reality as Tathata, 
or Thusness, and as Sunyata, or the Void, consid- 
ered not as mere emptiness but as “solid emptiness.” 
Sunyata resembles a crystal ball, which is visible to our 
eyes only because of what it reflects. Hold it up before a 
crowded street, and there within it is a crowded street. 
Hold it up before the empty sky, and there seems to be 
nothing in it, but only because it is reflecting the emp- 
tiness of the sky. Its true nature remains unknown. As 
the crystal ball reflects images, the manifold universe 
appears spontaneously within Sunyata. There is noth- 
ing in it, but everything comes out of it. Sunyata is 
the all-inclusive; having no opposite, there is nothing 
which it excludes or opposes. This was a philosophical 
theory expressing a spiritual and psychological state 
— the state of non-grasping or freedom from trishna. 
To thought and sense and feeling Reality is a void, for 
they cannot lay hold on it or keep it in any fixed form. 


But it is a living void, because all forms come out of it, 


28 


The Background in Indian Religion 


and whoever realizes it is filled with life and power and 
the Bodhisattva’s love (karuna)* for all beings. 

From a somewhat more psychological stand- 
point, Sunyata is also regarded as the ground of 
human consciousness — the “essence of Mind,” the 
supra-individual Self, in which all our varying states 
of consciousness, our thoughts, emotions, and sensa- 
tions have their being, like images produced sponta- 
neously in a mirror. This production of images is held 
to be playful rather than purposive, as if in the act of 
“creation” Reality were simply enjoying itself — an 
idea resembling the Hindu view of the universe as the 
lila, the playful dance, of God. Thus Mahayana consid- 
ers Reality under three aspects which, somewhat in the 
manner of the Persons of the Christian Trinity, are in 
essence one: Dharmakaya, which is the pure and undif- 
ferentiated Sunyata; Sambhogakaya, which is the cre- 
ative principle of enjoyment, the /z/a; and Nirmanakaya, 


which is the resultant manifested universe. 


Karuna is the moral equivalent of all-inclusiveness. 


29 


THE BACKGROUND 
IN CHINESE RELIGION 


WHILE ZEN DERIVED its highly practical approach 
to religion from Confucianism, it was actually more 
deeply influenced by Taoism as taught by Lao-tzu 
(sixth century BCE) and Chuang-tzu (third cen- 
tury BCE). In Taoism Reality is termed Tao, another 
untranslatable word, which has, however, a rather 
more dynamic connotation than Brahman, Tathata, 


or Sunyata. Tao is life considered as a flowing power, 


31 


ZEN 


like the wind, or a stream, or the present moment. 
It is sometimes rendered as “the Way of things,” or 
as the Logos. A person who has realized union with 
Tao is said to be ina state of Te, or “grace,” while the 
method of realization is called Wu-wei (no-assertion), 
which is highly similar to the Buddhist idea of giving 
up trishna. As in Buddhism, all evils are attributed to 
man’s self-assertiveness, his itch to possess life in fixed 
forms. But if he can realize that he is one with Tao, the 
fullness of life, he will cease to want to possess things 
and will therefore be free from evil. If man ceases from 
self-assertion and lets go of life, the Tao will have a 
chance to operate freely within him. His life will be 
lived not by his own ego, but by Tao. 

While Indian religion made its object the reali- 
zation of man’s identity with Brahman or Tathata, of 
the inherent unity of appearance and Reality, Samsara 
and Nirvana, Chinese religion made its object har- 
mony with the Tao. To Indian religion, the result of 
this realization was that man was delivered from the 


realm of opposites, that is, from life and death as we 


32 


The Background in Chinese Religion 


know them. His consciousness passed from the state 
of manifestation into the state of absolute Reality. 
Chinese religion was not in quite so much of a hurry 
to separate consciousness from everyday life. Man was 
in harmony with Tao here and now, fully in possession 
of his ordinary everyday consciousness of people and 
things. In principle, Mahayana Buddhism was at one 
with Taoism in this respect, for in insisting that there 
was no real difference between Nirvana and Samsara 
it could not allow the idea of passing from one to the 
other. Mahayana was, however, somewhat infected 
with the characteristically Indian desire to escape 
from the world of form, but in China it lost this de- 
sire almost entirely. It became a world-transforming 
instead of a world-escaping religion. 

Despite superficial differences, it will be seen that 
these two trends of Indian and Chinese religion have 
a common essence. Hindu-Buddhist religion discov- 
ered the essential Reality of life through detachment 
from its particular forms, assisted by the practice of 


meditation. Taoism discovered the essential harmony 


33 


ZEN 


of everyday life with Tao by letting go of that life so 
that it could be free to be itself. 

Both procedures are grounded in a common faith 
or trust, namely, that this everyday life zs Reality, that 
all things are in harmony with Tao, and that therefore 
this will be clear to you if you simply let go of the 
possessive itch. To try to attain union with Reality by 
action or by inaction (which is simply an indirect form 
of action) is to imply that you do not already have that 
union. There is nothing to be attained. The union sim- 
ply zs; Samsara zs Nirvana. The effort to attain some- 
thing is just another form of that acquisitive desire 
which springs from lack of trust in the one supreme 


fact. In the words of Hsi-yun: 


By their very seeking for it they produce the 
contrary effect of losing it, for that is using 
the Buddha to seek for the Buddha and using 
mind to grasp mind. Even though they do 
their utmost for a full kalpa [aeon], they will 
not be able to attain to it....If it is held that 


there is something to be attained apart from 


34 


The Background in Chinese Religion 


mind and, thereupon, mind is used to seek it, 
[that implies] failure to understand that mind 


and the object of its search are one.” 


* 


The Huang Po Doctrine of Universal Mind. Trans. by Chu Ch’an. 
London, 1947, pp. 16 and 24. The term “mind” as used here signifies 
that ground of consciousness or mind-essence which, as explained 


above, is identical with Sunyata. 


35 


THE MOMENTOUS HARMONY 


HISTORICALLY, ZEN IS THE EMBODIMENT of the 
common truth contained in the Hindu-Buddhist tra- 
dition and the Taoist tradition, the synthesis of the 
contemplative insight of Indian religion, the dynamic 
liveliness of Taoism, and the down-to-earthness of 
Confucianism. Zen is grounded precisely in this faith 
or trust that ordinary life is Tao, and is to be accepted 


or loved as such. The Zen master Chao-chu was asked, 


37 


ZEN 


“What is the Tao?” He replied, “Everyday life is the 
Tao.” “How,” pursued the inquirer, “does one get into 


p? “ 


harmony with it?” “If you ¢ry to get into harmony with 
it, you will get away from it.” The attempt suggests 
the absence of the Reality, and proceeds from lack of 
faith in the truth that harmony already is. Lack of faith 
in this harmony creates the sense of inadequacy and 
insecurity which underlies all our aggressive and evil 
actions. 

But Zen is more than a synthesis of these various 
trends in Indian and Chinese religion. The unique 
contribution of Zen to higher religion is its method of 
presenting the truth, a method involving “No depen- 
dence on words and letters, and direct pointing to the 
soul of man” — that is, to the Tao, Buddha-nature, or 
Reality itself. 

It is all too easy for ideas and concepts to conceal 
rather than reveal Reality. Thus the Zen masters say 
that ideas are fingers pointing at the moon of Reality, 
but that most people mistake the finger for the moon. 
Furthermore, we have already seen that it is quite 


impossible for ideas to describe or convey the deepest 


38 


The Momentous Harmony 


truth of life, since ideas are forms and Reality is too 
living to be held in any form. Zen, therefore, does not 
consist in acquiring new ideas about Reality and our 
relation to it; it consists in getting rid of ideas and feel- 
ings about life in order that we may get to life itself. 
The statement that ordinary life is Tao, or that we are 
one with Reality just as we are, here and now, is still an 
idea, and while it remains an idea it is still an attempt 
to capture the living truth in a fixed formula. Really to 
understand Zen we have to get away from this abstract 
and dead realm of concepts and come face-to-face 
with Reality as it stands quite clearly before us here 
and now. 

There is only one place where we are truly alive, 
where we come into immediate contact with Reality, 
and that is now — this present moment. The past was 
only real when it was the present moment, and the 
future will only be real when it becomes it. The past 
continues to be real to the extent that it lives on effec- 
tually in the present. But real life is always now. In 
fact, we have no knowledge of any other reality than 


the present moment, and, strictly speaking, nothing 


39 


ZEN 


has any existence save in this moment. Yet what we 
call the present moment is strangely elusive. As soon 
as we try to catch hold of it, it seems to run away. We 
cannot delay or hold it in any of the forms which it 
assumes or contains. We have moments of pleasure 
and moments of pain, but when we try to grab hold of 
the moment of pleasure, the moment, the movement, 
the life leaves the pleasure and it turns to dust in our 
hands. So, too, when we try to examine the moment, 
we cannot discover it, for it is too small to see. The 
more we look for it, the tinier it becomes, until we 
realize that it is infinitesimal and thus infinite. 

Yet however much we may try to delay or grasp 
the moment, the fact remains that while, from one 
point of view, it eludes us, from another, we cannot 
get away from it. We may try to lag behind in the past 
or to hurry on into the future, but inevitably we do our 
lagging or hurrying in the present moment. As soon as 
we realize that the momentis in reality inescapable, we 
shall no longer try to grasp it; for whether we know it 
or not, it grasps us. For the now, this present moment, 


is Reality. All things proceed from it and exist in it, 


40 


The Momentous Harmony 


and yet when we look at it directly it seems nothing. 
Now is Tao, and Tao is now, and even though we do 
our damnedest to possess it, we are still unable to get 
out of it. Our union with Reality is the truth whether 
we realize it or not, whether we strive to attain it or not. 

But to say that the now is Tao, or is Reality, at once 
introduces a concept which, useful though it may be 
for a time, instantly distracts our attention from the 
real now. At once our religion becomes dead and 
removed from life, for although this now, this eternal 
moment, looks so void and so uninteresting to sense 
and thought, in fact it is the mysterious source of all 
liveliness and power. The genius of Zen lies in its way 
of pointing to the real now without distracting the 
attention with concepts. But the human mind, because 
of its inherently possessive nature, lets go of concepts 
with extreme reluctance, for which reason Zen has 
sometimes to attack and smash them quite violently. 
Thus its technique has often the appearance of spiri- 


tual shock tactics. 


41 


DIRECT POINTING 


THE ZEN WAY OF TEACHING is to demonstrate 
Reality rather than to talk about it, or, if words are 
used at all, to avoid formally religious terminology and 
conceptual statements. When Zen speaks it expresses 
Reality, not with logical explanations and doctrines 
but with everyday conversation, or with statements 
that upset the normal conceptual mode of thinking so 


violently that they appear as utter nonsense. Because 


43 


ZEN 


Zen desires to get rid of concepts, to shatter the rigid 
frames in which we try to possess life, it employs a 
thoroughgoing iconoclasm. At the same time, Zen 
as a formal religious cult reads the scriptures, uses 
images and ceremonies, and sometimes breaks down 
far enough to include sermons and explanations. But 
it is just the preservation of this formal aspect of reli- 
gion which makes the informal and iconoclastic such a 
puzzling and effective contrast, a truth which Western 
reformers and iconoclasts have never appreciated. 
The greater part of Zen literature consists of 
mondo, of brief dialogues between masters and pupils, 
which illustrate its peculiar method of instruction, 
pointing to the real now without interposing ideas 
and notions about it. Here, for example, is the way 
in which Zen deals with the problem of non-duality, 
concerning which Indian Buddhism has composed so 


many volumes of intricate explanation. 
A monk asked Dosan, “How do we escape the 


heat when summer comes and the cold when 


winter is here?” 


44 


Direct Pointing 


The master said, “Why not go where there 
is no summer, no winter?” 

“Where is such a place?” 

“When the cold season comes, one is thor- 
oughly chilled; when the hot summer is here, 


one swelters.” 


As to escaping from Samsara, the world of opposites 
and everyday consciousness, to Nirvana, the realm of 


absolute unity and peace, Zen has this to say: 


Bokuju was once asked, “We have to dress and 
eat every day, and how can we escape from 
all that?” 

The master replied, “We dress; we eat.” 

“T do not understand.” 

“If you do not understand, put on your 


dress and eat your food.” 
Or again: 


“Pray show me the way to deliverance.” 


“Who has ever put you in bondage?” 


45 


ZEN 


“Nobody.” 
“If so, why should you ask for deliver- 


ance?” 


Another master deals with this question rather more 
explicitly, but we must be careful that he does not 


fool us: 


Hui-hai was asked, “How can one attain the 
Great Nirvana?” 

“Have no karma that works for trans- 
migration.”* 

“What is the karma for transmigration?” 

“To seek after the Great Nirvana, to aban- 
don the defiled and take to the undefiled, to 
assert that there is something attainable and 


something realizable, not to be free from the 


* Karma (literally, action) is the law of causality, and thus the phrase 
“karma that works for transmigration” means the kind of action 
which has the effect of binding the agent to Samsara, where, accord- 
ing to general Buddhist belief, man is born again and again into the 


world until he realizes Nirvana. 


46 


Direct Pointing 


teaching of opposites — this is the karma that 
works for transmigration.” 

“How can one be emancipated?” 

“No bondage from the very first, and 
what is the use of seeking emancipation? Act 
as you will, go on as you feel — without sec- 


ond thought. This is the incomparable way.” 


Hui-hai’s final remark must not, however, give the 
impression that Zen is just living lazily and fatuously 
in the present and taking life as it comes. If this be 
used as a formula for grasping the reality of Zen, the 
whole point is missed. A master was asked, “What is 
the Tao?” “Walk on!” he shouted. Thus whenever 
you think you have the right idea of Zen, drop it and 
walk on. 

More and more we shall see that the essence of Zen 
is simply the giving up of any attempt to grasp life in 
ideational or emotional forms. It involves a thorough- 
going acceptance of life and experience just as it is at 
any given moment, which, whether we know it or not, 


is precisely what our basic, mirror-like consciousness 


47 


ZEN 


is doing all the time. Passion, anger, elation, depres- 
sion, ideas of good and evil, mine and yours — these 
are varying forms taken by our feelings and thoughts, 
whereas the essence of Mind, the essential conscious- 
ness, is ever formless, free, and pure. “The perfect man,” 
said Chuang-tzu, “employs his mind as a mirror; it 
grasps nothing, it refuses nothing, it receives, but does 
not keep.” At the same time, this must not lead us to 
form the concept of a pure and unchanging conscious- 
ness separate and apart from the changing forms of 
thoughts and things. The point is not at all to reject 
phenomena and cling to the Absolute, because the 
very nature of the Absolute, of the essential Mind, is 
non-clinging. As soon as we conceive a formless Self 
or mind-essence underlying and distinct from the 
changing contents of experience, we are denying the 
very nature of that Self. For its nature is not to sepa- 
rate itself from anything, not to stand apart from expe- 
rience but to accept and identify itself with it. Its very 
life and power consist in a perpetual self-abandonment 


to its varied experiences, an identification of itself with 


48 


Direct Pointing 


its changing forms, which in Christian language would 
be called the divine love. Nor must it be thought that 
we have to make the pure Mind perform this act of 
self-abandonment; it does it by itself all the time, in us 
and through us, whether we wish it or not. 

This, then, is why Hui-neng constantly insisted 
that the only difference between an ordinary man and 
a Buddha, an enlightened one, is that the latter knows 
he is a Buddha whereas the former does not. When 
asked, “What is enlightenment?” a master replied, 
“Your everyday mind.” “When a thought moves,” 
wrote Kaku-an, “another follows, and then another 
— an endless train of thoughts is thus awakened. 
Through enlightenment all this turns into truth.” In 
reality the enlightened consciousness is not different 
from our ordinary everyday consciousness; to seek it 
as something over and above our mind as it is at this 
moment is immediately to set up a dualism. We thrust 
realization from us in the very act of regarding it as 
something to be attained. This seeming paradox is 


aptly expressed by Ma-tsu: 


49 


ZEN 


In the Tao there is nothing to discipline oneself 
in. If there is any discipline in it, the comple- 
tion of such discipline means the destruction 
of the Tao. But if there is no discipline what- 


ever in the Tao, one remains an ignoramus. 


It is only through seeking enlightenment that we find 


there is no need to seek. He goes on: 


One thought follows another without inter- 
ruption; the preceding one does not wait for 
the succeeding; each one is self-contained and 
quiescent. This is called the “Meditation of 
the Ocean-stamp,” in which are included all 
things, like the ocean where all the rivers how- 


ever different in size empty themselves.* 


Whether we know it or not, the “ocean” of pure con- 
sciousness perfectly accepts the stream of our thoughts 


and impressions all the time. At every instant we are 


7 Suzuki, Manual of Zen Buddhism, pp. 126-127. 


50 


Direct Pointing 


in complete harmony with the Tao, but an apparent 
discord arises when, through a wrong use of memory 
and anticipation, we allow past and future experiences 


to conflict with the present. In the words of Emerson: 


These roses under my window make no refer- 
ence to former roses or to better ones; they are 
for what they are; they exist with God today. 
There is no time to them. There is simply the 
rose; it is perfect in every moment of its exis- 
tence. ... But man postpones or remembers; he 
does not live in the present, but with reverted 
eye laments the past, or, heedless of the riches 
that surround him, stands on tiptoe to foresee 
the future. He cannot be happy and strong 
until he too lives with nature in the present, 


above time.* 


But between the unconscious harmony of the rose 


and the conscious harmony of the perfect man lies the 


Essays, First Series. “Self-Reliance.” 


5! 


ZEN 


illusion of self-consciousness, separation, and discord, 
wherein we strive blindly for what in truth we have 
never lost. Yet this itself is no more an actual loss of 
the Tao than the disappearance of the rose in winter 
is a violation of its natural and proper life. The bloom 
is forgotten and the seed goes underground. “Unless a 
grain of corn falls into the earth and dies,” said Jesus, 
“it remains alone; but if it dies, it bears much fruit.” In 
spiritual development there must always be the middle 
stage wherein by apparent loss, by seeking and striv- 
ing, we become conscious of the harmony that is our 


unconscious possession all along. 


Before a man studies Zen, to him mountains 
are mountains and waters are waters; after he 
gets an insight into the truth of Zen through 
the instruction of a good master, mountains 
to him are not mountains and waters are not 
waters; but after this when he really attains to 
the abode of rest, mountains are once more 


mountains and waters are waters.* 


Ch’ing-yuan, in Suzuki, Essays in Zen, vol. 1, p. 12. 


52 


Direct Pointing 


The ignoramus, the primitive “simple” man, accepts 
life for what it is, just as it comes. The “seeker,” how- 
ever, looks for the God, the Reality, the absolute 
and eternal consciousness behind life, regarding the 
images of ordinary experience as a distracting illusion. 
But the perfect man, consciously one with the Tao, 


again accepts life for just what it is. 


T’an asked a student, “What were you before 
you became a monk?” 

“T used to be a cowherd.” 

“How do you look after the cattle?” 

“T go out with them early in the morning 
and come home when it grows dark.” 


“Splendid is your ignorance!” 


Zen is spiritual freedom or spiritual poverty, that 
is, the liberation of our true nature (Buddha-nature 
or essence of Mind) from the burden of those fixed 
ideas and feelings about Reality which we accumu- 
late through fear — the fear that life will run away 


from us. “Scholars,” said Lao-tzu, “gain every day; 


53 


ZEN 


but Taoists lose every day.” Or in the words of Jesus, 
“Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the king- 
dom of heaven....Blessed are the pure [i.e., naked 
and free] in heart, for they shall see God.” Such pov- 
erty and freedom are expressed in this poem from the 


Mumon-kan:* 


Hundreds of spring-flowers; the autumn moon; 
A fresh summer breeze; winter snow: 
Free your mind from idle thoughts, 


And for you any season is a good season. 


But again, we must “walk on” even from spiritual 
poverty if this be used as a means to grasp the truth 
of Zen. Chao-chu was asked, “What would you say 


p? “ 


to one who comes to you with nothing Throw it 
!” 
away! 
These mondo may seem puzzling to the uniniti- 


ated, but in fact there is nothing obscure or hidden 


* ~~ The Mumon-kan (Chinese, Wu-men Kwan) or “No Gate Barrier” is a 


standard collection of mondo with brief comments and poems about 


each. In the verse quoted here “idle thoughts” are fixed concepts. 


54 


Direct Pointing 


about them. The truth which they indicate is, how- 
ever, of such radical simplicity and self-evidence that 


our complex and burdened minds find it hard to see. 


It is so clear that it takes long to see. 

You must know that the fire which you are 
seeking 

Is the fire in your own lantern, 

And that your rice has been cooked from the 


very beginning.* 


Or, as Pai-chang said when asked how to find Reality, 
“It is very much like looking for an ox when you are 


riding on one.” 


Kozankoku, a Confucian, came to Kwaido to ask 
about the hidden teaching of Zen. Kwaido said, 
“There is a passage in the text you are so thor- 


oughly familiar with, which fitly describes the 


* —— Mumon-kan, vii. lam indebted for this translation to the Ven. Sokei-an 
Sasaki, late abbot of Jofuku-in. 


55 


ZEN 


teaching of Zen. Did not Confucius declare, 
‘Do you think I am holding something back 
from you, O my disciples? Indeed, I have held 
nothing back from you.’ ” 

Kozankoku could not understand this, and 
vainly pressed the master for a further expla- 
nation. But later, when they were walking 
together in the mountains, they passed a bush 
of wild laurel. 

“Do you smell it?” asked Kwaido. 

“Yes.” 


“There, I have kept nothing back from you!” 


It would be fatal, however, to interpret this in a sen- 
timentally pantheistic sense, as if Kwaido were saying 
that the smell of the wild laurel is the Tao. No such 
conceptualism enters here. Pantheism, deism, theism, 
monism, dualism — all these are intellectual forms 
which must fail to grasp the living Reality. But when 
this has been thoroughly understood, intellectual 
forms may be used again without captivating the mind. 

Strictly speaking, Zen does not have a method for 


awakening our minds to Reality, unless it may be called 


56 


Direct Pointing 


a “method of no-method.” A method, a technique for 
discovering Reality implies an attempt to grasp it, and 
this, according to Zen, is as misleading and unneces- 
sary as “putting legs on a snake” or “adding frost over 


snow.” In the words of Lin-chi: 


The true man who has an insight into Reality. .. 
gives himself up to all manners of situations 
in which he finds himself in obedience to his 
past karma. He appears in whatever garments 
are ready for him to put on. As it is desired of 
him either to move or to sit quietly, he moves 
or sits. He has not a thought of running after 
Buddhahood. He is free from such pinings. 
Why is it so with him? Says an ancient sage, 
“When the Buddha is sought after, he is the 


* 


cause of transmigration.” 


Trans. D. T. Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, vol. iii, pp. 32-33. A 
free rendering of the original Chinese. Buddhahood is the state of 
enlightenment or awakening, or the immediate knowledge of Reality. 


Buddha is often used as a synonym for Reality. 


57 


yw > 
we 


ZEN MEDITATION 


WHILE, FROM ONE POINT OF VIEW, Zen has no 
method, from another it has a definite technique of 
meditation. It is against this background of definite 
technique that the “method of no-method” has its 
value as a surprising contrast. The success of Zen lies 
in its freedom both to use technique and to dispense 


with it; it is not bound to any one-sided procedure. 


59 


ZEN 


The Zen way of meditation, known as za-zen, is the 
result of a long process of development. 

Zen has always been a semi-monastic religion, 
though Zen monks do not take life vows, because 
many of them remain in the monastery only for a 
period of training before going back into the world as 
secular priests or laymen. In some ways these insti- 
tutions resemble our theological seminaries rather 
than monasteries in the strict sense. Originally Zen 
“monasteries” were small groups of monks gathered 
around an approved roshi or master, whose way of 
handling them was relatively informal and sponta- 
neous. The early mondo are simply records of the 
daily life and teaching of these primitive communities. 
Before long, however, these mondo were collected and 
some of them were used as formal koans, or subjects 
for meditation. Monks devoted part of their time to 
meditation, and part to manual work in support of the 
community, a way of life somewhat like the rule of St. 
Benedict. 


In meditation the monk sits cross-legged in the 


60 


Zen Meditation 


“lotus posture” (padmasana), and by slow, rhythmic 
breathing brings his mind to a state of calm and free- 
dom from ideas. He then takes up his koan and drops 
it into his mind like a stone into a still pool, whereafter 
he simply watches its effect. Some of the famous koans 
are these: “Before father and mother, what is your true 
nature?” or, as we might word it, “Beyond time and 
space, what is Reality?” “What is the sound of your 
hand?” “Stop the booming of the distant bell” — how 
can this be done? “When asked, ‘What is Buddha?’ 
Ummon answered, ‘Dried dung!’” ——- what does 
this mean?* Sometimes the koan seem to contradict 
each other. When asked, “What is Buddha?” Ba-so 
answered, “This mind is Buddha,” but on another 
occasion he said, “This mind is not Buddha.” 

At regular intervals the monk goes to the roshi for 
an interview (sanzen) when he is expected to demon- 
strate his view of the koan assigned to him. This is not 


to be done by wordy explanation, but by some kind 


Ummon’s answer is sometimes translated, “The dried-up dirt scraper.” 


6l 


ZEN 


of direct action or direct pointing to Reality in the 
true Zen style. The roshi responds in the same way, 
sometimes with a laconic comment, sometimes with 
silence, sometimes with a bang on the head from the 
big stick which lies before him — for all these mea- 
sures are parts of his spiritual shock tactics. Usually 
the monk sees into the meaning of his koan suddenly, 
experiencing a flash of insight termed sazori, and this 
may occur during meditation, during sanzen, or while 
he is going about his ordinary work. For we see into 
Reality suddenly just because there is no real method 
or succession of stages for approaching it. 

There are some 1,700 koans, and approximately 
fifty are needed for a full Zen training. It would seem 
that the various types of koans are used for getting 
rid of different types of conceptualism and mental 
fixation, and thus for revealing different “aspects” of 
the full understanding of Zen. More advanced koans 
have to do with the way in which Reality manifests 
itself in life and action. But it is almost impossible 


to discuss this subject with profit, since experiment 


62 


Zen Meditation 


alone can make sense of it. In the course of centu- 
ries koan meditation has become an art of the deep- 
est subtlety, though much may be learned from the 
general attitude of Zen quite apart from work with 


{a-fen. 


63 


THE CULTURAL EFFECTS 
OF ZEN 


ZEN HAS ENTERED INTO MANY ASPECTS of the life 
of the Far East — painting, architecture, gardening, 
chivalry, tea ceremony, etiquette, poetry, and ethics. 
Zen affects every sphere of daily life from the state- 
craft of the ruler to the menial work of the laborer. As 


a Zen poet says: 


How wondrous, how miraculous, this — 


I draw water and I carry fuel! 


65 


ZEN 


Its moral effects are profound but not obvious, for 
the oriental idea of goodness is not so self-conscious 
and self-assertive as the occidental. As Lao-tzu said, 
the wise man hides his virtue and appears on the sur- 
face like a fool, for “true grace [Te] does not appear as 
grace, and thus is grace; false grace is so aware of itself 
as grace that it is not grace.” Zen produces thousands 
of Bodhisattvas who do not advertise themselves. 

The most obvious effects of Zen are in the realm 
of aesthetics, for Chinese art of the T’ang, Sung, and 
Yuan periods, the Japanese painting of Sesshu and the 
Sumiye school, the gardening art of Kobori Enshiu, 
the haiku poetry of Basho and others — all these 
have had direct inspiration from Zen, or from a Zen- 
flavored Taoism. Three major characteristics of Far 
Eastern art exemplify aspects of the Zen life: 

1. Absence of symmetry. The phenomena of nature 
are rarely symmetrical in form; at most there is only 
an approximation to absolute symmetry, and Zen per- 
ceives in this fact the lively and dynamic quality of 
nature. For symmetry is a state of such perfect bal- 


ance that movement is no longer possible; a form so 


66 


The Cultural Effects of Zen 


balanced is dead, and thus the symmetrical form is 
analogous to that mental and emotional fixation which 
in Zen is ever broken down. It is for this reason that 
Chinese and Japanese paintings are so seldom archi- 
tectural and wooden. There is no feeling at all of 
stuffing and the glass case in their drawings of birds, 
and the very rocks and mountains seem to flow. As a 


Western poet has said: 


The hills are shadows, and they flow 


From form to form, and nothing stands. 


2. The use of emptiness. As Zen perceives the 
forms of life within Sunyata, the all-inclusive mystery 
of the Void, Chinese painting makes the greatest use 
of the empty background, of large expanses of mist, 
to suggest depth. For the empty spaces of Chinese 
painting are no mere emptiness; they are creative and 
suggestive, exciting the imagination and giving a star- 
tling clarity and vividness to the objects drawn against 
and within them. Zen taste deplores the cluttering of a 


picture or of a room with many objects. It likes to take 


67 


ZEN 


an empty space, and, within it, concentrate attention 
on one point — like the koan thrown into the still pool 
of the mind, like the one point of the living moment 
within the emptiness of past and future. 

3. The instantaneous quality. This might be called, 
too, the momentary quality, for Chinese and Japanese 
art love to portray moments of life, as if the painter 
had just glimpsed his subject for a second. A duck is 
painted just in the act of alighting, or a spray of bam- 
boos caught in a sudden gust of wind. The very media 
of the art — brush, ink, and silk or absorbent paper 
— require a swift, evenly flowing technique. As in life 
itself, a stroke once made can never be retouched. Zen, 


as Suzuki points out, 


permits no ossification as it were of each 
moment. It takes hold of each moment as it is 
born from Sunyata, that is, Emptiness, accord- 
ing to Buddhist philosophy. Momentariness 
is therefore characteristic of this philosophy. 
Each moment is absolute, alive, and signif- 


icant. The frog leaps, the cricket sings...a 


68 


The Cultural Effects of Zen 


breeze passes through the pine branches... 
Buddhism is quick to catch each movement 
of nature and expresses its impressions in a 


seventeen syllable poem or in a few strokes of 


the brush.* 


* 


Buddhist Philosophy and Its Effects on the Life and Thought of the 
Japanese People, Kokusai Bunka Shinkokai, Tokyo, 1936, p. 26. 


69 


CONCLUSION 


THE OCCIDENTAL READER must not gather from the 
foregoing that Zen is an easy-going aestheticism, a 
philosophy of idling along with the stream of events. 
Zen has also been the religion of warriors who applied 


it on the battlefield in the very moment of danger: 


Under the sword raised high 
Is hell, making you tremble. 


71 


ZEN 


But walk on! — 
And there is the Land of Bliss. 


The momentariness of Zen lies above and beyond 
the two wrong extremes of idling and hurrying, in 
an amazing poise, not of rigidity, but of balance in 
motion, not of the statue but of the dancer. For this 
is the balance of living Reality itself, of the unmoved 
Mover, of the whirlwind with peace at the heart. 

In essence, Zen involves no doctrine. It is an expe- 
rience of Reality beyond doctrine, for which reason 
Zen may be of use to people of any religion. It is to 
be doubted, however, whether one can ground one’s 
life in pure, essential Zen alone, for even as a specific 
religious cult Zen employs forms and symbols, and 
the normal structure of the Buddhist religion. For pure 
life expresses itself within and through structure. Life 
without structure is unseen; it is the unmanifested 
Absolute. But structure without life is dead, and reli- 
gion has altogether too much of this death. 

For the ordinary religious consciousness grasps 


too much, and has too little faith in the actual present 


72 


Conclusion 


fact of the Life of life as the most all-absorbing and 


self-evident reality of our existence. 


Like unto space it knows no boundaries; 

Yet it is right here with us, ever retaining its 
serenity and fullness; 

It is only when you seek it that you lose it. 

You cannot take hold of it, nor can you get rid 
of it; 

While you can do neither, it goes on its own 
way; 

You remain silent and it speaks; you speak and 
it is silent; 

The great gate of charity is wide open with no 


obstructions whatever before it.* 


- Hsuan-chiao, Cheng-tao Ke, 34. In Suzuki, Manual of Zen, p. 115. 


73 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Anesaki, Masaharu. History of Japanese Religion. London, 
1930. 

Chu Ch’an. The Huang Po Doctrine of Universal Mind. 
London, 1947. 

Eliot, Sir Charles. Japanese Buddhism. London, 1935. 

First Zen Institute of America. Cat’s Yawn. New York, 1947. 

Gatenby, E. V. The Cloud Men of Yamato. London, 1929. 

Grosse, Ernst. Die Ostasiatische Tuschmalerei. Berlin, 1923. 

Hu Shih. “The Development of Zen Buddhism in China.” 
Art. in Chinese Political and Social Review, vol. 15, no. 4. 
Peiping, January 1932. 

Nukariya, Kaiten. The Religion of the Samurai. London, 1913. 

Ohasama, S. and Faust, A. Zen, der lebendige Buddhismus in 
Japan. Gotha, 1925. 

Okamura, K. The Book of Tea. Edinburgh, 1919. New York, 
1926. 


75 


ZEN 


Senzaki, Nyogen and Reps, Paul. The Gateless Gate (A 
Translation of the Mumon-kan). Los Angeles, 1934. 

. 202 Zen Stories. Philadelphia, n.d. 

Shaku, Soyen. Sermons of a Buddhist Abbot. Chicago, 1906. 


Steinilber-Oberlin, E. and Matsuo, Kuni. Les Sectes boud- 


hiques japonaises. Paris, 1930. 

Suzuki, B. L. Mahayana Buddhism. London, 1938. 

Suzuki, D. T. Essays in Zen Buddhism, 3 vols. London and 
Kyoto, 1927, 1933, 1934. 

. Die Grosse Befretung (German translation of the 


above, with an introduction by C. G. Jung). Leipzig, 1939. 
. An Introduction to Zen Buddhism. Kyoto, 1934. 


—. Manual of Zen Buddhism (Selections from original 
texts). Kyoto, 1935. 
. The Training of the Zen Buddhist Monk. Kyoto, 1934. 


. Zen Buddhism and Its Influence on Japanese Culture. 


Kyoto, 1938. 

Watts, Alan W. The Collected Letters of Alan Watts. Edited by 
Joan Watts and Anne Watts. Novato, CA: New World 
Library, 2017. 

. The Spirit of Zen. London, 1948. 

Wong Mou-Lam. The Sutra of Wei Lang (or Hui-neng) (New 


edition, edited by Christmas Humphreys). London, 1944. 


76 


THE DRAWINGS AND SYMBOLS 


Title page: The Chinese character for “Zen.” 

Page 19: Bodhidharma, after the painting by Soga Jasoku. 
Japanese, 15th century. 

Page 25: The word AUM or OM, written in Sanskrit. This 
word is employed in both Hinduism and Mahayana 
Buddhism to denote the ultimate Reality. 

Page 31: The Chinese character for “Tao.” 

Page 37: The Chinese yang-yin symbol, denoting the man- 
ifestation of the Tao in the pairs of opposites — light 
and dark, life and death, male and female, positive and 
negative. 

Page 43: Bamboo, after the painting by Chu Lu (1553-1632). 
Chinese. Many references to the bamboo appear in Zen 
literature, and it is a favorite subject of Zen painters. A 
verse which describes the Zen life says: “The bamboo 


shadows are sweeping the stairs, but no dust is stirred.” 


77 


ZEN 


Page 59: The Chinese characters for “wu hsin” (Japanese 
“mushin”), literally — “no mind.” This is a special 
term for the Zen consciousness which it is impossible to 
render in any one English phrase. It might be said that 
the whole art of Zen is in learning to understand the 
difference between wu Asin and mere empty-mindedness 
or unconsciousness. Wu hsin is the psychological equiv- 
alent of Sunyata, the “solid” or creative void which 
effortlessly produces and embraces the universe. 

Page 65: The Bamboo cutter, supposed to represent Hui- 
neng, the Sixth Patriarch. After the painting by Liang 
K’ai. Chinese, 13th century. 

Page 71: From an autograph by the late Abbot Kozuki 
of Empukuji, Kyoto. Within the circle of the Void 


(Sunyata) is written: “Not one thing inside.” 


78 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


ALAN WATTS IS BEST KNOWN asan interpreter of Zen 
Buddhism in particular and of Indian and Chinese phi- 
losophy in general. He earned the reputation of being 
one of the most original and unfettered philosophers of 
the twentieth century. He was the author of more than 
twenty books, including The Way of Zen, The Wisdom 
of Insecurity, Does It Matter?, Psychotherapy East and 
West, The Book, This Is It, The Joyous Cosmology, In 
My Own Way, and Tao: The Watercourse Way (with 
Chungliang Al Huang). He died in 1973. 


79 


site 


BRAY 


NEW WORLD LIBRARY is dedicated to publishing books and other 
media that inspire and challenge us to improve the quality of our 
lives and the world. 

We area socially and environmentally aware company. We rec- 
ognize that we have an ethical responsibility to our readers, our 
authors, our staff members, and our planet. 

We serve our readers by creating the finest publications pos- 
sible on personal growth, creativity, spirituality, wellness, and other 
areas of emerging importance. We serve our authors by working 
with them to produce and promote quality books that reach a wide 
audience. We serve New World Library employees with generous 
benefits, significant profit sharing, and constant encouragement to 
pursue their most expansive dreams. 

Whenever possible, we print our books with soy-based ink on 
100 percent postconsumer-waste recycled paper. We power our 
offices with solar energy and contribute to nonprofit organiza- 
tions working to make the world a better place for us all. 

Our products are available wherever books are sold. Visit our 
website to download our catalog, subscribe to our e-newsletter, 
read our blog, and link to authors’ websites, videos, and podcasts. 


customerservice@newworldlibrary.com 
Phone: 415-884-2100 or 800-972-6657 
Orders: Ext. 10 * Catalog requests: Ext. 10 
Fax: 415-884-2199 


www.newworldlibrary.com 


51600 


781608 


} 


si Woe 9 


‘ZEN New World Library a 


882 


ret www.newworldlibrary.com 


2 se fo 


NEW WORLD LIBRARY - 


“7BR AWS 


