The Wisdom of the East 


EDITED BY J. L. CRANMER-BYNG M.C. 


“ease” 


he 


THE SPIRIT OF ZEN 


By the same author 


MYTH AND RITUAL IN CHRISTIANITY 


THE SPIRIT OF ZEN 


A way of life, work and art 
in the Far East 


ALAN W. WATTS 


GROVE PRESS, INC. NEW YORK 


Copynght © 1958 By Alan W. Watts 
This edition is published by arrangement with 
John Murray Ltd. 


First Evergreen Editon 1960 
Ninth prindng 
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 60-7347 


MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


To 
Christmas Humphreys 


Contents 


Preface to the Third Edition 
Prefacc to the First Edition 
Preface to the Second Edition 
Foreword 

The Origins of Zen 

The Sceret of Zen 

The Technique of Zen 

Life in a Zen Community 
Zen and the Civilization of the Far East 
Conclusion 

Glossary 

Bibliography 


Illustrations 


121 
124 
126 
128 


Preface to the Third Edition 


The appearance of a third edition of this work has given me 
the opportunity to make some further changes to improve its 
accuracy. Though I am still somewhat unsatisfied with the 
general presentation of Mahayana philosophy in the first 
chapter, I found that a complete rewriting of this section 
would so disrupt the artistic integrity of the book that I 
should have to rewrite almost the entire work. The biblio- 
graphy has been brought up to date, but it is no longer 
exhaustive. 
ALAN W. WATTS 
Mill Valley, California 
June, 1958 


11 


Preface to the First Edition 


I should never have been able to write this book if it had not 
been for the work of Professor Daisctz Teitaro Suzuki of the 
Otani Buddhist College at Kyoto. It is to him that we of the 
West owe almost all our knowledge of Zen, and I am deeply 
grateful to him for his permission to quote from many of his 
translations of the writings and sayings of Zen masters which 
appear in the following pages. This book will be to some 
their first introduction to Zen, and I strongly advise them to 
turn afterwards to the three volumes of Professor Suzuki’s 
Essays in Zen Buddhism, where they will find the subject 
treated in the fullest way. 

I must also give special thanks to Mr Christmas Humphreys, 
President of the Buddhist Lodge, London, for reading through 
my manuscript and making many valuable suggestions for its 
improvement. Indeed, I owe him further thanks, for it was 
he who not only introduced me to the work of Professor 
Suzuki but laid the foundations of my knowledge of Budd- 
hism. For this I can never be sufficiently grateful. 


ALAN W. WATTS 
Bromley, Kent 
December, 1935 


12 


Preface to the Second Edition 


Since this book was first written, nearly twenty years ago, I 
have been enabled to leam a great deal more, and in some 
ways a great deal less, about Zen Buddhism. Since 1935 a 
large amount of new information about Zen has become 
available. Not only has Dr D. T. Suzuki published some five 
or six new works, but a number of other authors—notably 
R. H. Blyth and Eugen Herrigel—have written important 
works from their first-hand experience. Fresh information of 
a more strictly academic type has also become available 
through the labours of Hu Shih, Fung Yu-lan, Jacques Gernet, 
Heinrich Dumoulin, and several others. Furthermore, I have 
had the privilege, denied to me before writing this book, of 
many conversations with Japanese exponents of Zen, including 
Dr Suzuki himself, Sokci-an Sasaki, Nyogen Senzaki, and 
Sohaku Ogata. 

Perhaps as a result of the last-mentioned opportunity, I may 
be said to know a bit less about Zen than in 1935. For living 
Zen, as distinct from academic Zen, is above all a process of 
unlearning, of the abandonment of ideology, of all fixed forms 
of thought and feeling whereby the mind tries to grasp its own 
life. Thus I do not really know what Zen is, because Zen—the 
essential experience underlying Buddhism—is not a ‘what’. It 
is not a thing, which is to say an aspect of experience definable 
by aword or concept. Zen is closer to what Korzybski has 
called the ‘unspeakable’ level of reality—the non-verbal, non- 
symbolic, and totally indefinable world of the concrete as 
distinct from the abstract. For all things, whether objects or 


13 


The Spirit of Zen 


processes, are abstracted from expericnce by thinking and 
naming. As Buddhism said so many centurics before semantics 
and metalinguistics, “Originally not one thing exists.’ 

Therefore a book which purports to explain Zen is some- 
thing of a hoax in the respect that the more it succceds in 
giving the reader an impression of intclligibility, the more it 
has failed to give understanding. A proper exposition of Zen 
should ‘tease us out of thought’, and leave the mind like an 
open window instead of a panel of stained glass. 

The only important change in this second edition is that it 
carries a completely new bibliography, which is, I belicve, as 
complete a list of writings of Zen in European languages as 
may be found. This is an important feature of a book which 
was never intended to be anything more than a popular 
introduction to Zen, and made no claims to originality or 
depth of scholarship. Any major changes in the body of the 
text would have been too expensive, though I would have 
liked to rewrite the discussion of Mahayana philosophy in the 
first chapter and to modify much of what was said about the 
koan. Some years of the study of Chinese would also have 
tempted me to rctranslate a number of quotations and tech- 
nical phrases. I would also like to have given the altcrnative 
account of the history of the introduction of Zen into China 
proposed by Hu Shih and Fung Yu-lan, which takes it back 
to Tao-sheng (A.D. 360-434), and regards the Bodhidharma 
story as somewhat Icgendary. 

In conclusion, I would like to say something about the 
present state of the study of Zen in the Westcrn world. In the 
past fifteen years or so, it has become very widely known in 
Europe and America, and is exercising a great intellectual and 
artistic influence. It is most gratifying that it has not, to any 
important extent, become a new fad in religious cults, with 


14 


Preface to the Second Edition 


organizations seeking converts. Happily, Zen finds its place in 
the West as a study of serious interest for three principal 
groups. 

In philosophical circles it is being found of special relevance 
to those who are looking for a step beyond the important 
insights of logical positivism and scientific empiricism. For 
Western philosophy seemed to have reached a point of 
impasse, at which it must either ‘close up shop’ or break loose 
from the vicious circle of verbal speculation. Among scientists, 
its interest has been chiefly for psychotherapists and for 
students of the new sciences of language—semantics and 
metalinguistics. Not only are the states of mind involved in 
Zen-practice of great psychological interest, but their ways of 
releasing thought and action from vicious circles suggest many 
practical applications. 

In the world of art, the influence of Zen is more indircct, 
and is seen in the great indebtedness of contemporary architec- 
ture and ceramics in the United States to Japanese feelings for 
space and texture. One should not forget to mention, also, the 
work of the potter Bernard Leach in England, nor to remem- 
ber that nearly thirty years ago Georges Duthuit called atten- 
tion to this trend in his Chinese Mysticism and Modern Painting. 

But in all these instances it is not quite correct to say that a 
‘Zen influence’ is simply being imported and imitated. It is 
rather a case of deep answering to deep, of tendencies already 
implicit in Western life which leap into actuality through an 
outside stimulus. So far as Zen is concerned, this must always 
be the way, for as a verse in the Zenrin Kushu says: 

If you do not get it from yoursclf, 
Where will you go for it? 
ALAN W. WATTS 

San Francisco, 1954 


15 


Foreword 


A short time ago Zen Buddhism was almost entirely unknown 
to the West, with the exception of a few Orientalists whose 
interest in the subject was primarily academic. Before the First 
World War there was only one work on Zen in any European 
language—Kaiten Nukariya’s Religion of the Samurai—and a 
few scattered references in books on Buddhism in general. It 
was not until Professor D. T. Suzuki of Kyoto published the 
first volume of his Essays in Zen Buddhism in 1927 that there 
was any work presented so as to excite the interest of the West 
with any effect, and at the same time to convey something of 
the real spirit of Zen. Subsequently Professor Suzuki published 
two more volumes of Essays, and it is largely owing to his 
work that we know anything of the subject at all. The result 
of his labours has been a swiftly increasing interest in Zen, not 
confined only to professed students of Oriental philosophy. 
Zen is so markedly different from any other form of Bud- 
dhism, one might even say from any other form of religion, 
that it has roused the curiosity of many who would not 
ordinarily look to the ‘unpractical’ East for practical wisdom. 

Once that curiosity is aroused it is not easily sct at rest, for 
Zen has a peculiar fascination for minds weary of conven- 
tional religion and philosophy. From the start Zen dispenses 
with all forms of theorization, doctrinal instruction and life- 
less formality; these are treated as the mere symbols of wisdom, 
and Zen is founded on practice and on an intimate, personal 
experience of the reality to which most forms of religion and 
philosophy come no nearer than an intellectual or emotional 


17 


The Spirit of Zen 


description. That is not to say that Zen is the only true path 
to Enlightenment; it has been said that the difference between 
Zen and other forms of religion is that ‘all other paths wind 
slowly up the mountain-side, but Zen, like a Roman road, 
thrusts all obstacles aside and moves in a direct line to the 
Goal’. After all, creeds, dogmas and philosophical systems are 
only ideas about the truth, in the same way as words are not 
facts but only about facts, whereas Zen is a v.gorous attempt 
to come into direct contact with the truth itself without allow- 
ing theories and symbols to stand between the knower and the 
known. Ina certain sense Zen is feeling life instead of feeling 
something about life; it has no patience with second-hand wis- 
dom, with someone else’s description of a spiritual experience, 
or with mere conceptions and beliefs. While second-hand 
wisdom is valuable as a signpost pointing the way, it is too 
easily taken for the path itself or even for the goal. So subtle 
are the ways in which descriptions of truth may pose as truth 
itself that Zen is often a form of iconoclasm, a breaking down 
of the mere intellectual images of the living reality, knowable 
only by personal experience. 

But it is in its methods of instruction that Zen is unique. 
There is no doctrinal teaching, no study of scriptures, no 
formal programme of spiritual development. Apart from a 
few collections of sermons by the earlier Zen masters, which 
are the only attempts at a rational exposition of its teachings, 
almost the whole of our records of Zen instruction are a 
number of dialogues (mondo) between the masters and their 
disciples which seem to pay so little attention to the usual 
standards of logic and sound reasoning as to appear at first 
sight to be nonsense. There are a number of commentaries 
upon these dialogues, and a large collection of short poems 
such as are found in Chinese and Japanese pictures, but from 


18 


Foreword 


the intellectual standpoint these have little more meaning than 
the dialogues themselves. So baffling are these records that 
Wieger could only describe Zen literature as ‘nombre d’in- 
folio remplis de réponses incohérentes, insensées ... Ce ne 
sont pas, comme on I’a supposé, des allusions 4 des affaires 
intérieures, qu'il faudrait connaitre pour pouvoir comprendre. 
Ce sont des exclamations échappées 4 des abrutis, momentané- 
ment tirés de leur coma.’ 

But it is easy to be led astray by outward appearances, and 
just as the highest and the lowest notes are equally inaudible, 
so, perhaps, is the greatest sense and the greatest nonsense 
equally unintelligible. But Zen does not attempt to be intel- 
ligible, that is to say, capable of being understood by the 
intellect. The method of Zen is to baffle, excite, puzzle and 
exhaust the intellect until it is realized that intellection is only 
thinging about; it will provoke, irritate and again exhaust the 
emotions until it is realized that emotion is only feeling about, 
and then it contrives, when the disciple has been brought to 
an intellectual and emotional impasse, to bridge the gap 
between second-hand, conceptual contact with reality, and 
first-hand experience. To effect this it calls into play a higher 
faculty of the mind, known as intuition or Buddhi, which is 
sometimes called the “Eye of the Spirit’. In short, the aim of 
Zen is to focus the attention on reality itself, instead of on our 
intellectual and emotional reactions to reality—reality being 
that ever-changing, ever-growing, indefinable something 
known as ‘life’, which will never stop for a moment for us to 
fit it satisfactorily into any rigid system of pigeon-holes and 
ideas. 

Thus anyone who attempts to write about Zen has to 
encounter unusual difficulties; he can never explain, he can 
only indicate; he can only go on setting problems and giving 


19 


The Spirit of Zen 


hints which at best can bring the reader tantalizingly nearer to 
the truth, but the moment he attempts any fixed definition 
the thing slips away, and the definition is seen to be no more 
than a philosophical conception. Zen cannot be made to fit 
into any ‘-ism’ or ‘-ology’; it is alive and cannot be dissected 
and analysed like a corpse. Therefore, if we have any doubts 
about the sense and sanity of the sayings of the Zen masters, 
let us, to begin with, give them the benefit of the doubt, and 
assume that there is wisdom in their complete disregard for 
logic. For instance, master Wu Tsu says, “Let me take an 
illustration from a fable. A cow passes through a window. Its 
head, horns, and the four legs pass over easily, but only the tail 
cannot pass through. Why can’t it?’ Or again, a monk came 
to master Chao-chou and asked, ‘I have just come to this 
monastery. Would you mind giving me some instruction, 
please?’ The master said, ‘Have you eaten your breakfast yet, 
ornot?’ “Yes, I have, sir.’ “Then wash your bowls.’ It is said 
that as a result of this conversation the monk became 
enlightened. 

Whether this is madness or not, the fact remains that Zen 
has profoundly influenced the whole culture of the Far East, 
and it is by its translation into thought and action that we must 
test the value of the inward spirit, however incomprehensible 
it may seem. Westerners must often have wondered how the 
great artistic achievements of the Far East have obtained that 
subtle and indefinable quality which gives them a unique place 
among the creations of the human spirit. The answer is that 
it comes from Zen—a way of life whose vital part in the 
history of Chinese and Japanese civilization has, until recent 
years, been much underestimated, for it is only recently that 
we have been given any clue as to what Zen itself is. 


20 


The Origins of Zen 


Just as it is impossible to explain the beauty of a sunsct to a 
man blind from his birth, so is it impossible for sages to find 
any words which will express their wisdom to men of lesser 
understanding. For the wisdom of sages is not in their 
teachings; otherwise anybody might become a sage simply by 
reading the Bhagavad-Gita, the Dialogues of Plato or the Bud- 
dhist Scriptures. As it is, one may study these books for a life- 
time without being any the wiser, for to seek Enlightenment 
in words and ideas (to borrow a phrase from Dr Trigant 
Burrow) is like expecting ‘the sight of a menu-card to reach 
and satisfy the inner processes of a hungry man’. Nothing, 
however, is easier than to confuse the wisdom of a sage with 
his doctrine, for in the absence of any understanding of truth 
another man’s description of his understanding is easily mis- 
taken for truth itself. Yet it is no more truth than a signpost is 
the town to which it points. Gautama the Buddha (Enlight- 
ened One) was careful to avoid any descriptions of the 
illumination which he found while sitting one night undcr a 
giant fig-tree at Gaya, and we arc told that when he was 
questioned upon the ultimate mysterics of the universe he 
‘maintained a noble silence’. He never tired of saying that his 
doctrine (Dharma) was concerned only with the Way to 
Enlightenment, and he never claimed it as a revelation of 
Enlightenment. Hence the Buddhist verse: 


When they curiously question thee, seeking to know what It is, 
Do not affirm anything, and do not deny anything. 


21 


The Spirit of Zen 


For whatsoever is affirmed is not true, 

And whatsoever is denicd is not truc. 

How shall anyone say truly what That may be 

While he has not himself fully won to What Is? 

And, after he has won, what word is to be sent from a Region 
Where the chariot of speech finds no track on which to go? 
Therefore, to their questionings offer them silence only, 
Silence—and a finger pointing the Way. 


Even so, the followers of the Buddha have sought En- 
lightenment in that finger instead of going whither it points 
into the silence; they have revered and depended upon the 
records of his sayings as if they enshrined his wisdom, yet in 
so doing they have made those records not only a shrine but 
the tomb in which the dead carcass of his wisdom is buried. 
Enlightenment, however, is living and cannot be fixed down 
into any form of words; therefore the object of the Zen 
School of Buddhism is to go beyond words and ideas in order 
that the original insight of the Buddha may be brought back 
to life. It regards this insight as the one important thing; 
scriptures are no more than devices, mere temporary ex- 
pedients, for showing where it may be found. It never makes 
the mistakeof confusing teachings withwisdom, for essentially, 
Zen is that ‘something’ which makes the difference between a 
Buddha and an ordinary man; it is Enlightenment as distinct 
from doctrine. 

Like so many of the key words of Oriental philosophy, 
‘Zen’ has no exact equivalent in English. It isa Japanese word, 
derived from the Chinese Ch’ an or Ch’ an-na which is in turn 
a transliteration of the Sanskrit Dhyana, usually translated as 
‘meditation’. This is a misleading translation because to the 
Englishman ‘meditation’ means little more than deep thought 
and reflection, whereas in Yoga psychology Dhyana is a high 


22 


The Spirit of Zen 


state of consciousness in which man finds union with the 
Ultimate Reality of the universe. The same is true of Ch’an 
and Zen, except that the Chinese mentality preferred to find 
this union less through solitary meditation in the jungle than 
through the work of everyday life. There is nothing ‘other- 
wordly’ about Zen, for it is a constant attitude of mind just as 
applicable to washing clothes as to performing religious offices, 
and whereas the Yogi retires from the world to achieve his 
Dhyana, Zen is found in a monastic community where master 
and disciples share all the work of supporting the monastery 
—growing rice, gardening, cooking, chopping wood and 
keeping the place clean. Thus if ‘Zen’ is to be translated at all, 
the nearest equivalent is ‘Enlightenment’, but even so Zen is 
not only Enlightenment; it is also the way to its attainment. 

There is a tradition that Zen originated at the moment when 
the Buddha attained his supreme insight into the mysteries of 
life that night at Gaya in the Fifth Century B.c. That insight 
was handed down through a line of twenty-eight Patriarchs 
until it came to a certain Bodhidharma, who brought Zen to 
China in the Sixth Century a.p. Legends say that this insight 
was passed from one to the other without any intermediary of 
scriptures or doctrinal teaching; it was a ‘direct transmission’, 
a communication which passed immediately from mind to 
mind, understandable only by that person who was far enough 
developed to grasp his master’s Enlightenment. While this 
“Secret Message’ was being carried on, the followers of the 
Buddha were forming themselves into many different sects, 
which fell into two main divisions—the Mahayana (Greater 
Vehical of the Law) and the Hinayana (Lesser Vehicle), the 
latter being a term of contempt invented by the adherents 
of the former. The difference between the two was largely 
the result of a dispute over the authority of certain sets of 


24 


The Origins of Zen 


scriptures. None of the Buddha’s teachings was committed to 
writing until at least 150 years after his death; until that time 
they were repeated from memory and so were given a 
tabulated and mechanical form particularly unattractive to the 
Western student. The inevitable result was that they became 
full of monkish interpolations (see Mrs Rhys Davids’ Outline 
of Buddhism), and though it is generally assumed that the Pali 
version is more original than the Sanskrit scriptures of the 
Mahayana, there is little doubt that even these have wandered 
far from the actual words of the Buddha. The Hinayana or 
Theravada (Way of the Elders) is composed of those who 
accept only the Pali version, known as the Tipitaka (the Three 
Baskets). So convinced are they that this version contains the 
last word of the Buddha’s wisdom that they refuse to recognize 
any ideas or precepts which it does not include, and because its 
instructions are largely concerned with matters of conduct, the 
psycho-physical analysis of man, and the monastic regimen, 
the Hinayana has become a formal and rigid, almost material- 
istic, school of thought. From the time of its origin to the 
present day its philosophy has ncither changed nor grown in 
any important respect. The Sanskrit scriptures of the 
Mahayana, on the other hand, are composed chiefly of meta- 
physical discourses, which were continually elaborated and 
subjected again and again to fresh interpretations. Geographic- 
ally, the Hinayana is confined to the southem part of Asia— 
Ceylon, Burma and Siam—while the Mahayana went north- 
wards to China, Tibet, Mongolia, Korea and Japan. Whereas 
the Hinayana does not differ importantly from country to 
country, the Mahayana embraces a number of distinct sects, 
ranging from the highly ritualistic Lamaism of Tibe:: to the 
fresh simplicity of Zen in Japan. 

Both Hinayana and Mahayana Buddhism have a common 


25 


The Spirit of Zen 


basis in the elementary principles of the Buddha’s doctrine. 
Briefly, this doctrine is that man suffers because of his craving 
to possess and kcep for ever things which are essentially 
impermanent. Chicf among thesc things is his own person, 
for this is his means of isolating himself from the rest of life, 
his castle into which he can retreat and from which he can 
assert himself against external forces. He believes that this 
fortified and isolated position is the best means of obtaining 
happiness; it enables him to fight against change, to strive to 
keep pleasing things for himself, to shut out suffering and to 
shape circumstances as he wills. In short, it is his means of 
resisting life. The Buddha taught that all things, including this 
castle, are essentially impermanent and that as soon as man 
tries to possess them they slip away; this frustration of the 
desire to possess is the immediate cause of suffering. But he 
went further than this, for he showed that the fundamental 
cause is the delusion that man can isolate himself from life. A 
false isolation is achieved by identifying himself with his castle, 
the person, but because this castle is impermanent it has no 
abiding reality, it is empty of any ‘self-nature’ (atta) and is no 
more the Self than any other changing object. What, then, is 
the Self? The Buddha remained silent when asked this ques- 
tion, but he taught that man will find out only when he no 
longer identifies himself with his person, when he no longer 
resists the external world from within its fortification, in fact, 
when he makes an end of his hostility and his plundering 
expeditions against life. In contrast to this philosophy of 
isolation the Buddha proclaimed the unity of all living things 
and charged his followers to replace this hostility by divine 
compassion (karuna). The practice of this teaching brings the 
disciple to the state of Nirvana, the end of suffering and the 
extinction of selfishness, the condition of eternal bliss which 


26 


The Origins of Zen 


no words can describe. In addition to this philosophy of life, 
the Buddha incorporated into his doctrine the ancient prin- 
ciples of Karma (the law of conditioned action) and its corol- 
lary Rebirth or Reincamation (sce Appendix II). These imply 
that death is no escape from suffering, for ‘each man’s life the 
outcome of his former living is’; death is only a temporary rest, 
and man must work out his own deliverance through number- 
less lives until he attains the final Enlightenment. However, 
few Zen Buddhists interpret the doctrine of rebirth quite so 
literally. To be rebom is rather to be under the illusion that a 
continuing ego survives from moment to moment, to feel that 
I who sit here am truly I who came in at the door ten minutes 
ago. 

So far both Mahayana and Hinayana are in agreement, but 
they disagree over the Buddha’s silence on the question of the 
Self. What is found when man no longer resists life from 
behind the barrier of his person? Because the Buddha denied 
the existence of any ‘self-nature’ in the person, the Hinayana 
takes this to mean that there is no Self at all. The Mahayana, 
on the other hand, considers that a true Self is found when the 
false one is renounced. When man neither identifies himself 
with his person nor uses it as a means of resisting life, he finds 
that the Self is more than his own being; it includes the whole 
universe. The Hinayana, realizing that no single thing as such 
is the Self, is content with that realization; hence it is a denial 
of life, conceiving Enlightenment only as the negative attain- 
ment of understanding that all separate entities are anatta— 
without self; and anicca—without permanence. But the 
Mahayana completes this denial with an affirmation; while 
denying the existence of self in any particular thing, it finds it 
in the total interrelatedness of all things. Thus Enlightenment 
is to deny the self in the castle, to realize that Self is not this 


27 


The Spirit of Zen 


person called ‘T’ as distinct from that person called “You’, but 
that it is both ‘T’ and “You’ and everything else included. The 
Mahayana therefore affirms life by declaring that all things are 
the Self, instead of denying it by saying only that in each 
thing, taken separately, there is no sclf. Yet fundamentally 
there is no disagreement on this point between Mahayana and 
Hinayana; the difference is that the former goes further than 
the latter. Furthermore, Mahayana philosophy designates the 
true Self by the term sunyata or ‘voidness’ to show, not that it 
is merely nothing, but that it surpasses every idea which the 
mind can form. Reality cannot be grasped in the idea of 
Being, because Being is meaningless apart from Non-being, 
and vice versa. The true Self is not an idea but an experience 
—the experience which comes to pass when the mind has 
voided every metaphysical premise, every idea with which it 
attempts to grasp the nature of the world. 

But this difference in theory gave rise to an important 
difference in practice. The Hinayanist, because of his negative 
ideal, regards the highest form of manas he who simply attains 
his Nirvana, his release, through the realization of anatta and 
anicca, and leaves it at that. Sucha one is known as an Arhan 
as distinct from a Bodhisattva, the ideal man of Mahayana 
philosophy. Here is one who is not content with the mere 
attainment of Nirvana; the Bodhisattva feels that he cannot 
enjoy eternal bliss while other beings suffer, because he knows 
that there is no essential difference between them and himself, 
and his Nirvana cannot be complete if they do not share it. 
Because he affirms all life as the Self he regards all beings as his 
‘other selves’, and for him Nirvana is a vanity and a selfishness 
if there is a single creature still unenlightened. Therefore after 
countless lives of painful striving against sclf-delusion he attains 
the right to eternal bliss, only to renounce it in order that he 


28 


The Origins of Zen 


may work for the enlightenment of every living thing. The 
ideal of the Bodhisattva implies the most complete acceptance 
of life, for the Bodhisattva can exclude nothing and neglect 
nothing because he identifies himself with everything. ‘For- 
going self, the universe grows I.’ Thercfore Keyserling 
describes him as he ‘who says yes to the most evil world, for 
he knows himself to be one with it. Rid of himself, he feels 
his foundation in God, his surface, however, intertwined with 
everything which exists. Thus he must love all beings as he 
loves himself, thus he cannot rest until everyone mirrors the 
divinity in everything.’ 

In Mahayana philosophy this divinity, the Self, was known 
as the Buddha-nature—the ultimate, eternal and universal 
principle of which all things are manifestations. In Sanskrit it 
is called Tathata or ‘Suchness’, a term which has a close affinity 
with the Chinese Tao or the ‘Way of things’. This principle is 
described as the Buddha-nature because to be a Buddha means 
that one has realized one’s identity with Tathata, with the one 
true Self which is not conditioned by distinctions between ‘T 
and ‘You’, ‘Me’ and ‘Mine’, ‘This’ and ‘That’. It may be 
natural for us to seek some explanation for man’s ignorance of 
the Buddha-nature, to discover why, if the Self includes all 
things, man should imagine that it exists only in his own per- 
son. This is the old problem: if all things are the One, why 
does the One become the Many? If there is but one Self; why 
do men imagine that there are many selves? 

To these questions Mahayana Buddhism gives no verbal 
answer save to point out that questions asked under illusion 
are themselves part of the illusion. To the awakened con- 
sciousness of a Buddha the One has not become the Many; it is 
the Many, for as the Hridaya Sutra says, ‘Form is not different 
from emptiness (sunyata); emptiness is not different from 


29 


The Spirit of Zen 


form. Form is precisely emptiness; emptiness is precisely 
form.’ Nor is the ignorant imagination that there are many 
selves in his eyes a problem demanding an explanation, for 
the Vimalakirti Sutra declares that ignorance and delusive 
notions (klesa) are not different from Enlightenment. An 
ordinary man is in truth a Buddha just as he is, and if he asks, 
‘Why, then, don’t I know it?’ the Mahayana and Zen alike 
would reply, “Why do you ask the question?’ In other words, 
this is a way of asking, ‘Do you really fecl that you are a 
separate self? See if you can experience what you call your 
ego concretely. Discover the actual sensation which you 
interpret as your self-hood, and see whether it may not have 
been misinterpreted. Turn your attention to actual first-hand 
concrete expcrience and do not be misled by ideas and con- 
ceptions about it.’ 

Therefore from the very start Zen aimed at clearing aside 
all definitions, intellectual concepts and speculations; this it did 
with the most uncompromising thoroughness. It proclaimed 
at once that both Nirvana and Samsara are the same thing, and 
that to look for the former outside the latter and to try to 
reach it by the conventional performance of meritorious deeds 
is a mere absurdity. Nirvana is here and now, in the midst of 
Samsara, and there is no question of its being a state of one- 
ness as distinct from a state of many-ness at all; everything 
depends upon one’s own inner realization. A wise man will 
see Nirvana at once in the ordinary things of life; a fool will 
philosophize about it and think of it as something else, yet 


An old pine tree preaches wisdom, 
And a wild bird is crying out Truth, 


and when master Tung-shan was asked, “What is the Buddha?’ 
he replied, ‘Three pounds of flax.” The whole technique of 


30 


The Origins of Zen 


Zen was to jolt people out of their intellectual ruts and their 
conventional morality. The masters asked awkward and un- 
answerable questions; they made fun of logic and metaphysics; 
they turned orthodox philosophy upside down in order to 
make it look absurd. Thus we have master Te-shan say- 
ing, ‘Nirvana and Bodhi (Enlightenment) are dead stumps to 
tie your donkey to. The twelve divisions of the scriptures are 
only lists of ghosts and sheets of paper fit to wipe the dirt from 
your skin. And all your four merits and ten stages are mere 
ghosts lingering in their decaying graves. Can these have any- 
thing to do with your salvation?’ 

Zen was first introduced into China by Bodhidharma in 
A.D. §27. Practically nothing is known of its history in India, 
and it is probable that Bodhidharma himself only suggested it 
to the Chinese who evolved it into its present unique form. A 
story is told that Bodhidharma was brought before the 
Emperor Wu, who was anxious to sce this great sage and to 
obtain from him some approval of his own devout works. 
Therefore he asked Bodhidharma: 

“We have built temples, copied holy scriptures, ordered 
monks and nuns to be converted. Is there any merit, Reverend 
Sir, in our conduct?” 

‘No merit at all.’ 

The Emperor, somewhat taken aback, thought that such an 
answer was upsetting the whole teaching, and inquired again: 

“What, then, is the holy truth, the first principle?’ 

‘In vast emptiness there is nothing holy.’ 

‘Who, then, are you to stand before me?” 

‘I know not, your Majesty.’ 

Bodhidharma is always depicted by Chinese and Japanese 
artsists as a fierce old man with a great black beard and large, 
denetrating eyes. Very little is known about him or his work, 


31 


The Spirit of Zen 


and apparently he brought no specific message or teaching to 
China at all; his influence depended not upon what he did or 
said, but upon what he was, and in neither of his two other 
recorded interviews with his disciples does he make any state- 
ment of his teaching. Shang Kwang (Hui-K’e), his spiritual 
successor, had to wait standing outside the cave where 
Bodhidharma was meditating for a whole week before he was 
admitted. All the time it was snowing, but Shang Kwang was 
so determined to find out Bodhidharma’s secret that he with- 
stood frost-bite and even went to the extreme of cutting off 
his left arm and presenting it to the master in order to show 
that he would make any sacrifice for the privilege of being his 
pupil. At last he was admitted, but Bodhidharma would not 
give any explanations. All he did was to set him a puzzle 
which somehow opened his eyes to the truth. Shang Kwang 
said: 

‘I have no peace of mind. Might I ask you, Sir, to pacify 
my mind? 

‘Bring out your mind here before me,’ replied Bodhid- 
harma. ‘I shall pacify it!’ 

‘But it is impossible for me to bring out my mind.’ 

‘Then I have pacified your mind’ 

A short time after Bodhidharma’s death someone reported 
that he had seen him among the mountains on the way back 
to India, walking barefooted and carrying one shoe in his 
hand. Therefore the master’s grave was opened, and all that 


was found was the single shoe that he had left behind! 


For nine years he had remained and nobody knew him; 
Carrying a shoe in his hand he went home quietly, without ceremony. 


Perhaps it is hard to see anything in such an absurd story as that 
of Bodhidharma’s career which could have altered the whole 


32 


The Origins of Zen 


history of the Far East. An old man comes over from India, 
is very rude and abrupt with the Emperor, refuses to see a poor 
wretch who wants some instruction until he has cut off his 
arm, and then only says something quite unintelligible. Finally 
he is seen walking about with a shoe in his hand. And yet 
from that time there began something which inspired artists 
and writers, soldiers and statesmen, something which has 
influenced the cultures of China and Japan more than any 
other single factor. The truth was that Bodhidharma had 
found wisdom which could only be transmitted to someone 
prepared to receive it, and then it was a wisdom which could 
not be put into any intellectual formula. Only those who 
wanted it so much that, like Shang Kwang, they were pre- 
pared to give anything for it could understand. To others it 
was nonsense, and the absurd legends which have been 
attached to Bodhidharma probably originated from a desire 
to emphasize his unconventionality and to give him that 
slightly humorous atmosphere which always seems to attach 
itself to the exponents of Zen. Almost all the pictures of 
Bodhidharma by Zen artists seem to have been calculated to 
raise a smile. 

It is the humorous aspect of Zen which shows one of its 
important affinities with Taoism, for a similar absence of 
pompous gravity and seriousness is found in some of the 
sayings of Lao Tzu and Chuang Tzu. During the years fol- 
lowing the death of Bodhidharma and the beginning of Zen 
as it is known to-day it must undoubtedly have come into 
close contact with Taoist teachings, for in the sayings of the 
later masters the word ‘Tao’ is often used synonymously with 
‘Buddha-nature’ or the ‘Dharma’ (Law). Perhaps the secret 
of both Zen and Taoist humour was that neither took the 
objective world very seriously; they made fun of the cumber- 


33 


The Spirit of Zen 


some intcllect and of all forms of conventionality and pom- 
posity. When Chuang Tzu’s wife died one of his disciples 
found him singing and beating timc on a pot instead of in- 
dulging in pious mourning. The disciple remonstrated: 

‘To live with your wife and then see your eldest son grow 
up and be a man, and then not to shed a tear over her corpse 
—this would be bad enough. But to drum on a pot and sing; 
surely this is going too far.’ 

“Not at all,’ replied the master. “When she died I could not 
help being affected by her death. Soon, however, I remem- 
bered that she had already existed in a previous state before 
birth. .... And now, by virtue of a further change, she is dead, 
passing from one phase to another like the sequence of spring, 
summer, autumn and winter. ... For me to go about weep- 
ing and wailing would be to proclaim myself ignorant of there 
natural laws. Therefore I refrain.’ 

The particular humour of Zen is found in many of the 
pictures which the masters have painted of each other. 
Seldom do we find solemn and dignified personages, but 
rather lively caricatures of absurdly fat or gnarled little men, 
roaring with laughter or swearing at some unfortunate dis- 
ciple who has been unable to find a quick answer for an 
impossible question. There is one delightful picture of a little 
bald-headed man leaning on a crooked staff with his tiny eyes 
sparkling with amusement at two cocks having a scrap in the 
foreground, while another shows the venerated Sixth Patriarch 
(Hui Neng), wearing a few shabby rags, engaged in pulling 
some holy scripture to pieces like a wild maniac. Frequently 
the Zen masters used to refer to each other as ‘old rice-bags’ 
and with other uncomplimentary terms, not out of any pro- 
fessional jealousy, but because it amused them to think that 
they and their wise and venerated brothers were supposed by 


34 


The Origins of Zen 


ordinary standards to be so especially holy, whereas they had 
all realized that everything was holy, even cooking-pots and 
odd leaves blown about by the wind, and that there was 
nothing particularly venerable about themselves at all. There 
is another picture by Mu-ch’i showing the master Hsien-tzu 
chuckling at a shrimp, for whether it is a shrimp or a couple 
of cocks the Zen masters seemed to find endless wonder and 
amusement in the most ordinary things. Perhaps their 
laughter is at the thought that such odd little creatures as these 
are, just as much as men, embodiments of the sublime Buddha- 
nature. Or it may also be, to quote Keyserling again, that 
“Spirit lacks all gravity and in so far seriousness. Seen from 
Spirit nothing is heavy; it takesallthingslightly. Notonly the 
concept of toil, even that of suffering finds no object in it. 
There is toil only from the point of view of Gana (the Flesh); 
and man knows pain and sorrow only as a creature of feeling 
and emotion. . .. Thus spiritual man must needs impress man 
of the earth as wanting in seriousness’ (South American 
Meditations, p. 373). 

But apart from its humour Zen has other connections with 
Taoism. Lao Tzu, the supposed founder of Taoism, is believed 
to have been a contemporary of the Buddha (approx. 
600 B.c.)!, and by the time Zen came to China the original 
philosophy of Lao Tzu had long been overlaid with a wealth 
of mythology and superstition, for, unlike Confucianism, it 
had become the religion of the masses. The central concept of 


1 This is the date generally given, although some authorities hold 
that Lao Tzu is only a mythological character. Mr Arthur Waley 
gives the date of the Tao Teh King (usually ascribed to Lao Tzu) as 
240 B.C. and believes that it only became connected with the name 
of Lao Tzu at a later date. See his The Way and its Power (London, 
1934), pp. 86, 99 and ror. 


35 


The Spirit of Zen 


original Taoism was that of the Tao—a word that has been 
translatcd as the Way, the Law, God, Reason, Nature, Mean- 
ing and Reality. But actually there is no one English word 
which can convey its true meaning. The character “Tao’ is 
composed of symbols signifying rhythm, or periodical move- 
ment, and intelligence, but, as Lao Tzu himself says, “The Tao 
which can be described in words is not the true Tao’ and it is 
best to leave it untranslated. Suffice it to say that the general 
idea behind Tao is that of growth and movement; it is the 
course of nature, the principle governing and causing change, 
the perpetual movement of life which never for a moment 
remains still. To Taoism that which is absolutely still or 
absolutely perfect is absolutely dead, for without the possibility 
of growth and change there can be no Tao. In reality there is 
nothing in the universe which is completely perfect or com- 
pletely still; it is only in the minds of men that such concepts 
have arisen, and it is just those concepts which, according to 
Taoism, are at the root of human misery. For man clings on 
to things in the vain hope that they may remain still and 
perfect; he does not reconcile himself to the fact of change; he 
will not let Tao take its course. Thus Lao Tzu and his great 
exponent, Chuang Tzu, taught that the highest form of man 
is he who adapts himself to and keeps pace with the movement 
of Tao. He alone can find peace, for the fact that man notices 
and regrets change shows that he himself is not moving with 
the rhythm of life. Movement is only noticeable to something 
which is relatively still, but this is a false stillness because it 
creates friction with that which is moving. If man would keep 
pace with Tao he would find the true stillness, for he would 
be moving with life and friction would not arise. 

This doctrine can very easily degenerate into mere laissez 
faire and thus Taoism eventually became an easy-going 


36 


The Origins of Zen 

fatalism, whereas the original teaching was nothing of the kind. 
For coupled with the doctrine of Tao is the teaching of wu- 
wei, the secret of mastering circumstances without asserting 
oneself against them. Wu-wei has been translated by so many 
Wester scholars as non-action and by corrupt Taoism it was 
held to mean the same thing. Actually it is the principle 
underlying ju-jutss—a highly successful form of overcoming 
an opponent in wrestling—the principle of yielding to an on- 
coming force in such a way that it is unable to harm you, and 
at the same time changing its direction by pushing it from 
behind instead of attempting to resist it from the front. Thus 
the skilled master of life never opposes things; he never tries 
to change things by asserting himself against them; he yields 
to their full force and either pushes them slightly out of direct 
line or else moves them right round in the opposite direction 
without ever encountering their direct opposition. That is to 
say, he treats them positively; he changes them by acceptance, 
by taking them into his confidence, never by flat denial. 
Perhaps wi-wei can best be understood by contrast with its 
opposite, y#-wei. The character for yu is composed of two 
symbols—hand and moon—thus signifying the idea of clutch- 
ing at the moon as if it could be seized and possessed. But the 
moon cludes all attempts at grasping, and can never be held 
still in the sky any more than circumstances can be prevented 
from changing by conscious striving. Therefore while yu is 
trying to clutch what is elusive (and Life as Tao is essentially 
elusive), wu is not only not clutching but also the positive 
acceptance of clusiveness and change. Thus the highest form 
of man makes himself a vacuum so that all things are drawn to 
him; he accepts everything until by including all things he 
becomes their master. It is the principle of controlling things 
by going along with them, of mastery through adaptation. 


37 


The Spirit of Zen 


In a certain sense the concept of Tao is more dynamic than 
the Mahayana idea of Tathata; the former is something per- 
petually moving, while the latter is that which is unmoved in 
the midst of all changes. But the distinction between them is 
more apparent than real, for only that which accepts change 
can remain unharmed and truly unmoved. Ifit is large enough 
to include all changes it can never itself be changed, and 
Tathata is the one principle which includes all separate and 
transitory things. But, as in the case of the Mahayana, the Zen 
masters saw that to talk about Tao was to miss Tao altogether, 
for the moment one tries to hold it as a concept it becomes 
unreal and dead. It is all very well to talk about moving with 
Tao, but the very fact that one is talking about moving 
implies that one has not yet begun to move, and the Zen 
masters were concermed with giving people the initial push. 
Thus it was Zen that brought Taoism back to life; if for a 
moment one stops to philosophize and think about, life moves 
on and the living reality of the moment is lost. Therefore the 
Zen masters had no patience with concepts; conceptual think- 
ing is putting a barrier between oneself and the Tao, and this 
is absurd for the Tao is here all the time, at every moment 
ready to be seen but never waiting to be thought about. Thus 
it is said in the Mumon-kan: 


No gate stands on public roads; 
There are paths of various kinds; 
Those who pass this barrier 

Walk freely throughout the universe. 


After the death of Bodhidharma there followed him a 
series of five Zen Patriarchs, of whom the last was Hui Neng. 
From the time of Hui Neng Zen lost all its distinctively 
Indian character; it became thoroughly transformed by the 


38 


The Origins of Zen 


more practical Chinese mentality and whatever traces of intel- 
lectual teaching remained were almost entirely swept away. 
Hui Neng was the last to deliver any distinctly philosophical 
explanation of Zen, and thereafter most of the few lengthy 
discourses of Zen masters of which there are records were far 
more elusive, paradoxical and thoroughgoing. But Hui Neng 
left a remarkable work—a collection of his sermons written 
down by one of his disciples—its full title being “The Sutra 
Spoken by the Sixth Patriarch on the High Seat of the Gem of 
Law (Dharmaratha)’. Asarule the term ‘sutra’ is only applied 
to the discourses of the Buddha himself or of the great 
Bodhisattvas who were his immediate disciples, and the onc 
exception to this rule is the ‘Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch’ which 
has come to be known as ‘the only sutra spoken by a native of 
China’. This was an honour richly deserved, for this sutra has 
a place among the Bhagavad-Gita, the Tao Te Chitg, the 
Dhammapada and the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali which are 
universally acknowledged as the greatest masterpieccs of 
Eastern spiritual literature. The first section of the ‘Sutra of 
the Sixth Patriarch’ is Hui Neng’s account of how he came to 
an understanding of Zen; in this we are told that he was an 
illiterate scller of firewood, and that one day while he was 
working in his shop he overheard someone reciting a passage 
from the Diamond Sutra (Vajracchedika) outside in the strect. 
Instantly he obtained an intuitive realization of its meaning, 
and found that the person reciting the sutra came from the 
monastery where the Fifth Patriarch, Hung Jan, was in- 
structing a community of some thousand disciples. At once 
Hui Neng set out in search of the Patriarch, and on coming to 
the monastery he was sct to work in the stables for eight 
months. One day Hwang Yan, realizing that his time was 
nearly over, summoned all his disciples and told them that his 


39 


The Spirit of Zen 


successor must now be appointed; the privilege was to go to 
the one who could write the best verse summarizing the 
teaching of Zen. 

At that time the head monk was a certain Shin Hsiu—a man 
with a thorough intellectual understanding of Buddhism but 
with no grasp of the essential truth. In his heart he knew that 
his knowledge was only superficial, and he was afraid to go 
and subinit his verse to the master in person. He decided, 
therefore, to write it on the wall outside the master’s hall, so 
that if the mastcr should approve he would declare himself to 
be the author. Thus in the middle of the night he went and 
wrote this verse: 


The body is like unto the Bodhi-tree, 
And the mind to a mirror bright; 
Carefully we cleanse them hour by hour 
Lest dust should fall upon them. 


Publicly the Patriarch expressed his approval of the verse, but 
in secret he told Shin Hsiu that his understanding was shallow 
and that before he could allow him to be Sixth Patriarch he 
must submit another. In the meantime Hui Neng had seen 
this verse, and realizing that something was wrong he asked a 
friend to write another by its side, which he would dictate. 
And this was: 


Neither is there Bodhi-tree, 
Nor yet a mirror bright; 
Since in reality all is void, 
Whereon can the dust fall? 


The Patriarch saw at once that here was someone who under- 
stood the emptiness of mere conceptions and analogies, and 
for fear of the jealousy of the other monks, he secretly 
appointed Hui Neng as his successor, handing over to him the 


40 


The Origins of Zen 


robe and begging-bowl which were supposed to have be- 
longed originally to the Buddha himself. After a series of 
adventures with jealous pursuers, Hui Neng became recognized 
as Sixth Patriarch, and his distinctive co to Zen was 
the method of Sudden instead of Gradual realization. The differ- 
ence was that while some considered it necessary to come toa 
gradual understanding of Buddhism through patient study and 
the performance of meritorious deeds, Hui Neng saw that this 
method easily led one astray into intellectualism. Life is mov- 
ing too swiftly to be approached tentatively and gradually, for 
while one makes elaborate preparations for Enlightenment the 
immediate truth is slipping away all the time. The person who 
dallies on the edge of the stream, wondering how best to take 
the plunge, testing the heat of the water with his toes, and 
thinking about how it will feel when he is in, soon gets into the 
habit of putting off the issue. The Zen disciple must walk 
quietly to the edge and slip calmly into the water without 
further ado, without allowing himself time to conjure up fears 
and anxious speculations as to what it will be like, or to find 
elaborate reasons as to why he should not get in at once. 

Just before his death Hui Neng announced that the practice 
of appointing a Patriarch would be discontinued, for he said 
to his disciples, “You are all free from doubts, therefore you 
are all able to carry on the lofty object of our school.’ Then 
he quoted a verse said to have been written by Bodhidharma: 


The object of my coming to China 
Was to transmit the Teaching of Deliverance to all under delusion. 
In five petals the flower will be complete; 
Thereafter the fruit will come naturally to maturity. 

This was indeed what came to pass, for during the latter 
part of the T’ang and the whole of the Sung and Yiian 
dynasties (A.D. 713-1367) which followed on the death of Hui 


41 


The Spirit of Zen 


Neng the high level attained by the teaching and practice of 
Zen coincided with the Golden Age of Chinese culture. Al- 
most all the great Zen masters lived in this period—Ma Tsu 
(Jap. Baso), Pohang (Jap. Hyakujo), Lin Chi (Jap. Rinzai), 
Chao-chou (Jap. Joshu) and Yun Men (Jap. Ummon)—many 
of whom will be quoted in the following chapters. At that 
time Zen enjoyed a wide popularity among all grades of 
society, bringing to fruition all that was best in Taoism and the 
Mahayana. For Zen synthesized the idealism, the immovable 
serenity and the austerity of Buddhism with the poetry _and 
fluidity of Taoism, ah its reverence for the incomplete, the 
‘imperfect’ and the changing as showing the presence of life 
of the unending flow of Tao. These two elements pervade the 
whole spirit of Zen, together with its own unique dynamic 
quality, which gives life and strength to the other two. 

Towards the end of the Sung Dynasty (1279) another form 
of Buddhism began to arise, and in the following years it 
gradually diminished the supremacy of Zen in China. This 
was the cult of Amitabha (Ch. A-mi-to Fo, Jap. Amida), the 
personification of “Boundless Light’, the great Buddha who 
had vowed to save all beings and bring them in the end to 
Nirvana. It was believed that by virtue of this vow all who 
put their faith in the compassion of Amitabha would be 
reborn into the Pure Land or Western Paradise (Sukhavati)— 
a place where the attainment of wisdom would be an easier 
task than in this impossible world. The Western Paradise was 
described with a wealth of sensuous imagery which very 
naturally appealed to the masses— 


In that land of true pleasure the flowers never fade, 
Each terraced ascent is of diamond and jade. 

The law of Tathagata sung by each bird 

From thicket and grove in sweet music is heard. 


42 


The Origins of Zen 


To this day Pure Land Buddhism is the most popular form of 
the Mahayana in both China and Japan where Amitabha is 
generally worshipped as a loving God in many ways similar 
to the God of Christianity. Thus Far Eastem Buddhism was 
divided into two main schools, known in Japanese as Jiriki and 
Tariki—‘self power’ and ‘other power’—that is to say, those 
who relied on their own efforts for the attainment of wisdom 
and those who relied on the compassion of the Bodhisattvas. 
Zen belonged to the former, and as the civilization of China 
began slowly to lose its virility it passed on to the young 
civilization here it was first esta y Ei-sai 
in 1191. Here it became the relig i¢_samurai=the 
warrior class—and had an even more profound effect on the 
culture of the nation than in China; to this day Zen is a power- 
ful factor among the educated Japanese and many professional 
and buginess men are in the habit of making periodical visits 
to Zen ‘monasteries where they live and work with the monks 
for a few weeks, gathering strength for a return to their 
ordinary labours. But Zen will go further than Japan. Al- 
ready a hostel for Western students has been attached to a 
monastery at Kyoto, and whether under the name of Zen or 
not, something of its spirit must enter wherever religions and 
philosophies are to be roused from the grave of theories and 
words. 


43 


The Secret of Zen 


A Confucian poet once came to Zen master Hui-t’ang to 
inquire the secret of his teaching, whereupon the master 
quoted to him one of the sayings of Confucius: “Do you think 
I am hiding things from you, O my disciples? Indeed, I have 
nothing to hide from you.’ Since Hui-t’ang would not allow 
him to ask any more questions, the poet went away deeply 
puzzled, but a short time after the two went for a walk 
together in the mountains. As they were passing a bush of 
wild laurel the master turned to his companion and asked, 
‘Do you smell it?? Then to the answer, ‘Yes,’ he remarked, 
‘There, I have nothing to hide from you!’ At once the poet 
was enlightened. For it is really a paradox to spcak of the 
secret of Zen, and in spite of all the apparently abstruse or 
ridiculous answers of the Zen masters to the urgent question- 
ings of their disciples, nothing is being hidden from us. The 
truth is that Zen is so hard to understand, just because it is so 
obvious, and we miss it time and time again because we are 
looking for something obscure; with our eyes on the horizon 
we do not see what lies at our feet. In the words of Hakuin’s 
‘Song of Meditation’: 


All beings are from the very beginning the Buddhas; 

It is like ice and water: 

Apart from water no ice can exist. 

Outside sentient beings, where do we seek the Buddha? 


1 This and most of the other Zen stories (sondo) quoted have been 


translated by Professor Suzuki, and large numbers of them will be 
found in his various works, 


46 


The Secret of Zen 


Not knowing how near Truth is, 
People seek it far away... . 
They are like him who, in the midst of water, 
Cries out in thirst so imploringly. 
(Trans. SuzuRl.) 


Man is often too proud to examine the self-evident things 
which are closest to him. Zen found the followers of the 
Mahayana looking for truth to scriptures, to holy men and 
Buddhas, believing that they would reveal it to them if they 
lived the good life. For man’s apparent humility in thinking 
that wisdom is something too sublime to reveal itself in the 
ordinary affairs of his life is a subtle form of pride. Inwardly 
he feels that he must be so great as to be removed from the 
things of the world before he can receive truth, and such is 
his pride that he will only deign to receive it from the lips of 
sages and from the pages of sacred scriptures. He does not see 
it in human beings or in the incidents of everyday life; he 
does not see it in himself, for again he is too proud to see 
himself as he is. So far from seeking for truth he hides his 
imperfections under his ‘meritorious deeds’ and approaches 
the Buddhas from behind their mask. 

To Zen this careful self-preparation for finding the truth 
at some future time or from some external source is putting 
off the issue of seeing the facts just as they are at the moment, 
be they good or evil. For to him who cannot see the truth in 
himself no Buddha can reveal it, and he who does not look 
for it this moment cannot expect to be shown it in the future. 
And so Zen taught that nobody could find the Buddha in a 
Paradise or in any celestial realm until he had first found it 
in himself and in other sentient beings, and nobody could 
expect to find enlightenment in a hermitage unless he was 


capable of finding it in the life of the world. For the first, 
47 


The Spirit of Zen 


principle of the Mahayana is that all things, however vile on 
the surface and however insignificant, are aspects of the 
Buddha-nature, and this implies that every being and thing 
must be accepted; nothing can be excluded from the ‘Lotus 
Land of Purity’ as being ‘worldly’ or ‘trivial’ or ‘base’. As 
Thomas 4 Kempis wrote in the Imitation of Christ, ‘If thy heart 
were right, then every creature would be a mirror of life and 
a book of holy doctrine. There is no creature so small and 
abject, but it reflects the goodness of God,’ and to the ques- 
tion ‘What is Enlightenment?’ a Zen master replied, “Your 
everyday thoughts,’ while another when asked, ‘What is the 
Tao: answered, ‘Usual life is the very Tao.’ Master Po- 
chang said that Zen meant simply, ‘Eat when you are hungry, 
sleep when you are tired,’ while Lin-chi declared that ‘the 
truly religious man has nothing to do but go on with his 
life as he finds it in the various circumstances of this worldly 
existence. He rises quietly in the moming, puts on his clothes 
and goes out to work. When he wants to walk, he walks; 
when he wants to sit, he sits. He has no hankering after 
Buddhahood, not the remotest thought of it. How is this 
possible? A wise man of old says, If you strive after Buddha- 
hood by any conscious contrivances, your Buddha is indeed 
the source of eternal transmigration’ (Suzuki, Essays in Zen 
Buddhism, Il, p. 260). 

If all things are in reality the Tao or the Buddha-nature, 
what is the use of striving to become a Buddha and to attain 
Nirvana? For those who have eyes to see, eternal truth and 
Buddhahood are manifested plainly before us here and now, 
in our own thoughts and actions, and in the changing stream 
of events which is flowing past us all the time. Hence there 
is no object in seeking after Buddhahood as if it were some- 
thing other than life as it is; in the words of Hui Neng, ‘The 


48 


The Secret of Zen 


only difference between a Buddha and an ordinary man is 
that one realizes it while the other docs not.’ 


This very earth is the Lotus Land of Purity, 
And this body is the body of Buddha. 
(Hakun.) 


Therefore Zen interprets striving after Buddhahood as imply- 
ing a distinction between oneself and the Buddha-nature; 
that is the foundation of egoism, for it means that the self 
has been separated from the rest of life, that it has become 
isolated from other beings, and this is a lesser form of lunacy, 
for the lunatic is the most isolated person in the world. There- 
fore all external ideas of the Buddha and Nirvana were 
uncompromisingly swept aside, and Zen became a form of 
iconoclasm. It ruthlessly broke down all conceptions and 
symbols, all external and anthropomorphic ideas of the 
Buddha, which masqueraded as the truth. Thus we have 
Lin-chi declaiming: 


O you followers of Truth! If you wish to obtain an orthodox 
understanding of Zen, do not be deceived by others. Inwardly or 
outwardly, if you encounter any obstacles kill them right away. 
If you encounter the Buddha, kill him; if you encounter the 
Patriarch, kill him; .. . kill them all without hesitation, for this is 
the only way to deliverance. Do not get yourselves entangled 
with any object, but stand above, pass on, and be free! 

(Trans. SUZUKI.) 


Again there is the Zen saying, ‘Do not linger about where 
the Buddha is, and as to wherc he is not, pass swiftly on.’ An 
amusing story in this connection is that of master Tan-hsia 
and the wooden Buddha. One winter night Tan-hsia took 
sheltcr in a temple, and finding that the fire was going out he 
took down one of the wooden figures of the Buddha from 


49 


The Spirit of Zen 


the altar and placed it on the embers. When the keeper of the 
temple discovered what had been done he was furious at such 
an act of sacrilege and began to scold Tan-hsia for his irrev- 
erence. But Tan-hsia merely scratched about among the 
ashes, remarking, ‘I am gathering the holy relics from the 
burnt ashes.’ 

‘How,’ asked the keeper, “can you get holy relics from 
a wooden Buddha?’ 

‘If there are no holy relics,’ replied Tan-hsia, ‘this is cer- 
tainly not a Buddha and I am committing no sacrilege. May 
I have the two remaining Buddhas for my fire?” 

Zen was therefore the direct method of approach; it dis- 
pensed with external aids to religion as liable to lead people 
into confusion. Scriptures and doctrines were well so long as 
they were seen only as aids, and Zen masters likened them to 
a finger pointing at the moon; he is a fool who takes the 
finger for the moon. Thus Zen has been summed up as: 


A special transmission outside the Scriptures; 
No dependence upon words and letters; 
Direct pointing to the mind of man; 

Seeing into one’s own nature. 


But while we may be told that the truth of Zen is obvious, 
that it is standing before our eyes every moment of the day, 
this does not take us very far. There seems to be nothing 
remarkable about the ordinary affairs of life; there appears to 
be nothing in putting on one’s clothes, eating one’s food or 
washing one’s hands which would indicate the presence of 
Nirvana and Buddhahood. Yet when a monk asked master 
Nan-ch’uan, ‘What is the Tao?’ he replied, ‘Usual life is the 
very Tao.’ The monk asked again, ‘How can we accord with 
it?’ (i.e. ‘How can we bring ourselves into harmony and unity 


50 


The Secret of Zen 


with it?”). Nan-ch’uan answered, ‘If you try to accord with 
it, you will get away from it.’ For life, even as the ordinary 
humdrum series of daily events, is something esscntially 
ungraspable and indefinable; never for a moment does it 
remain the same; we can never make it stand still for analysis 
and definition. If we try to think of the speed at which time 
is passing or at which things are changing our minds are set 
in a whirl, for it isa speed which can never be calculated. The 
harder we try to catch hold of the moment, to seize a pleasant 
sensation, or to define something in a way which will be 
satisfactory for all time, the more elusive it becomes. It has 
been said that to define is to kill, and if the wind were to stop 
for one second for us to catch hold of it, it would cease to be 
wind. The same is true of life. Perpetually things and events 
are moving and changing; we cannot take hold of the present 
moment and make it stay with us; we cannot call back past 
time or keep for ever a passing sensation. Once we try to do 
this all we have is a dead memory; the reality is not there, and 
no satisfaction can be found in it. If we suddenly realize that 
we are happy, the more we endeavour to think of some means 
of preserving our happiness, the faster we see it slipping away. 
We try to define happiness so that we may know how to 
find it when we are feeling miserable; a man thinks, ‘I am 
happy now that I am staying in this place. Therefore happi- 
ness, for me, is to come and stay in this place.’ And the next 
time he is unhappy he tries to apply this definition; he goes 
to that place again and finds that it does not make him happy; 
there is only the dead memory of happiness, and the definition 
does not hold. For happiness is like Maeterlinck’s blue birds 
—try to capture them and they lose their colour; it is like 
trying to clutch water in one’s hands—the harder one grips, 
the faster it slips through one’s fingers. Therefore a Zen 


51 


The Spirit of Zen 


master when asked, ‘What is the Tao?’ replied immediately, 


“Walk on!’ for we can only understand life by kee ing pace 
with it, by a complete affitmation and aiepares oT es ptance of its magic- 
like” itansformations and unending changes. By this accept- 
ance the Zen disciple is filled with a great sense of wonder, for 
everything is perpetually becoming new. The beginning of 
the universe is now, for all things are at this moment being 
created, and the end of the universe is now, for all things are 
at this moment passing away. Therefore the Zen poet 


P’ang-yiin says: 


How wondrously supernatural, 

And how miraculous this! 

I draw water, and I carry fuel! 
(Trans, SuzuK1.) 


Thus Zen is sometimes described as ‘straightforwardness’ or 
‘going right ahead’, for Zen is to move with life without 
trying to arrest and interrupt its flow; it is an immediate 
awareness of things as they live and move, as distinct from 
the mere grasp of ideas and feelings about things which are the 
dead symbols of a living reality. Thercfore master Takuan 
says in relation to the art of fencing (kendo)—an art strongly 
influenced by the principles of Zen— 


This—whet may be termed the ‘non-interfering’ attitude of 
mind—constitutes the most vital element in the art of fencing as 
well as in Zen. If there is any room left even for the breadth of a 
hair between two actions, this is interruption. 


That is to say, the contact between an event and the mind’s 
response thereto should not be broken by discursive thinking, 
for, he continues, 


When the hands are clapped, the sound issues without a 


52 


The Secret of Zen 


moment’s deliberation. The sound does not wait and think before 
itissues. There is no mediacy here; one movement follows another 
without being interrupted by one’s conscious mind. If you are 
troubled and cogitate what to do, seeing the opponent about to 
strike you down, you give him room, that is, a happy chance for 
his deadly blow. Let your defence follow the attack without a 
moment's interruption, and there will be no two separate move- 
ments to be known as attack and defence. 


Hence if ‘attack’ represents the external world, or life, and 
‘defence’ one’s response to life, this must be taken to mean 
that the distinction between ‘self’ and ‘life’ is destroyed; 
egoism disappears when the contact between the two is so 
immediate that they move together, keeping in the same 
rhythm. Takuan says further: 


This immediateness of action on your part will inevitably end 
in the opponent's self-defeat. It is like a boat smoothly gliding 
down the rapids; in Zen, and in fencing as well, a mind of no- 
hesitation, no-interruption, no-mediacy, ishighly valued. So much 
reference is made in Zen to a flash of lightning or to sparks issuing 
from the impact of two flint-stones. If this is understood in the 
sense of quickness, a grievous mistake is committed. The idea is 
to show immediateness of action, an uninterrupted movement of 
life-energy. Whenever room is left for interruption from “a 
quarter not at all in vital relation with the occasion, you are sure 
to lose your own position. This of course does not mean to desire 
to do things rashly or in the quickest possible time. If there were 
this desire in you its very presence would be an interruption. 

(Trans. Suzuxt.)! 


This is in many ways similar to the art of listening to music; 


1 The above translation of Takuan’s advice is taken from Vol. III 
of Professor Suzuki's Essays in Zen Buddhism, p. 319. See also the 
section on Judo and Kenda, p. 106. 


53 


The Spirit of Zen 


if one stops to consider one’s emotional or intellectual reac- 
tions to a symphony while it is being played, to analyse the 
construction of a chord, or to linger over a particular phrase, 
the melody is lost. To hear the whole symphony one must 
concentrate on the flow of notes and harmonies as they come 
into being and pass away, keeping one’s mind continuously 
in the same rhythm. To think over what has passed, to 
wonder what is about to come, or to analyse the effect upon 
oneself is to interrupt the symphony and to lose the reality. 
The whole attention must be directed to the symphony and 
oneself must be forgotten; if any conscious attempt is made to 
concentrate upon the symphony, the mind is led away by 
the thought of oneself trying to concentrate, and it was for 
this reason that Nan-ch’uan told the monk that if he tried to 
accord with the Tao he would get away from it. Therefore 
Zen went further than telling man to listen to the symphony 
instead of thinking about his reactions to it, for even to tell 
someone not to think about his independent reactions is to 
make him think about not thinking about them! Therefore 
Zen adopted the positive method of emphasizing the sym- 
phony of life itself; all talk about trying to bring the mind into 
harmony introduces the concept of the self which is trying, 
thereby drawing the attention away from the actual fact of 
life. It was this to which the Zen masters pointed; they simply 
demonstrated life without making any assertions or denials 
oat ie Therclore Ghe Would say to his disciple ‘Beyond 
assertion and denial show me the truth of Zen. Quick, quick, 
or thirty blows for you!’ The disciple had no time to stop and 
think out an answer; the master expected it to come as imme- 
diately and as spontaneously as life itself is moving. A master 
once held up a stick before a gathering of his disciples and 
said, ‘O monks, do you see this? If you see it, what is it you 


34 


The Secret of Zen 


see? Would you say, “It is a stick’? If you do you are 
ordinary people, you have no Zen. But if you say, “We do 
not see any stick,” then I would say: Here I hold one, and how 
can you deny the fact?’ The particular stick in question was 
known as the shippe, the master’s symbol of office, and it was 
often used to demonstrate Zen since it always lay close to the 
master’s hand. Master Hsiang-yen once asked a disciple: 

‘There was once a monk who asked Wei-shan why Bod- 
hidharma had come to China, and Wei-shan in answer held 
up his shippe. Now how do you understand the meaning of 
Wei-shan’s action?” 

‘The master’s idea,’ replied the disciple, ‘is to elucidate mind 
along with matter, to reveal truth by means of an objective 
reality.’ 

“Your understanding,’ said the master, ‘is all right as far as 
it goes. But what is the use of hurrying so to theorize?” 

Whereupon the disciple asked, “What, then, will be your 
understanding?” 

Hsiang-yen held up his shippe. 

Master Po-chang once set a pitcher before two of his 
disciples, saying, “Do not call it a pitcher, but tell me what 
it is.’ 

One of them answered, ‘It cannot be called a piece of 
wood,’ 

But Po-chang considered this answer beside the point, 
whereupon he asked the other the same question, and in reply 
he came forward, pushed the pitcher over and walked away. 
As a result Po-chang appointed this disciple as his successor. 

It was in this way that the Zen masters brought the minds 
of their disciples into direct contact with life, with the con- 
stantly changing and moving process which is the Buddha- 
nature perpetually manifesting itsclf. To know the Buddha- 


55 


The Spirit of Zen 


nature was to know life apart from ‘interruptions’, the chief 
of which was the concept of the self as an entity distinct from 
life, occupied entirely with its own private reactions to reality 
as distinct from reality itself. The Buddha had taught that 
the cause of this folly was Trisha (Pali Tanha), which is so 
often niistranslated as ‘Desire’. Literally it means ‘Thirst’, and 
from this it came to mean ‘thirst for life’, while in the context 
of the Buddha’s teaching it undoubtedly meant thirst for life 
as an isolated being, as one who stands outside and considers 
primarily the effect which life is having and will have upon 
himself. Apart from this effect he has no realization of life 
whatever, and thus he never actually lives; to return to the 
analogy of music, he is like one who is so occupied with his 
own feelings about a tune that the tune is only half heard, 
for while he is thinking over the effects of the first bar the 
orchestra has played several more which he misses altogether. 
But while the philosophers of the Mahayana were considering 
these things intellectually, being concerned with the ideas 
rather than the realities, Zen passed beyond all discursive 
thinking. When asked about the ultimate mysteries of Budd- 
hism, it replied, ‘The cypress tree in the courtyard!’ ‘The 
bamboo grove at the foot of the hill!’ ‘The dried up dirt 
scraper!’ Anything to bring the mind back from abstractions 
to life! © 

Closely connected with the foregoing is another important 
aspect of Zen, which may be called ‘spiritual poverty’. Almost 
every form of religion has insisted that many possessions are 
a bar to spiritual progress, but while the Zen monk has cer- 
tainly the minimum of material possessions, Zen interprets 
poverty as_an attitude of mind rather than a physical con- 
dition. One of the most common ways of trying to fix 
life into rigid definitions is to qualify something, whether a 


56 


The Secret of Zen 


person, a thing or an idea, with the statement, “This belongs 
tome.’ But because life is this elusive and perpetually changing 
process, every time we think we have really taken possession 
of something, the truth is that we have completely lost it. All 
that we possess is our own idea about the thing desired—an 
idea which tends to remain fixed, which does not grow as the 
thing grows. Thus one of the most noticeable facts about 
those obsessed with greed for possessions, whether material 
goods or cherished idcas, is their desire that things shall remain 
as they are—not only that thcir possessions shall remain in their 
own hands, but also that the possessions themselves shall not 
change. There are theologians and philosophers who show 
the greatest concern if anyone qucstions their ideas about the 
universe, for they imagine that within those ideas they have 
at last enshrined ultimate truth, and that to lose those ideas 
would be to lose the truth. But because truth is alive it will 
not be bound by anything which shows no sign of life— 
namely, a conception whose validity is held to depend partly 
on the fact that it is unchangeable. For once we imagine that 
we have grasped the truth of life, the truth has vanistred, for 
fruth cannot become anyone’s property, the reason being that 
truth is life, and for one person to think that he posssesses all 
life is a manifest absurdity. The part cannot possess the whole. 
Therefore Chuang-Tzu tells the following story: 


Shun asked Ch’eng, saying, ‘Can one get Tao so as to have it for 
one’s own?” 

‘Your very body,’ replicd Ch’eng, ‘is not your own. How 
should Tao be?’ 

‘If my body,’ said Shun, ‘is not my own, pray whosc is it?” 

‘It is the delegated image of Tao,’ replied Ch’eng. ‘Your life is 
not your own. It is the delegated harmony of Tao. Your indi- 
viduality is not your own. It is the delegated adaptability of Tao. 


57 


The Spirit of Zen 


... You move, but know not how. You arc at rest, but know 
not why.... These are the operation of the laws of Tao. How 
then should you get Tao so as to have it for your own?” 


Just as no person can possess life, so no idea which a person 
may possess can defirie it; the idea of possession is illusory, for 
apart from the fact that all things must eventually pass away 
into some other form, and can never remain in one place for 
eternity, at the root of possession lies the desire that things 
shall not alter in any way, and this is a complete impossibility. 
If, therefore, life can never be grasped, how can it ever be 
understood? How can truth be known if it can never be 
defined? Zen would answer: by not trying to grasp or define 
it, and this is the fundamental Buddhist ideal of non-attach- 
ment, or the Taoist ideal of(wu-wei. 

But Buddhism and Taoism go further than saying that 
nothing can ever be possessed; they declare that those who try 
to possess are in fact possessed, they are slaves to their own 
illusions about life. Spiritual freedom is just that capacity to 
be as spontaneous and unfettered as life itself; to be ‘as the 
wind that bloweth where it listeth and thou hearest the sound 
thereof but cannot tell whence it cometh nor whither it goeth.’ 
‘Even so,’ said Jesus, ‘is everyone that is bom of the Spirit.’ 
But non-attachment does not mean running away from things 
to some peaceful hermitage, for we can never escape from our 
own illusions about life; we carry them with us, and if we are 
afraid of them and wish to escape it means that we are doubly 
enslaved. For whether we are content with our illusions or 
frightened of them, we are equally possessed by them, and 
hence the non-attachment of Buddhism and Taoism means 
not running away from life but running with it, for freedom 
comes through complete acceptance of reality. Those who 
wish to keep their illusions do not move at all; those who fear 


58 


The Secret of Zen 


them run backwards into greater illusions, while those who 
conquer them ‘Walk on’. 
Thus the poverty of the Zen disciple is the negative aspect 


the significant Latin word for ‘baggage’. This state of mind is 
the realization of the Mahayana doctrine of sunyata, of the 
emptiness of all transitory things; nothing can be grasped, for 
everything is emptiness; nor is there anything which can 
grasp, for the self is emptiness. Therefore the Yuen-Chioh 
Sutra declares that all component things are ‘like drifting 
clouds, like the waning moon, like ships that sail the ocean, 
like shores that are washed away’, and the Zen masters, realiz- 
ing the evanescence of the outer world, of their own ideas and 
of the ego itself, cease to cling to these passing forms. In the 
words of the Dhammapada they are ‘those who have no posses- 
sions... who have realized the causeless and unconditioned 
freedom through understanding the emptiness of that which 
passes away—the track of these men it is impossible to trace 
just as the track of birds in the sky cannot be followed.’ For 
the Zen life does not move in ruts; it is the freedom of the 
Spirit, unfettered by external circumstances and internal 
illusions. Its very nature is such that it cannot be described in 


at any particular place, never attachi 

object, always adapting itself to the rise and fall of the ground. 
FF auch analogies give rhe Timpression GF dreamy laissez faire, 
it must be remembered that Zen is not always a gentle brecze, 
like decadent Taoism; more than often it is a fierce gale which 


sweeps everything ruthlessly before it, an icy blast which 
penetrates to the heart of everything and passes right through 


59 


The Spirit of Zen 


to the other side! The freedom and poverty of Zen is to leave 
everything and “Walk on’, for this is what life itself does, and 
Zen is the religion of life. ae 

Therefore the masters tell thcir disciples to forget all that 
they have ever learnt before coming to the practice of Zen, 
to forget even their knowledge of Buddhism. For the Buddha 
himself declared that his teaching was only a raft with which 
to cross a river; when the opposite bank has been reached it 
must be left behind, but so many of his followers mistook the 
raft for the opposite bank. Yet this negative aspect of Zen, 
this giving up, is only another way of ex ressing th the positive 
fact that to give up everything is to gain a all. ‘He that loseth 
his life shall find it.’ Professor Suzuki points out 's out that while it 
was the custom of some of the masters to express their 
poverty, others would refer rather to the complete sufficiency 
of things. Thus while Hsiang-yen says: 


My last year’s poverty was not poverty enough; 

My poverty this year is poverty indeed. 

In my poverty last year there was room for a gimlet’s point; 
But this year even the gimlet has gone— 


Mumon emphasizes the other side of the picture: 


Hundreds of spring flowers, the autumnal moon, 
A refreshing summer breeze, winter snow— 
Free thy mind from idle thoughts, 

And for thee how enjoyable every season is! 


Here we find the acceptance and affirmation of the seasonal 
changes, and in the same way Zen accepts and affirms the 
birth, growth, decay and death of men; there are no regrets for 
the past, and no fears for the future. Thus the Zen disciple 
gains all by accepting all, since ordinary possessiveness is loss 


60 


The Secret of Zen 


—it is the denial of the right of people and things to live and 
change; hence the only loss in Zen is the loss of this denial. 

After all this the Western student will naturally be wonder- 
ing where ordinary morality comes into Zen. Every religion 
has had its moral code, and the Buddha summed up his 
teaching in the words: 


Cease to do evil; 

Learn to do well; 

Cleanse your own heart— 

This is the way of the Buddhas. 


It will be asked if there is not a grave danger in the Zen 
practice of accepting all things, both good and evil, as mani- 
festations of the Buddha-nature, for on such grounds it might 
be possible to justify any form of action. Indeed, this is a 
difficulty with which the Zen masters have had to reckon; 
immature disciples would frequently make the all-inclusive- 
ness of Zen an excuse for pure libertinism, and it is for this 
reason that the members of Zen communities observe a rigid 
discipline. The solution to the difficulty is that no one should 
undertake the practice of Zen without first having adapted 
himself to a thorough moral discipline. While morality 
should not be confused with religion, it does take one a 
certain distance towards the goal; it cannot go the whole way 
because it is essentially rigid, intellectual and limiting, and Zen 
begins where morality leaves off. At the same time, morality 
is valuable so long as it is recognized as a means to an end; it 
is a good servant, but a terrible master. When men use it as 
a servant it enables them to adapt themselves to society, to mix 
easily with their fellows, and most especially it permits free- 
dom for spiritual development. When it is their master, they 
become bigots and conventional ethical machines. But as a. 


61 


The Spirit of Zen 


means to an end it makes social existence possible; it guaran- 
tees men against obstruction from their fellows, and while it 
does not of itself produce spiritual understanding, it provides 
the necessary freedom for spiritual development. A garden 
fees be deciplmediao dae tie oli and flowers do not 
strangle each other, but the beauty of the garden is not in the 
discipline so much as in the things whose growth it has made 
possible. And just as the garden must be cultivated and 
planned before the flowers are allowed to grow, so the moral 
law must be mastered before the spiritual law, for just as the 
flowers might strangle each other, so might the followers of 
the spirit become wild libertines. Yet morality, in the ethical 
sense of being adapted to society, is not by itself sufficient 
preparation for Zen. Something stronger than this is needed 
if the tremendous power of the spirit is to be born in man 
without running amok, and that is self-discipline. In the 
fullest sense of the term this virtue is rare in human society, 
although no society can exist for long without it, and the long 
duration of Chinese civilization as compared with that of 
ancient Greece must primarily be attributed to the insistence 
of both Confucianism and Buddhism on a rigid self-discipline. 

Therefore the Zen masters have always insisted on a severe 
training as a preliminary to the practice of Zen. This training 
is picturesquely referred to as ‘the long maturing of the sacred 
womb’, and numerous stories are told of the discipline which 
the masters imposed upon themselves in the early stages of 
their development, of how they brought their thoughts and 
emotions under complete control, how they hardened them- 
selves to frost and snow in broken-down temples where ‘there 
were no roofs and the stars shone through at night’. There 
is a remarkable series of pictures known as the “Ten Stages 
of Spiritual Cow-herding’ which demonstrate this point 


62 


The Secret of Zen 
particularly well. The_task of understanding Zen is repre- 


sentedundertheallegory of aman catching and herding a cow, 
which is intended to symbolize the mind. There are ten pic- 
tures, showing the cow being traced, caught and brought 
under control until it is sufficiently well-behaved for the man 
to ride home on its back. Then the cow is forgotten, and the 
man is seen sitting quietly in his hut, while the next picture is 
just a blank circle entitled, “The Cow and the Man both gone 
out of sight’, for all illusions have been conquered and the 
whole objective world is seen as emptiness. But this is not all, 
for though the disciple has realized the evanescence of all forms 
he has not yet made direct contact with life itself; he has seen 
things as such as illusions, but he has not realized their funda- 
mental Buddha-nature. Therefore the next picture is called 
‘Back to the Origin, back to the Source’ and shows just a few 
sprays of grass by a stream, while in the last picture we see the 
Bodhisattva communicating what he has found to others in 
the form of the rotund, jolly Pu Tai—the god of good for- 
tune, who ‘enters the city with bliss-bestowing hands’. In 
the fifth picture where the cow is being led carefully back to 
the path the verse attached to it reads: 


Never let yourself be separated 

From the whip and the tether, 

Lest she should wander away 

Into a world of defilement; 

When she is properly tended 

She will grow pure and docile; 

Even without chain, nothing binding, 
She will by herself follow you. 


Restrictions can be discarded when the mind has been thor- 
‘oughly controlled and made to adopt right habits, but it is not 
until the last picture of all that the man ‘goes on his own way 


63 


The Spirit of Zen 


without following the steps of the ancient sages. Carrying a 
gourd he goes out into the market; leaning against a stick he 
comes home. He is found in company with wine-bibbers 
and butchers; he and they are all converted into Buddhas.” 


1 The Cowherding Pictures, complete with the commentaries and 
verses attached to them, will be found at the end of the first volume 
of Professor Suzuki’s Essays in Zen Buddhism. Two other versions of 
these pictures will be found in his Manual of Zen Buddhism. 


64 


The Technique of Zen 


Described in words, Zen has much in common with many 
other religions and philosophics; the ideas of poverty, free- 
dom, acceptance and direct contact with reality set forward in 
the previous chapter are found also in Taoism, Vedanta, Sufi- 
ism and the writings of many Christian mystics. Though Zen 
may go somewhat further than other systems in all these 
things, it is in no way radically different so far as the ultimate 
spiritual expericnce is concerned. In its methods, however, 
it is unique. Whercas the fate of almost every cult is to fall 
away in time from the spirit of its early followers, Zen has 
been able to preserve that spirit up to the present day; after 
more than 1,400 years it has in no way degenerated into mere 
‘philosophism’ or into the formal observance of precepts of 
which the original mcaning is no longer known. There are 
two reasons for this; firstly, that the criterion of Zen is a 
spiritual expericnce so definite that there can be no mistaking 
it, and secondly, that the early masters devised a means of 
passing on their teaching which can never be explained away 
by the intcllect—a means which, if put into use at all, can only 
have one result, and that is this spiritual experience. These two 
factors are inseparable; the first is known as Satori and the 
second as the Kogu{pron. Ko-an). 

Satori is a definite experience in so far as the manner of its 
coming and its effects upon character are concerned; other- 
wise it is indefinable, for it is the sudden realization of the truth 


of Zen. Essentially Satori is a sudden experience, and it is 


“often described as a ‘turning over’ of the mind, just as a pair of 
65 


The Spirit of Zen 


scales will suddenly turn over when a sufficient amount of 
material has been poured into one pan to overbalance the 
weight in the other. Hence it is an expericnce which gener- 
ally occurs after a long and concentrated effort to discover the 
meaning of Zen. Its immediate cause may be the most trivial 
event, while its effect has been described by Zen masters in the 
most astonishing terms. A master wrote of his own experi- 
ence, ‘It was beyond description and altogether incommun- 
icable, for there was nothing in the world to which it could 
be compared. . . . As I looked round and up and down, the 
whole universe with its multitudinous sense-objects now 
appeared quite different; what was loathsome before, together 
with ignorance and passions, was seen to be nothing clse but 
the outflow of my own inmost nature, which in itself 
remained bright, true and transparent.’ Another wrote, 
“Whatever doubts and indccisions I had before were com- 
pletely dissolved like a piece of thawing ice. I called out 
loudly, ‘“‘How wondrous! How wondrous! There is no 
birth-and-death from which one has to escape, nor is there 
any supreme knowledge after which one has to strive.” ’ 
Some descriptions are even more vivid than these; in many 
cases it seemed as though the bottom had fallen out of the 
universe, as though the oppressiveness of the outer world had 
suddenly melted like a vast mountain of ice, for Satori is 
release from one’s habitual state of tenseness, of clinging to 
false ideas of possession. The whole rigid structure which is 
man’s usual interpretation of life suddenly drops to pieces, 
resulting in a sense of boundless freedom, and the test of true 
Satori is that he who experiences it has not the slightest doubt 
as to the completeness of his release. If there is anywhere the 
least uncertainty, the least feeling of ‘this is too good to be 
true’, then the Satori is only partial, for it implies the desire 


68 


The Technique of Zen 


to cling to the experience lest it should be lost, and until that 
desire is overcome the experience can never be complete. The 
wish to hold fast to Satori, to make sure that one possesses it, 
kills it in just the same way as it kills every other experience. 
But one’s own fecling of certainty is not the only test of 
Satori; the experienced master can tell at once whether the 
disciple has any doubts, firstly, by his intuition, and secondly, 
by testing the disciple with a Koan. 

While Satori is ‘the measure of Zen’, because without it 
there can be no Zen at all, only a heap of nonsense, the Koan 
is the measure of Satori. Literally the word “Koan’ means ‘a 
public document’, but it has come to mean a form of problem 
based on the actions and sayings of famous masters. It is a 
problem which admits of no intellectual solution; the answer 
has no logical connection with the question, and the question 
is of such a kind as to baffle the intellect altogether. Here are 
some examples: 


‘A sound is made by the clapping of two hands. What is 
the sound of one hand?’ 

“A long time ago a man kept a goose in a bottle. It grew 
larger and larger until it could not get out of the bottle 
any more; he did not want to break the bottle, nor did 
he wish to hurt the goose; how would you get it out?” 

“When the Many are reduced to the One, to what is the 
One to be reduced?” 

‘Here is a man on a tree holding one of the branches in his 
mouth, but ncither clinging to any of them with his 
hands nor touching the trunk with his feet. Someone 
at the foot of the tree asks him, ““What is Zen?” If he 
does not answer the question, he cannot satisfy the man, 
but ifhe speaks, even a word, he will at once fall down 


69 


The Spirit of Zen 


to death. At such a moment, what answer would you 
make if you were he?’ 


To Westerners these Koans may appear as pure rubbish, 
reminiscent of ‘Why is a mouse when it spins?’ But it will be 
noticed that all of these Koans involve one in some kind of 
dilemma; there is generally a choice between two alternatives, 

both of which are equally impossible. Thus each Koan reflects 
the giant Koan of life, for to Zen the problem of life is to pass 
Bey nadlilc Ovo Sinan cick seriodan and denial, both of 
which obscure the truth. Thus a less ‘nonsensical’ Koan is the 
already quoted, “Beyond assertion and denial say one word 
of Zen, or thirty blows for you!’ Every Koan must eventu- 
ally lead to this impasse. One begins by trying to grapple with 
it intellectually; it is found to contain a certain amount of 
symbolism and analogy. Thus in the tale about the goose we 
find that the goose represents man and the bottle his circum- 
stances; he must either abandon the world so as to be free of it, 
or else be crushed by it, but both of these alternatives are 
forms of suicide. What purpose is to be served by abandoning 
the world, and what can we achieve if we allow it to crush us? 
Here is the fundamental dilemma with which the Zen disciple 
is confronted, and somehow he must find a way through. 
The moment he finds it there comes the flash of Satori; the 


goose is out of the bottle and the bottle is unbroken, for sud- 
de nly the disciple has escaped from the bondage of his own 
€ whic 


imaginary prison—the rigid view o e himself has 
created out of his desire for possession. Thus to the question, 
“How shall [escape from the Wheel of Birth and Death?’ a 
master replied, “Who puts you under restraint?” 

Many Western students are under the impression that Zen 
‘meditation’ (i.e. work on the Koan) is a form of self-hypnosis, 


70 


The Technique of Zen 


its object being to induce a state of trance. Acting on this 
impression, Mr Arthur Walcy has described Zen as ‘Quiet- 
ism’, Reischauer as ‘mystical self-intoxication’, and Griffiths 
as ‘mind murder and the curse of idle reverie’ (Religions of 
Japan, p. 255). The exact opposite is the truth; work with a 
Koan, to be successful, must have none of the passivity of 
Quietism; as for ‘mind murder and the curse of idle reverie’, 
a few days’ sojourn in a Zen community would dispose of any 
suspicion of idle reverie, while the accusation that Zen is ‘mind 
murder’ is no more true than the charge that it upsets all 
morality. For like morality, the mind (intellect) is a good 
servant and a bad master, and while the rule is for men to 
become enslaved by their intellectual modes of thought, Zen 
aims at controlling and surpassing the intellect, but as in the 
case of the goose and the bottle, the intellect, like the bottle, 
is not destroyed. For the Koan is not a means of inducing 
trance as if some kind of trance were the highest possible 
attainment for human beings; it is simply a means of breaking 
through a barrier, or as the Zen masters describe it, it is a brick 
with which to knock at a door; when the door is opened, the 
brick may be thrown away, and this door is the rigid barrier 
which man erects between himself and spiritual freedom. 
When the door is opencd at the moment of Satori, the dis- 
ciple passes not into a trance but into a new attitude towards 
life which reflects itself in a character of remarkable beauty. 
These misinformed Western critics must be confusing Zen 
proper with a schism certainly as old as the time of Hui Neng, 
the Sixth Patriarch, who remarked that there were some dis- 
ciples who imagined that all one had to do was to sit still with 
a perfectly vacant mind, but on more than one occasion he 
said emphatically that such persons were no better than 
inanimate objects, than blocks of wood and pieces of stone. 


71 


The Spirit of Zen 


Far from being an exercise in passivity, the Koan involves 
the most tremendous mental and spiritual struggle, requiring 
what the masters call a ‘great spirit of inquiry’. Thus master 
Ku-mei Yu writes: ‘Once lifted up before the mind, never let 
the Koan slip off; try to see with all the persistence you find in 
yourself into the meaning of the Koan given you, and never 
once waver in your determination to get into the very bottom 
of the matter... . Do not makea guess-work of your Koan; 
do not search for its meaning in the literature you have 
learned; go straight at it without leaning on any kind of inter- 
mediary help.’ Once work upon a Koan has been started a 
whole mass of ideas will arise in the mind—symbolical mean- 
ings, associations, possible solutions and all manner of wander- 
ing thoughts. These must be ruthlessly thrust aside, and the 
more insistent they become, the more intensely must the dis- 
ciple concentrate on the Koan itself, striving to penetrate the 
dilemma which it presents. From time to time the master will 
interview the disciple to find out how he is progressing, and 
as often as the disciple offers a merely intellectual and logically 
thought out solution the master will disapprove and tell him 
to try again. Usually this process will continue for several 
ycars, until the disciple eventually reaches a complete impasse; 
he realizes that every intellectual solution is futile; he arrives 
at a state where the dilemma of life enshrined in the Koan 
becomes an overpowcring reality and a problem so urgent 
that it has been compared to a ball of red-hot iron stuck in 
one’s throat. Philosophically, we may understand perfectly 
that the great problem of life is to get the goose out of the 
bottle without hurting cither, to pass beyond assertion and 
negation, to find release from the impossible alternatives of 
overcoming the world by attempting to possess everything, 
or of letting ourselves be completely ruled by circumstances. 


72 


The Technique of Zen 


But that does not mean that we realize the problem as the 
most urgent of all necessities. The choice is between asserting 
ourselves against the world, trying to make all things submit 
to us, and, on the other hand, giving way entirely to ‘Fate’, 
denying our own capacity to achieve anything. Most of us 
shun the latter and attempt feebly to realize the former, by 
clinging fast to our mental and physical possessions, hoping 
gradually to add to their store. And while this first alterna- 
tive can never possibly be achieved, since the more we grasp 
the faster do the objects of our desire slip away, the thought 
of the second fills us with the horror of eternal death. If this 
ever occurs to us asa problem it is only in a remote and philo- 
sophical way; it seems as far off as the Day of Judgement, and 
since there is plenty of time between now and then we can 
hope for a possible solution to ‘turn up’. 

But work with a Koan makes the problem an immediate 
reality, and when the impasse is reached the disciple is likened 
to a pursued rat that has run up a blind tunnel, to a man who 
has climbed to the end of a pole or reached the edge of a 
precipice in an attempt to flee from a raging fire. It is just 
when this most hopeless stage has been reached that the 
masters urge their disciples to redouble their efforts. A way 
must be found off the end of the pole and the rat must gather 
all its strength to break through the tunnel walls. In a work 
called The Mirror for Zen Students compiled by the master 
T’ui-yin it is said, ‘As the inquiry goes on steadily and uninter- 
ruptedly you will come to see that there is no intellectual clue 
in the Koan, that it is altogether devoid of sense as you ordin- 
arily understand the word, that it is entirely flat, devoid of 
taste, has nothing appetizing about it, and that you are begin- 
ning to have a certain fecling of uneasiness and impatience.’ 
After a while this feeling becomes intensified, and the Koan 


73 


The Spirit of Zen 

seems so overwhelming and impenetrable that the disciple is 
likened to a mosquito trying to bite a lump of iron, but ‘at the 
very moment the iron absolutely rejects your frail proboscis, 
you for once forget yoursclf; you penetrate, and the work is 
done’. There is no way of explaining this moment other than 
by saying that it is the time when the fetters of illusion snap 
asunder at the intense pressure of the disciple’s will. The Koan 
exercise is so devised as to concentrate the mind and stimulate 
the will to the highest degree, and in its later stages effort will 
be provoked simply by the increasing difficulty of the task. 
Thus when the final dilemma is faced the disciple will meet it 
with his entire strength, and as the tremendous force of his 
will meets with the stubbom resistance of the Koan, some- 
thing happens; just at the moment of ‘impact’ when the mos- 
quito jabs at the lump of iron, there comes the flash of Satori, 
and the disciple realizes that there was nothing in it after all! 
‘Nothing is left to you at this moment,’ writes a master, ‘but 
to burst out into a loud laugh.’ 

Our only means of discovering the why and wherefore of 
this experience is to turn to the sayings of the Zen masters 
themselves, and to see if we can gather anything from their 
descriptions of the ways in which it came upon them. A good 
example comes from Hakuin, who describes this last stage of 
the Koan exercise as follows: ‘When the disciple grapples with 
a Koan single-handedly, he will come to see that he has 
reached the limit of his mental tension, and he is brought to 
a standstill. Like the man hanging over the precipice, he is 
completely at a loss what to do next. ... All of a sudden he 
finds his mind and body wiped out of existence, together with 
the Koan. This is what is known as “letting go your hold.” 
As you become awakened from the stupor and regain your 
breath, it is like drinking water and knowing for yourself that 


74 


The Technique of Zen 


it is cold. It will be a joy inexpressible.’ The important phrase 
in this quotation is ‘letting go your hold’. For if the Koan is 
taken to be a way of presenting in miniature the giant Koan of 
life, the great dilemma and problem at which every being is 
working, however unconsciously, then, in the same way as 
life itself, the Koan can never be grasped. The Zen masters 
distinguished between two kinds of phrases (chii)—the dead 
and the living—the dead being those which were amenable to 
logical analysis and solution, and the living being those which 
could never be confined to any fixed system of interpretation. 
Koans belong to the second type, for they share in life’s 
elusiveness and indefinability. Thus when the disciple comes 
to the final point where the Koan absolutely refuses to be 
grasped, he comes also to the realization that life can never 
be grasped, never possessed or made to stay still. Whereupon 
he ‘lets go’, and this letting go is the acceptance of life as life, 
as that which cannot be made anyone’s property, which is 
always free and spontaneous and unlimited. The Koan is a 
way of presenting the central problem of life in an intensified 
magnifies the impasse always reached by those who try to 
clutch anything that is alive in their desire that it may be 
possessed and made to surrender its own life to theirs. Yet 
they can never take hold of its life; all that they can have is its 
corpse, which must in time decay also. Therefore the Zen 
disciple is given something which cannot be killed by defini- 
tion and analysis; he must try to grasp it alive, and the 
moment he realizes, finally and absolutely, that it cannot be 
grasped, he lets go ing in a flash what a fool he has 
been to deny the right of all things to live by trying to gras 

them for his own. Thus at this moment he attains freedom 

75 


The Spirit of Zen 


attempt to shut the wind in a box, to kcep life alive without 
letting it live. 

There are, of course, various degrecs of Satori, and in order 
to reach the highest of these it is necessary to work with many 
Koans. There are said to be 1,700 of these Koans and though 
it will hardly be necessary for the disciple to solve all of them 
before his understanding of Zen is complete, it is exceedingly 
rare that one alone is sufficient to achieve the final Satori. 
In the early stages of Zen practice the flash of enlightenment 
will last only for a few seconds, while as time goes on it 
will become more permanent, until at last the disciple has a 
Satori which sweeps away every shadow of doubt and un- 
certainty. There are certain similarities between Satori and 
the “Sudden Conversion’ of Christianity. William James 
gives some remarkable instances of this in his Varieties of 
Religious Experience, and it is interesting to compare them 
with the records left by the Zen masters. James gives an 
instance of a man who was trying to pray, and evcry time he 
attempted to call on God he felt that something was choking 
him. 


Finally something said: ‘Venture on the atonement, for you will 
die anyway if you don’t.’ So I made one final struggle to call on 
God for mercy, with the same choking and strangling, determined 
to finish the sentence of prayer for mercy, if I did strangle and die, 
and the last I remember that time was falling back on the ground 
with the same unseen hand on my throat... . When I came to the 
very heavens seemed to open and pour down rays of light and 
glory. Not for a moment only, but all day and night, floods of 
light and glory seemed to pour through my soul, and oh, how I 
was changed, and everything became new. My horses and hogs 
and everybody seemed changed. 


James shows that in almost every case the sudden conversion 


76 


The Technique of Zen 


is preceded by a feeling of acute despair and wretchedness, 
somewhat similar to the final impasse of the Koan. He notes 
that Protestant theology with its emphasis on the fundamental 
sinfulness and impotence of man lends itself especially to this 
type of experience. ‘In the extreme of melancholy the self 
that consciously is can do absolutely nothing. It is completely 
bankrupt and without resource, and no works it can accom- 
plish will avail.’ There follows the complete surrender of the 
soul to God, which is in some ways similar to what Hakuin 
describes as ‘letting go your hold’. A French Protestant, 
Adolphe Monod, speaking of his own experience of conver- 
sion, says, ‘Renouncing then all merit, all strength, abandon- 
ing all my personal resources, and acknowledging no other 
title to His mercy than my own utter misery . . . I prayed as 
Thad never yct prayed in my life.’ Many converts speak of the 
results of this final surrender as giving them an entircly new 
outlook on life, whereby everything becomes transformed 
and made full of the Glory of God. Here it is interesting to 
compare the Zen masters’ records of the after-effects of 
Satori; Hakuin says, ‘It is like drinking watcr and knowing for 
yourself that it is cold. It will be a joy incxpressible,’ while 
another master already quoted is even more emphatic, saying, 
‘As I looked round and up and down, the whole universe . . . 
appeared quite different; whatever was loathsome before . . . 
was seen to be nothing else but the outflow of my inmost 
nature, which in itself remained bright, true and transparent.’ 
Another expresses it in a verse— 


Oh, this one rare occurrence, 

For which would I not be glad to give ten thousand pieces of gold! 

A hat is on my head, a bundle around my Icins; 

And on my staff the refreshing breeze and the full moon I carry! 
(Trans. SuZUKI.) 


77 


The Spirit of Zen 


Here we see that something altogether new has been found in 
the monk’s ordinary mushroom hat, his travelling bundle, 
the breeze and the moon. Again, there is the story of master 
Yao-shan— 


One eve he climbed 
Straight up the solitary peak; 
Revealed in the clouds the moon he saw, 
And what a hearty laugh he gave! 
(Trans. SuzuKI.) 


Once more we are reminded of P’ang-yiin's 


How wondrously supernatural, 
And how miraculous, this! 
I draw water, and I carry fuel! 


Turning from Zen to Christianity we find something closely 
akin to this in another record quoted by James: 


I plead for mercy, and had a vivid realization of forgiveness and 
renewal of my nature. tWhen rising from my knees I exclaimed, 
‘Old things have passed away, all things have become new.” It was 
like entering another world, a new state of existence. Natural 
objects were glorified, my spiritual vision was so clarified that I 
saw beauty in every material object of the universe, the woods 
were vocal with heavenly music. 


But the Zen masters are more subtle and reserved in their 
allusions to the joy of their new life; for some reason they 
do not appear to be so serious about it as the Christian mystics, 
and only rarely do they speak of their rapture at finding so 
priceless a treasure. They will describe quite vividly the one 
; ee eee ? 
moment’s flash of illumination which seems to shake the 
whole universe, but as to what follows they only hint, and 


78 


The Technique of Zen 


speak of it in the most matter-of-fact terms. Thus Chao-pien 
writes of it as 


A sudden clash of thunder, the mind-doors burst open, 
And lo, there sitteth the old man (the Buddha-nature) in all his 
homeliness. 


And thereafter they refer to their realization in terms of the 
most ordinary affairs, for their object is to show Zen as 
something perfectly natural, as intimately related to everyday 
dife, while the Buddha is just ‘the old man in all his homeliness’; 
he has been there all the time, for his home is ordinary life, but 
nobody recognizes him! 

There is a famous Zen parable which fitly sums up this 
particular attitude to life. It is said that to those who know 
nothing of Zen mountains are just mountains, trees are just 
trees, and men are just men. After one has studied Zen for 
a little time, the emptiness and transcience of all forms is 
perceived, and mountains are no longer mountains, trees no 
longer trecs, and men no longer men, for while ignorant 
people believe in the reality of objective things, the partially 
enlightened see that they are only appearances, that they have 
no abiding reality and pass away like drifting clouds. But, 
the parable concludes, to him who has a full understanding of 
Zen mountains are once again mountains, trees are trees, and 
men are men. 

Thus while the main characteristics of Satori and Sudden 
Conversion are the same, they are approached and interpreted 
in very different ways. In the first place, Conversion is held 
to come to essentially depraved Man from an external God, 
while Satori is the realization of one’s own inmost _nature. 
Conversion takes place when something comes from outside 
and transforms the world, while Satori is just seeing the world 


79 


The Spirit of Zen 


asit really is, for to Zen the supernatural is natural, while to 
Christianity it is something not inherent in nature at all; it is 
at certain times brought to nature by the Grace of God; 
heaven comes down to earth and supersedes nature. But in 
Zen there is no dualism of heaven and earth, natural and 
supernatural, Man and God, material and spiritual, mortal 
and immortal, for ordinary men and Buddhas, Samsara and 
Nirvana, Avidya (Ignorance) and Bodhi (Enlightenment) are 
the same; it is one’s own spiritual realization that makes the 
difference, and 


The mind is its own place, and of itself 
Can make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven. 


Therefore the mind is the key to life, for under illusion it 


creates confusion and when clarified it reveals the Buddha- 
nature. Thus in Zen, as in almost all the religions of the East, 
the essential task is to master the mind. This is achieved 
primarily through the Koan exercise, and to assist this task the 
Zen masters have evolved a technique of meditation or Za-zen 
whichenables the disciple to relax the body, banish wandering 
thoughts and preserve his nervous energy so that he may 
devote his entire strength to the Koan. The elements of Za- 
zen were probably derived from Indian Yoga, for a similar 
posture is adopted and careful attention is paid to correct 
breathing. But the aims of Yoga and Za-zen appear to be 
rather_different, for the Zen masters discourage the various 
kinds of trance which are considered so important in Yoga 
psychology. They point out that although certain types of 
trance may possibly arise, they are not the objectives of the 
exercise; they declare, on the contrary, that wisdom can never 
be found by seeking after these static and othcr-wordly states 
of consciousness, for the Chinese mind required something 


80 


The Technique of Zen 


altogether more vital and practical. This is not to imply that 
Za-zen is right while Yoga is wrong, but that different types 
of mind will find Enlightenment in different ways; what may 
be right for the Indian is wrong for the Chinese, because the 
inhabitants of cold or temperate climates will require some- 
thing more vigorous than the inhabitants of tropical regions, 
where life finds it possible to carry on with a minimum of 
exertion. 

The aim of Za-zen is simply to release the mind from having 
to think about the body, and to reduce all distractions so that 
its whole attention may be directed to a particular task. The 
periods of the day set aside for Za-zen in a Zen monastery 
(Zendo) are thus for intense work upon the Koan, although 
the masters advise that the Koan should be kept in mind at all 
times of the day, whatever one’s occupation and circumstances 
may be. But it must be remembered that Za-zen and the Koan 
are not, in themselves, the objectives of the Zen life. They are 
a form of spiritual gymnastics to assist in bringing about a 
certain experience, and when that experience has been attained, 
the devices used for producing it can be discarded. For the aim 
of Zen is not to retire for ever from the world into solitary 
meditation; such retirement is only a means of obtaining 
knowledge, which, to be of any use, must be applied to the 
Bodhisattva’s task of bringing wisdom to all the world. To 
confuse this objective with sitting in Za-zen and working at 
Koans i once spain to mistake The niger for the moon, there- 
in the commentary to the Cowherding Pictures, ‘When you 
know that what you need is not the snare or the net, but the 
hare and the fish, it is like gold separated from dross, like the 


moon rising out of the clouds.’ 


81 


Life in a Zen Community 


The Buddha’s first action after his Enlightenment was to 
found his Order (Sangha) of homeless mendicants—wander- 
ing sages who had sacrificed all for learning and spreading the 
Law, begging their means of livelihood from those to whom 
they preached, and living in the greatest simplicity with no 
other possessions than ‘one robe and one bowl, under a tree 
and ona stone’. Originally they were not ascetics who stinted 
themselves as a penance; they did not regard simplicity as an 
end in itself, but merely as a means of relieving themselves of 
all encumbrances so that their whole energy might be directed 
to the one important task of finding Enlightenment for them- 
selves and for others. Not long after the Buddha’s death these 
homeless mendicants began to gather together in monastic 
communities, and as the years went by their numbers in- 
creased rapidly; communities (viharas) began to spring up all 
over India, spreading in time to Ceylon, Tibet and China, and 
to this day the members of the Sangha may be found over the 
whole of Eastern Asia, in the Hawaiian Islands and even in 
Western America. 

Needless to say, Buddhism did not escape from any of the 
evils of monasticism. The original ideal of the monk (bhikku) 
was very high; his social function was the important task of 
acting as ‘guide, philosopher and friend’ to the community, in 
retum for which he was supported by gifts of food. Because 
the principles of Buddhism inculcated the greatest reverence 
for all things in the universe, he was careful to use everything 
given to him to its fullest extent so that nothing might be 


83 


The Spirit of Zen 


wasted; his clothes were supposed to be cast-off rags, and even 
when these fell to pieces some goodness was still to be found 
in them for they were made into mops to clean out the vihara. 
All things were of value, and nothing might be despised, noth- 
ing cast away if it were still capable of being used. But if an 
institution which maintains itself by begging is to retain its 
original purity for long, its members must be highly developed 
beings, and as these are few and far between the Buddhist 
monks tended to become lazy and degenerate, living on 
the community as parasites pandering to the superstitions 
of ignorant folk. Monasteries became rich with the gifts of 
princes and wealthy merchants, until the monk’s home of 
‘under a tree and on a stone’ became in many places a vast 
and highly adorned palace. Cast-off rags became gorgeous 
robes of silk, while the heads of monasteries assumed all 
the dignity and even the power of temporal rulers. These 
developments were not without redeeming features, for the 
increasing richness of the monastic communities enabled 
their members to produce magnificent works of art to which 
the imagery and symbolism of Buddhism lent itself with 
great ease. 

By the Sixth Century a.p. the monastic Buddhism of China 
had reached a high stage of development, and the records say 
that there were communities numbering each a thousand or 
more monks, somewhat similar to the enormous monasteries 
to be found in Tibet and Mongolia at the present time, many 
of which are cities in themselves. From the beginning the Zen 
Patriarchs began to gather these communities about them, and 
just as Zen gave a new lift to the teachings of Buddhism, so 
also it gave a new lifeto monastic institutions. The evolution 
of the Zen community as it exists to-day must be dated from 
the time of the master Po-chang (Jap. Hyakujo), who died in 


84 


Life in a Zen Community 


A.D. 814. Po-chang recognized the need for establishing 
monastic institutions of a rather different kind from any that 
had hitherto existed, for while the communities of the time 
had become contemplative and other-worldly it was essential 
to the Zen life that itshould be in close touch with the ordinary 
labours of the world. If society was to be assisted in applying 
Buddhism to its everyday life little could be achieved if the 
recognized teachers of Buddhism were altogether removed 
from that life. Therefore Po-chang drew up a set of rules and 
precepts for a distinctively Zen community, and this work, 
known as the Po-chang Ching-kuei, has formed the basis of the 
monastic life of Zen Buddhism ever afterwards. 

Po-chang saw at once that if monastic life was to retain its 
vitality, it was essential that the monks should not live by 
begging alone. Thus the first principle of his regulations was 
that ‘a day of no working is a day of no eating’, and for this 
reason almost every Zen community is attached to a farm 
where rice and other vegetables are grown for the needs of the 
brotherhood. He insisted that every member of the com- 
munity must undertake some kind of labour, for Zen finds 
nothing degrading in even the most menial types of manual 
work, so much so that new-comers to the monastery are as a 
tule given lighter and morc attractive tasks than the monks of 
higher rank. Every institution is, as far as possible, self-con- 
tained and democratically governed; it has its own cooks, 
secretarial staff, administrators, proctors, builders, craftsmen 
and sextons, and while the master attached to each monastery 
has no particular part to play in the government and admin- 
istration of the community, he shares with its members in all 
the ordinary labours required for its maintenance. 

The life of the community centres round the Meditation 
Hall (Semmon Dojo)—a large rectangular building, varying 


85 


The Spirit of Zen 


in size according to the number of monks—and it is here that 
the inmates practise their Za-zen, keep thcir few belongings 
and sleep at nights. Apart from this there is the dining-hall, 
kitchen, lavatorics, sick-rooms, the master’s private apart- 
ments, the garden, and frequently woods and ficlds, besides a 
number of special offices and guest-rooms. Professor Suzuki 
has recently (1934) published a work on The Training of the 
Zen Buddhist Monk which is illustrated by a remarkable series 
of pictures by Zenchu Sato, who is a member of a large com- 
munity at Kamakura. These pictures do not pretend to have 
any great artistic value, but they give a very definite impres- 
sion of the esprit de corps of a Zen monastery, and one of the 
most noticeable things about them is the happiness and jollity 
of the monks as they go about their various tasks. Whether 
they are chopping wood, cooking the meals, washing clothes 
or shaving, there are laughing faces and obvious signs of great 
industry. In fact, the industry of Zen monks has become pro- 
verbial, and in Japan when someone’s house is said to be like a 
Zen monastery it means that it is scrupulously clean and tidy. 
To guard against the dangers of libertinism, life is regulated 
with a strict discipline; all important functions are carried out 
with precision and regularity, so much so that they appear to 
be ceremonies. Waste of both time and material is reduced to 
a minimum, and the monk’s possessions are so few that they 
are just enough to make a pillow for him to sleep on at night. 
But this is not because the ideal of Zen is asceticism; Zen is no 
more asceticism than it is any other form of life, for Zen is an 
attitude towards life, and as such it believes in using just the 
right amount of time, energy and material required to achieve 
a given object—no more and no less. 

While some of the Zen monasteries in Japan are treasure 
houses of both Chinese and Japanese works of art—paintings, 


86 


Life in a Zen Community 


pottery, bronzes, lacquer and carved wood—these objects are 
not displayed with the same profusion that is found in the 
temples of other sects. The decoration of a Zen monastery is, 
as a rule, carried out with the same spirit of economy which 
prevails in the discipline and ceremonial. The aim is that each 
work of art shall be fully appreciated, and this is impossible if 
too many are displayed at a time. Thus the prevailing atmos- 
phere of a Zen monastery is one of severe simplicity, relieved 
here and there by carefully selected objects of great beauty; 
but this simplicity must not be taken to mean the mere absence 
of adornment. Zen has so influenced architecture and the art 
of furnishing that the very structure of rooms is beautiful 
in itself apart from any additional omamentation. Thus the 
subtly tinted paper screens (shoji) which form the walls of a 
Japanese room, the wooden frames upon which they are 
stretched, the dull yellow of the rice-straw mats (tatami) on the 
floor, and the long, low, expansive lines of the buildings have 
an indefinable, quiet beauty of their own even though made 
of the simplest and most inexpensive materials. The Medita- 
tion Hall itself is such a room as this, its own object of adorn- 
ment being the shrine of the Buddha (Butsudan) standing in 
the centre of the Hall with perhaps just a single spray of 
flowers sct before it. The Hall itself is long and narrow, 
panelled on either side with plain shoji of a faint greyish tint, 
concealing entrances into the surrounding courtyards or 
gardens and cupboards where the monks kcep their bedding. 
Parallel to the walls down either side of the Hall are low plat- 
forms upon which the monks sleep and practise their Za-zen. 
At the time of meditation they come into the Hall in proces- 
sion and take their seats on these platforms facing the centre of 
the room. The head monk goes forward and prostrates him- 
self before the shrine, while outside another monk summons 


87 


The Spirit of Zen 


any members of the community who happen to be late by 
beating on a flat wooden gong bearing the inscription: 


Birth and death is a grave event; 
How transient is life! 

Every minute is to be grudged, 
Time waits for nobody. 


The head monk then lights a stick of incense to mark the time, 
and when he has returned to his seat Za-zen begins. At this 
point two other monks rise from their seats and approach the 
shrine, bowing to each other and to the figure of a Bod- 
hisattva, whereupon each takes up a flat, tapering piece of 
wood (keisaku), and after a further bow they separate and go 
to opposite sides of the Hall. Then they begin to walk back- 
wards and forwards in front of the two rows of meditating 
monks, keeping a careful look out for anyone who shows 
signs of drowsiness. At first they walk swiftly, but after a 
while they slow down their pace, treading more and more 
softly until they move like shadows. Suddenly one of them 
stops before a monk who appears to be sleepy, and giving him 
a few sharp slaps across the shoulders with the keisaku, restores 
him at once to full consciousness. After a while they return to 
their seats, and meditation continues until the stick of incense 
has burnt down to the end, whereupon the head monk sounds 
a bell and strikes together two wooden clappers. This is the 
signal for relaxation and exercise, and at once the shoji are 
pushcd aside to let in the air. Then, falling into a column, the 
monks begin to march swiftly and quietly round the Hall, 
gathering speed as they go, and when another stick of incense 
has bumt down the head monk strikes the clappers again. 
Refreshed by their exercise the monks return to meditation, 
and these periods of Za-zen and exercise continue for some 


88 


Life ina Zen Community 


three hours until it is time for the principal meal of the day, 
which takes place at ten o'clock. 

Every monk keeps a nest of small eating-bowls in a wooden 
box, wrapped ina napkin. At meal times he takes these out of 
his cupboard in the Hall and proceeds to the dining-room 
where long wooden tables, standing about a foot from the 
ground, have been prepared. The Zen monk has three meals 
a day—breakfast at a little after four o'clock in the morning, 
the principal meal at ten, and what is known as ‘medicinal 
food’ at five. Members of the Sangha are not supposed to eat 
after the middle of the day, but since climatic conditions 
in Japan will not allow this, the aftemoon meal is called 
‘medicinal’, being composed of what is left over from the meal 
at ten. In a Zen monastery the eating of food is attended with 
a special ceremonial which begins with the recitation of a 
short sutra, followed by the ‘Five Meditations on Eating’: 


Firstly, let us reflect on our own work, let us see whence comes this 
offering of food; 

Secondly, let us reflect how imperfect our virtue is, whether we 
deserve this offering; 

Thirdly, what is most essential is to hold our minds in control and be 
detached from the various faults; 

Fourthly, that this is medicinal and is taken to keep our bodies in 
good health; 

Fifthly, in order to accomplish the task of Enlighteninent, we accept 
this food. 

(Trans. SuzuR1.) 


When this recitation is finished, two monks come forward 
with a great wooden bowl of rice which they serve out to the 

1 The ideas expressed in this and other ‘recitations’ quoted are not 
peculiar to Zen. They have been adopted by the Zen monks as part 
of the usual ceremonial used in Buddhist monasteries in the Far East. 


89 


The Spirit of Zen 


company, followed by another monk who hands out pickled 
vegetables. Another serves tea, and when all have been given 
their food, each scts a small portion of his mcal on the edge of 
the wooden table as an offering to the unscen spirits, saying: 


O you of the spiritual worlds, 
I now offcr this to you; 
Let this food fill the ten quarters 
And all the spirits enjoy it. 
(Trans. SUZUKI.) 


Afterwards these offerings are taken outside for the birds. As 


they eat the monks continue to meditate on the principles 
of Buddhism— 


The first morscl is to destroy all evils, 
The second morsel is to practise all good decds, 
The third morsel is to save all sentient beings— 
May we all attain the path of Buddhahood. 
(Trans. SUZUKI.) 


The repast is continued in silence, while the attendants give 
second helpings to those who signify that they want morc by 
folding their arms before them; those who have had enough 
simply rub thcir hands together as the attendant passcs. Not 
a scrap of food is Ieft in the bowls, which are cleaned by pour- 
ing the remainder of the tca from one to the other, swilling it 
round and finally drinking it. They are then wiped with the 
napkin and replaced in thcir boxes, to the accompaniment of 
a further recitation: 


Having finished this meal, my bodily strength is fully restored; 
My powcr extends over the ten quarters and through the three periods 
of time, and I am a strong man; 


90 


Life in a Zen Community 


As to reversing the wheel of cause and effect, no thought is to be 
wasted over it. 
May all beings attain miraculous powers! 
(Trans. SuzuK1.) 
Or alternatively: 


As the skies are limitless, so shall be my compassion to all sentient 
beings. 

The mind released should be free and unclinging to things of the 
earth. 

As the flowers of the lotus are lovely and unstained, rising up from 
the mud, so shall my meditations be even though living in this 
world of illusion. 

With mind so purified I offer homage to the Buddha, the Enlightened 
One. 


Twice a day the master of the monastery holds interviews 
with the monks to find out how they arc progressing with their 
Koans and to give personal instruction. These interviews arc 
known as San-zen, and are attended voluntarily. The great 
bulk of written teachings on Zen consists of records of such 
interviews as these, several of which have already been quoted. 
The monk is ushered into the master’s room with all due 
observance of monastic conventions; there is much bowing 
and ringing of bells, but as soon as the interview begins con- 
ventions are altogether set aside. Thus the master may begin 
by asking the monk some question, frequently the Koan on 
which he has been working. Thus Shih-kung asked: 

‘Can you take hold of empty spacc?” 

‘Yes, sir,’ replied the monk. 

“Show me how you do it.’ 

The monk made a clutching movement in the air with his 
hand, but Shih-kung exclaimed: 

‘Is that the way? But after all you have not got anything.’ 


91 


The Spirit of Zen 


Therefore the monk asked, “What, then, is your way?” 

Immediately Shih-kung took hold of the monk’s nose, and, 
giving it a sharp pull, called out: 

‘That i: the way to have good hold of empty space!” Or it 
may be that the monk will open the interview by asking the 
master a question, as for instance: 

“What do you say when I come to you with nothing?’ 

‘Fling it down to the ground.’ 

‘I said that I had nothing, what shall I let go?” 

‘If so, take it away.’ 

Even to hold on to the idea that Zen is to possess nothing is 
to miss the truth. 

Shih-kung’s pulling of his disciple’s nose is no unusual 
behaviour in these interviews, but this is neither madness nor 
brutality; in so far as it is possible to give a rational explanation 
of it, its meaning is to demonstrate Zen by some very positive 
action, showing that Zen is actual living reality. Mere obscure 
words or strange movements might be interpreted as sym- 
bolism, but about a smack on the face there can be no mistake; 
here is something thoroughly alive, so quick that it cannot be 
grasped, so emphatic that there can be no ‘philosophizing’ 
about it. Words can be written down; they can be depended 
upon to stay still and imagined to contain the truth, but a 
smack is a smack—once given it cannot be called back nor 
analysed nor used as a means of trying to confine truth to a 
permanent formula. Thus when someone says, ‘Zen is to see 
into one’s own nature,’ here is something one can hold on to 
as expressing the truth of Zen, yet that is to miss it altogether. 
But when the master just gives a smack one cannot hold on to 
it at all, and for that reason he has really expressed the truth of 
Zen. 

Sometimes the master of a monastery will give a more 


92 


Life ina Zen Community 


formal kind of instruction than San-zen. This is the teisho—a 
discourse on the inner meaning of one of the Zen text-books, 
when the master addresses the whole community gathered 
together. These discourses are usually given at the time of 
year when Za-zen is practised more frequently than usual; that 
is to say, during the weeks when some important event in the 
life of the Buddha is being commemorated. These periods are 
known as Sesshin, and the monks rise at two in the moming 
instead of at four, spending almost the whole day in the 
Meditation Hall. San-zen is held more frequently, and less 
time is devoted to the ordinary work of running the monastery, 
which usually occupies most of the day. The giving of a 
teisho is attended with much ceremonial and sutra recitation. 
The monks put on a special robe and go to the lecture hall in 
a solemn procession; the master arrives shortly afterwards 
accompanied by two attendants, and having made his obeis- 
ance before the image of the Buddha he takes his seat on a high 
chair, before which a reading-desk has been placed. Then he 
may read a passage from the Zen records, stopping to explain 
various points, or else he may deliver a Zen ‘sermon’. If it 
should be the latter, unusual things are wont to happen. One 
day a master had just taken his seat when outside a bird began 
to sing. The master said nothing and everyone listened to the 
bird. When the song stopped the master simply announced 
that the sermon had been preached and went away. On 
another occasion the master stretched out his arms and re- 
mained silent. He was about to leave the hall when one of the 
monks asked him why he had said nothing, to which he 
answered, ‘The scriptures are expounded by the scripture 
teachers and the commentaries by the commentators. Why, 
then, do you wonder at me? Am I not a Zen teacher?’ 
Master I-tuan once said to his assembled monks, “To talk is 


93 


The Spirit of Zen 


blaspheming, to remain silent is deception. Beyond silence 
and talking there is an upward passage, but my mouth is not 
wide enough to point it out to you.’ So saying, he left the hall. 
Sometimes monks will come forward with questions, or clse 
the master will ask one of them to demonstrate his under- 
standing of Zen. Thus master Shou-shan began his discourse 
by producing a stick and asking, ‘Call this a stick and you 
assert; call it not a stick and you negate. Now, do not assert 
or negate, and what would you call it? Speak! Speak!’ 
Whereupon a monk came out of the assembly, seized the stick 
and broke it in two, asking, “What is this?’ All these strange 
utterances must be treated in the same way as the Koan; 
sometimes they contain obscure symbolism or references to the 
sayings of other masters which only learned students of Zen 
literature can understand, but these are only superficial 
difficulties. Intellectual analysis may reveal a fraction of their 
meaning, but essentially they are like smooth balls of steel. 
The harder the sword of intellect cuts at them, the faster do 
they jump away. 

At the conclusion of the master’s discourse the monks recite 


the ‘Four Great Vows’ before returning to the Meditation 
Hall— 


However innumerable sentient beings are, 
I vow to save them; 
However inexhaustible the passions are, 
I vow to extinguish them; 
However immeasurable the Dharmas are, 
I vow to study them; 
However incomparable the Buddha-truth is, 
I vow to attain it. 
(Trans. SuzuKI.) 


Apart from these specifically religious and ceremonial 


94 


Life ina Zen Community 


activities which have been described, the life of the Zen monk 
is occupied principally by the work of maintaining the 
monastery. But in Zen this too might be called specifically 
religious, for from the standpoint of Buddha-nature no one 
activity is more religious or holy than any other. Therefore 
Zen finds religion in everyday activities, laying particular 
emphasis on this finding, for the general rule is for men to seek 
religion apart from ordinary life. In the words of George 
Herbert, 


All may of Thee partake; 
Nothing can be so mean 

Which with this tincture, ‘For Thy sake,’ 
Will not grow bright and clean. 


A servant with this clause 
Makes drudgery divine. 

Who sweeps a room as for Thy laws 
Makes that and the action fine. 


This is pure Zen, except that Buddhists would say that they 
work not for God's sake, but for the Enlightenment of all 
sentient beings. Yet after all there is hardly so much difference 
as that between the two, for sentient beings are essentially the 
Buddha-nature, and to serve them is to serve the highest 
principle in the universe, to work in harmony with the 
supreme law of life which is that all beings are potentially 
Buddhas and that at some time they must become so in 
actuality. Jesus, too, said that on the Last Day God would say 
to His children, ‘Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the 
least of these My brethren, ye have done it unto Me.’ 

There are innumerable references in the literature of Zen to 
the discovery of Enlightenment in the ordinary work of life. 


95 


The Spirit of Zen 


Tai-an asked Po-chang, ‘I have been seeking for the Buddha, 
but do not yet know how to go on with my research.’ 

Po-chang replied, ‘It is very much like looking for an ox 
when you are riding on one.’ 

“What shall a man do after knowing him?’ 

‘It is like going home on the back of an ox.’ 

“May I be further enlightened as to the care I shall have to 
bestow on the whole matter?” 

‘It is like a cowherd,’ said Po-chang, ‘looking after his 
cattle, who using his staff keeps them from wandering into 
another’s pasture.’ 

When master Chao-chou was sweeping one of the rooms in 
his monastery a disciple asked him, “You are a great Zen 
master free from the dust of evil thoughts, and why this busy 
sweeping?’ Immediately the master replied, “The dust comes 
from outside!’ One day a master approached the keeper of the 
monastery granary while he was sifting rice through a sieve. 
The master said, 

‘Don’t scatter the grains, for they come from our kind- 
hearted donors.’ 

‘No, master, I won’t scatter them about.’ 

The master saw a single grain of rice lying on the ground, 
and, picking it up, asked, “You say you don’t scatter them 
about; if so, where does this grain come from?” 

The keeper said nothing, so the master spoke again: 

“Be careful not to think slightingly of this one grain of rice, 
for hundreds of thousands of grains all come out of it.’ 

In conclusion it should be made clear that not every Zen 
monk desires to remain for ever in a monastery. Having 
qualified as a master he may or may not take charge of another 
community; in many cases he will returm to the ordinary life 
of the world, or else become a wandering teacher of the Law, 


96 


Life ina Zen Community 


travelling from place to place and helping those whom he 
meets by the way. For the ideal of the Bodhisattva is not to 
remain apart from the world; it is to be in it, though not of it, 
to be an anonymous force for Enlightenment working in and 
through human society. Ifhe has any solitude it is the solitude 
which inevitably attaches itself to great wisdom. He cannot 
isolate himself from other beings, for in every creature he sees 
one of his other selves. Therefore if there is any isolation it is 
by reason of the barriers which others crect against him 
through fear of or indifference to his wisdom. It is not the 
selfish isolation of the hermit who tries to gain spiritual free- 
dom through physical freedom, for the Bodhisattva knows 
that the two are independent of each other. A man may be 
free to travel where he likes, but there is no place on earth 
where he can escape from his own Karma, and whether he 
lives ona mountain or inacity he may still be the victim of an 
uncontrolled mind. For man’s Karma travels with him, like 
his shadow. Indeed, it is his shadow, for it has been said, ‘Man 
stands in his own shadow and wonders why it is dark.’ 


97 


Zen and the Civilization 
of the Far East 


The ultimate test of any religion is its effect upon the lives of 
its followers, for “by their fruits ye shall know them’. There 
is, however, a tendency to judge thesc effects differently in the 
West than in the East, for Europcans will test the value of a 
religion by the success it achieves in bringing harmony into 
society as a whole, by the extent to which it improves the 
social condition of the masses, and by its capacity to reach and 
be understood by “all sorts and conditions of men’. But the 
religions of Asia were not originally intended to be ‘mass 
religions’, where they have become so they are altogether 
different from the forms in which they were first taught, for 
the East regards wisdom not as something to be handed out 
indiscriminatcly to all and sundry, but as the right of the few 
who show themselves capable of understanding and applying 
it in the correct way. In the West we have a saying that 
‘Knowledge is Power’, and yet we take great pains to convey 
this power to all people, irrespective of their fitness to be 
trusted with it. Thus whatever benefits may be derived from 
the wide distribution of knowledge, they are overbalanced by 
the terrible abuses of knowledge which lie at the root of nearly 
all the great problems of modern civilization. Nobody would 
dream of allowing a child to play with the switches in an 
electric power-house, and yet the wisdom of the West, 
which is Science, can become anyone’s property, whatever his 
motives for wishing to possess it may be. Perhaps the West is 


98 


The Spirit of Zen 


now begiiming to regret its wise men’s liberality with their 
knowledge, for in the last half-century we have seen physical 
science exploited for all kinds of destructive, immoral and 
anti-social ends. At the same time the West has hospitals, 
hygicnic sanitation and other material blessings which are 
altogether new to the East; yet it has to pay for them dearly 
when the two-edged blade of knowledge cuts the other way. 

The wisdom of the East is not physical but psychic and 
spiritual Science, and while the results of abusing physical 
Science are bad enough, the abuse of psychic and spiritual 
Science is immeasurably worse because it wrecks far more than 
men’s bodies. Fortunately the wise men of the East have 
chosen their disciples carefully and have veiled their deepest 
knowledge in myths and symbols understandable only by 
those whom they see fit to trust. Therefore Westerners have 
often accused them of jealousy, of selfishly hiding their wis- 
dom from the masses for fear that their own supremacy 
would be endangered if the whole world were to discover 
their secrets. But this is not so; the reason for their secrecy is 
that they havea far greater respect and reverence for wisdom 
than is usual in the West, for while we spread our wisdom 
abroad as if it were some cheap news item, they regard it as 
the most priceless of all treasures. In order to obtain it a man 
must sacrifice all that he has; he must be prepared to go to any 
lengths to show that he really does desire to lear and to make 
good use of his knowledge; in short he must prove that he 
values wisdom above all other things, that he regards it as a 
sacred trust never to be used for unworthy ends. It was for this 
reason that Shang Kwang had to cut off his arm after waiting 
for a week in the snow before Bodhidharma would see him. 

Yet the foregoing in no way conflicts with what has been 
said about the truth of Zen being revealed in ordinary life, or 


100 


Zen and Civilization of Far East 


with the fact that it is perfectly clear for those who have eyes 
to see. For the great treasure which cannot be had without so 
much sacrifice is not Truth itself; that is to be found every- 
where—with everyone and everything, whether its presence 
is realized or not; it is no more the property of wise men than 
of fools and lunatics, for the Buddha-nature is common to all. 
Therare treasure is the capacity to see Truth. Thus, like every 
other Eastern religion in its highest expression, Zen is for the 
few, though it differs from other forms of Buddhism, from 
Hinduism and Taoism, in that it has never had an exoteric or 
popular form. Therefore the immediate effects of Zen upon 
the civilization of the Far East must not be sought in the life 
of the masses except in so far as this was affected by rulers and 
administrators who had come into contact with the Zen 
masters. The effects of Zen will be found in the life and work 
of certain individuals and of various small groups of people, 
such as the samurai or warrior class of feudal Japan. In the 
East the effectiveness of a religion is judged by its success 
in producing a comparatively small number of thoroughly 
enlightened men, for it is not believed possible fundamentally 
to alter the lives of vast numbers of people within the span of 
a thousand years or so. Great social changes are not expected; 
the religions of the East are more concerned with the en- 
lightenment of some few individuals than of society asa whole, 
because society is made up of individuals, and will only be- 
come enlightened when, after thousands of years, more and 
more individuals have proved themselves fit for the highest 
knowledge, until the chosen few have become the whole 
community. 

In the history of the Far East the fruits of Zen are several 
hundred characters of such remarkable greatness that by them- 
selves they would be sufficient witness to the value of Zen, 


101 


The Spirit of Zen 


artistic achievements which equal anything produced at any 
other time or place in the world, a form of chivalry and 
military technique with good claim to be unsurpassed, and a 
surc foundation of expericnce for future work on a far greater 
scale. It is, of course, particularly difficult to give accurate 
descriptions of the characters of the great Zen masters and 
devotces, for their greatness was less in what thcy said or did 
than in what they were, and in the impression which they 
created upon those who came into contact with them. While 
it is true that many of them were supcrb artists or warriors of 
tremendous courage, their csscntial qualities were like Zen 
itself—unmistakable but quite indefinable. We must gather 
our own impressions of them from the accounts of their ways 
of teaching and from the pictures of them which have been left 
to us by artists deeply imbued with the spirit of Zen. As to the 
accounts of their teachings, many of these have been quoted; 
in all there is something forceful, spontaneous and unhesitat- 
ing. They waste no words; they avoid all forms of pedantry, 
and in answering questions they never evade the real issue by 
an abstract discourse, but say something which goes right to 
the heart of the questioner, touching him personally in a way 
that may be unintelligible to others. So keen is their intuition 
of another person’s state of mind that they are never taken in 
by those who try to deceive them with a second-hand know- 
ledge of Zen. Master Chu-hung was once writing a book on 
the ten laudable deeds of a monk, when one of these pre- 
tenders asked him, “What is the use of writing such a book 
when in Zen there is not even an atom of a thing to be called 
laudable or not?’ “The five aggregates of personality are 
entangling,’ replied the master, ‘and the four elements grow 
rampant, and how can you say there are no evils?’ “The four 


102 


Zen and Civilization of Far East 


elements, countered the other, ‘are ultimately all empty and 
the five aggregates have no reality whatever.’ This remark 
elicited a slap on the face, with the reproof, ‘So many are mere 
learned ones; you are not the real thing yet. Give me another 
answer.’ The monk was furious, and making no answer he 
was about to go away whenthe master smiled at him and said, 
‘There, why don’t you wipe the dirt off your own face?” 
There is a remarkable triptych by the Japanese painter 
Jasoku, showing Bodhidharma, Lin-chi and Te-shan—three of 
the greatest exponents of Zen. The portrait of Bodhidharma 
is of the head and shoulders alone, loosely draped with a 
flowing wrap, which covers his head and falls over his 
shoulders, showing just the face and chest. The easy lines of 
the wrap contrast sharply with his powerful features, pro- 
minent eyebrows, a rough moustache reaching from below 
his aquiline nose to the extremities of a great square jaw, 
fringed with a short bushy beard. But the whole force of the 
picture is concentrated in the eyes. Thcy look slightly up- 
wards and to one side, with lids wide open, and with steady, 
penetrating gaze he seems to be watching intently at some- 
thing just over one’s head. Bodhidharma is sometimes 
referred to as the ‘Bearded Barbarian,’ yet in spite of the 
huge moustache, shaggy eyebrows and unkempt beard there 
is something in Jasoku’s picture essentially aristocratic. Here is 
no contemplative, dreamy Buddhism; the artist has made 
Bodhidharma personify the dynamic and positive spontaneity 
of life. The same is true of his portrait of Lin-chi. Here the 
master is shown sitting in the posture of meditation with his 
hands clasped on his lap, and from beneath a high, smooth 
forehead, the same powerful and penetrating eyes are watch- 
ing. Yet in spite of his almost fierce countenance, the picture 


103 


The Spirit of Zen 


gives an unmistakable impression of the deepest calm and 
gentleness. For there was this paradox in the characters of all 


the Zen masters—the immovable equanimity and boundtess 
companion oF the Bodhisattva, combined with -a-wiatity 3s 

rilfiant and ruthless as lightning. This paradox reflected itself 
one Gan aman ee find the followers of Zen 
embracing the two seemingly incompatible parts of poet and 
soldier, lofty idealist and grim realist. When master So-gen 


was about to be beheaded by a gang of ruffians, he quietly sat 
down and wrote this verse: 


The heaven and earth afford me no shelter at all; 
I'm glad, unreal are body and soul. 
Welcome thy weapon, O warrior of Yuan! Thy trusty steel, 
That flashes lightning, cuts the wind of Spring, I feel. 
(Trans. NUKARIYA.) 


So also the great fencing master, Miyamoto Musashi: 


Under the sword lifted high, 
There is hell making you tremble; 
But go ahead, 
And you have the land of bliss. 
(Trans. SuzuRt.) 


Just as we find these two distinct elements in the characters of 
the Zen masters and their disciples, so do we find that Zen has 
influenced the civilization of the Far East in two directions—in 
aesthetics and in the military arts. On the one hand it was Zen 
which produced the poetry and other-worldliness of the tea- 
ceremony (cha-no-yu), the art of landscape gardening, the work 
of the Sung, Sumiye and Kano painters, the poetry of Basho 
and the quiet simplicity of Japanese architecture, while on the 
other it was Zen which produced the alarming technique of 
ju-jutsu and kenjutsu (fencing), and the stern principles of 


104 


Zen and Civilization of Far East 


bushido—the Samurai’s code of chivalry.1 Thus the paradox of 
Zen was that it could combine the peace of Nirvana with the 
intense activity of battle and the common tasks of everyday 
life. To quote Takuan once again, 


What is most important is to acquire a certain mental attitude 
known as ‘immovable wisdom.’ ... ‘Immovable’ does not mean 
to be stiff and heavy and lifeless as a rock or piece of wood. It 
means the highest degree of mobility with a centre which remains 
immovable. The mind then reaches the highest point of alacrity 
ready to direct its attention anywhere it is needed. ... There is 
something immovable within, which, however, moves along 
spontaneously with things presenting themselves before it. The 
mirror of wisdom reflects them instantaneously one after another, 
keeping itself intact and undisturbed. 


In the realm of aesthetics the first important traces of Zen 
influence are found in the art of the T’ang Dynasty (a.p. 618- 
905). At some time during the latter half of this period lived 
the greatest of all Chinese painters, Wu Tao-tzu. 7Unfor- 
tunately all of his work is now lost to us with the exception of 
one superb triptych, and many authorities hold that even this 
is a copy. This painting is to be found in one of the Zen 
monasteries_at shows the Buddha with the-two 


great Bodhisattvas, Manjusri and Samantabhadra; it is the 
central figure of the Buddha which holds one’s gaze. Con- 
temporaries describe the artist as painting ‘as if a whirlwind 
possessed his hand’ and its influence will certainly be seen if one 
looks into the details of this central figure. The lines forming 


the folds of the Buddha’s robe are sharp, bold and jagged, but 


the face bears an expression of such absolute serenity that it 


1 For the influence of Zen on the poetry and drama of Japan, see 
Mr E. V. Gatenby’s Cloud Men of Yamato-—also in this serics. 


105 


The Spirit of Zen 


dominates the whole picture, making it a symbol of the spirit 
of Zen; it is intense liveliness with a foundation of complete 
rest. As the Taoists would say, ‘Just because the axle moves 
not, the spokes revolve,’ or, ‘It is the principle of non-action 
that makes all things move.’ The same characteristics are 
found in the paintings of the Japanese school of Sumiye. These 
pictures were executed on a particular type of rough and brittle 
paper with a soft brush. The medium was black Chinese ink; 
there was no colouring, no elaboration, and the effect of the 
brittle paper was that a stroke once made could never be 
effaced, while if it were not to smudge it must be drawn swiftly 
and deftly. With such materials it was absolutely necessary for 
the artist to paint ‘as if a whirlwind possessed his hand’; there 
was no possibility of ‘touching up’; the least error made itself 
obvious, and if the artist were to stop and think in the middle 
of his stroke the result would be an ugly blot. Thistechnique 
was exactly suited to the spirit of Zen, for it implied that the 
artist must commit his inspiration to paper while it was still 
alive; he could not make a rough sketch and then slowly fill in 
the details, until the inspiration was killed by a mass of changes 
and elaborations. He must make the picture complete in a few 
moments, for it was like the Zen master’s slap on the face— 
sudden, irrevocable, definite and lively; a smack given slowly 
and tentatively is no smack at all but a feeble push—it has no 
life, no spontaneity. Similarly a picture that does not catch the 
inspiration while it lives but laboriously tries to resurrect it 
when it is dead is like a stuffed bird in a glass case; Sumiye 
catches the bird in a second before it has flown away—indeed, 
it allows it to fly away because it has no need to have it shot 
and stuffed so that the artist can examine its corpse at leisure. 
Thus the Sumiye artist must always ‘Walk on!’ for death 
follows life just one pace behind. 


106 


Zen and Civilization of Far East 


Yet for all the suddenness and immediacy of Sumiye it has 
its underlying calm, and that is in the elimination of non- 
essentials. This principle is much earlier than Sumiye, for it 
goes back to the very beginnings of Zen and further into the 
philosophy of Taoism, where it was taught as ‘economy of 
force’. In the Tao Te Ching it is said: 


A violent wind does not outlast the morning; a squall of rain 
does not outlast the day. Such is the course of Nature. And if 
Nature herself cannot sustain her efforts long, how much less can 
man! 


And again: 


The skilful traveller leaves no tracks; the skilful speaker makes 
no blunders. 
(Trans. LIONEL GILES.) 


For the good walker uses just the right amount of energy to 
move himself along; leaving no tracks he walks light and so 
raises no dust. The Taoist would saythatif a walker raises dust 
it is a signthat he is using energy which isnotabsorbedincarry- 
ing out his purpose; therefore it goes elsewhere and is wasted in 
stirring up the dust. While this analogy may besomewhat far- 
fetched, the basic principle is the secret of concentration and of 
success in any form of activity. It is to use just the right 
amount of energy required to achieve a given result, but as a 
rule man makes his life more difficult than it need be by wast- 
ing an enormous amount of his strength in every task that he 
undertakes. In the first place, the total energy expended is 
greater than what is required to achieve the task, and in the 
second, only a small portion of it is actually absorbed in that 
task because it is scattered far and wide instead of being 
directed at one point. Therefore master Po-chang said that 
Zen meant, ‘Eat when you are hungry, sleep when you are 


107 


The Spirit of Zen 


tired. ... Most people do not eat but think of various other 
things, thereby allowing themselves to be disturbed; they do 
not sleep but dream of a thousand and one things.’ The un- 
controlled mind uses up its energy over innumerable worries, 
distractions and wandering ideas instead of giving itself to one 
thing at a time, and for this reason it never achieves completely 
what it sets out to do, for the moment it begins on one thing 
it runs off to others, exhausing itself with a tremendous 
amount of wasted activity. In comparison with this the 
activity of Taoism and Zen may appear to be inconsiderable, 
yet this is only because they hold strength in reserve; their 
calmness is the result of a one-pointed attitude of mind; they 
take each thing as it comes, finish with it and pass on to the 
next, so avoiding all the useless running backwards and for- 
wards, worrying about the past and future, by which activity 
simply defeats itself. 

Thus ‘economy of force’ is the Zen principle of ‘going right 
ahead’, and in life as well as in art Zen never wastes energy in 
stopping to explain; it only indicates. Just as in philosophy it 
points to ‘the cypress tree in the courtyard’ or ‘the bamboo 
grove at the foot of the hill’ without further comment, with- 
out going into any metaphysical analysis, so in art it indicates 
the bare essentials without elaboration. For Zen is to see life 
for oneself, and if the philosopher and the artist describe all that 
there is to be seen, their descriptions become so easily a sub- 
stitute for first-hand experience. Therefore the purpose of 
philosophy and art is not to provide a reproduction of life in 
words or in paint, for the real thing is better than any repro- 
duction. Their purpose is to give one the hint to see for one- 
self. Hence the Chinese artists understood better than any 
others the value of empty spaces, and in a certain sense what 
they left out was more important than what they put in; it was 


108 


Zen and Civilization of Far East 


a tantalizing reticence, a vacuum which drew out curiosity; 
they lifted just a corner of the veil to excite people to find out 
for themselves what lay beyond. This was the Taoist principle 
of wu-wei, of arriving at action through non-action, With a 
few strokes of the brush the Sung artist could achieve more 
than others could achieve after weeks of painstaking labour, 
for his strength was in his ‘economy of force’. 

The great Zen painters of the Sung Dynasty (960-1279) 
were Kuo Hsi, MiFei, Ma Yuan and Mu Ch’i, and of these Ma 
Yuan was especially famed for painting just ‘one comer’. A 
fine example of his work is the picture of the ‘Solitary Angler’, 
where in the midst of a dim nothingness a small, frail boat is 
seen floating on water faintly suggested by a few soft curves, 
while the fisherman sits at one end with his line trailing out 
behind. One of Mu Ch’i’s masterpieces, called ‘In the Mom- 
ing Sun’, shows no sign of the sun at all—only the dimly out- 
lined figure of a little, bald-headed Zen monk, absorbed in 
plaiting a straw rope with one end tied to his big toe. The 
only solid part of the picture is formed by a few clumps of 
grass and shrubbery around the rock upon which he is sitting, 
against a light, hazy background suggesting the moming mist. 
At the end of the Sung Dynasty Zen began to die out in 
China, and the art of the Ming period showed tendencies 
towards over-elaboration and prettiness. The real tradition of 
Sung passed to Japan, where it was taken up by the schools 
of Sumiye and Kano, extending itself beyond painting to 
architecture, gardening and especially to the aesthetics of the 
tea-ceremony and all that it implied. 

The drinking of tea had always been associated with Zen, 
and from the earliest times the monks used it to keep them- 
selves awake during long periods of meditation. There is a 
gruesome legend as to its origin which tells that Bodhidharma 


109 


The Spirit of Zen 


once fell asleep during his meditaGions and was so furious that 
he cut off his eyelids. Falling to the ground they at once 
tumed into the first tea-plants, and ever afterwards the drink 
made from its leaves has kept off sleep and purified the soul. 
The elements of the teaceremony were brought to Japan from 
China, where the Zen monks used to pass a large bowl of tea 
from one to another while sitang in the Meditatior Hall, and 
the T’ang poet Luwuh in his famous work the Cha<hing (The 
Scripeare of Tea) laid the foundations of the ritual and philo- 
sophy of tea. Okakura Kakuzo writes that he ‘was born in an 
age when Buddhism, Taoism and Corfucanism were seeking 
mutual svnthesis. The pantheistic symbolism of the ume was 
urging one to mirror the Universal in the Parucular. Luwuh 
saw in the Tea-service the same harmony and order which 
reigned through all chines.’ Another poct of the same period 
said of tea: 
The Srst cup moistens my lips and chroae, the second cup breaks 
my looeliness, the third cup ec ae inmox beme.... The 
fourch cup rakes 2 dighr perspiration—ail the wrong solic: passes 
* away through my pores. Ar the mfth cup I am porified; che sixch 
cup ‘calls me to the realms of immoculs. The serench cup—zh, 
bas I cocld czke no more! I oak, feel che breach of cool wind that 
mses in my skeeves. Where is Heaven? Let me ride on this sweet 
breeze and wai away thither. 
Such were the feelings that became associated with tea~driok- 
ing, and by the time it came to Japan it was no mere com- 
modity; it was something much more than a drink made fom 
died leaves, for a Zen master could say, ‘Mark well that the 
taste of Zen (CA’an) and the caste of tea (che) are the same.’ 
This was not only a pun; gradually all the aeszhetic ideals of 
Zen had attached themselves to the ceremony of drinking tea, 
for while the monks used it co refresh chemselves during their 


110 


Zen and Civilization of Far East 
hard struggles with the Koan, they began to accompany it with 


a those things which bring quietness and peace of mind J 
was not long before the practice of drinking it in the Mcdita- 
tion Hall was discontinued, and instead a special room was set 
apart for the purpose. From this evolved the Tea House 
(chaseki), the ‘Abode of Emptiness’, a frail paper structure with 
a simple roof of rice-straw, hidden away in a corner of the 
garden. In this way the tea-ceremony became recognized as 
the most satisfactory way of refreshing the spirit; essentially it 
was a temporary escape from all cares and distractions—a 


period of rest and contemplation, of absorption in all that was 


beautiful in nature and art. == 
“Ks time went on the garden in which the Tca House was 
built itself became an incidental to the tea-ceremony, and the 
path of great flat stones which crossed the miniature landscape 
and vanished among the shrubs signified release from the 
world, There was no vulgar massing of varied bright colours 
in the landscape garden, for Zen taste required soft, restful 
tints, while the Japanese gardeners became so skilled that in a 
few square feet they could create the impression of a quict, 
lonely mountain valley. Again there was no attempt to copy 
nature, for the most powerful effect was produced by a mere 
suggestion of the atmosphere which Kobori Enshiu described 
as 

A cluster of summer trees 

A glimpse of the sea, 

A pale evening moon. 
As the path drew near tothe Tea House a large stone was found 
by the way, the top of which was hollowed out into a bowl 
fed with water from a bamboo spout. Here the hands were 
washed before entering the Tea House, standing at the end of 
the path in the loneliest part of the garden. 


111 


The Spirit of Zen 


I look beyond; 

Flowers are not, 

Nor tinted leaves. 

On the sea beach 

A solitary cottage stands 

In the waning light of an autumn eve. 


The House itself was of such fragile structure that at once it 
suggested the impermanence and emptiness of things; there 
was no rigidity or formal symmetry in its design, for to Zen 
symmetry was unnatural and dead, too perfect to leave any 
room for growth and change, and it was essential that the Tea 
House should harmonize with its surroundings, that it should 
be as natural as trees and unhewn rocks. The entrance was so 
small and low that all who went in had to bow down in 
humility, while the samurai had to leave his long swords out- 
side. In the tea-room itself there prevailed the same atmos- 
phere of calm and solitude; there was no bright colouring— 
only the dull yellow of the straw mats and the faint grey of the 
paper walls, while in the alcove (tokonoma) was some master- 
piece of Sumiye or Kano painting, or perhaps a rare specimen 
of calligraphy in plain black and white. Before the picture was 
set just a solitary branch of blossom or tinted leaves, arranged 
with infinite care by a hand skilled in the art of flower 
arrangement. When all the participants were assembled the 
host would come into the room with the utensils of the 
ceremony; some of these were rare objects of art which would 
be passed round for the company’s admiration, and in the 
meantime the tea-kettle would be set to boil on a charcoal 
brazier. Inside the kettle were placed a few pieces of metal so 
that the boiling produced a musical sound likened by Kobori 
Enshiu to ‘the soughing of pines on some far away hill, or the 


ile 


Zen and Civilization of Far East 


sound of a cataract muffled by clouds’. The bowls in which 
the tea was served were fashioned with the very greatest care, 
although they appear to be of the roughest workmanship, for 


the aesthetic ideals of Zen favoured a crude, thick porcelain of 
a colour resembling the shades of autumn leaves rather than 


the ex uisite ‘e -shell’ china adorned with birds and flowers 
the tea-ceremony was to_make the hi est possible use of 
Se Re Fie aed min ent hus the 
sscrsic pales ETE CePesbany’ Weve expected Sp eicte not 
so much the intrinsic value of the materials used, but the care 
and artistry with which they had been prepared and arranged. 
Because the ceremony consisted in an attitude of mind rather 
than inits utensils, the greatest of all its masters, Sen no Rikyu, 
said, ‘If we have naught but a kettle, we can celebrate the tea- 
ceremony. Yet there are some who ever insist on the regular 
utensils, which is foolish.’ 

In the tea-ceremony we find Zen in its most peaceful aspect, 
expressed as the highest spiritual freedom and detachment, as 
an absolute contentment with the natural sufficiency of things. 
It was an expression of poverty, of separation from earthly 
belongings, and its basic principles were an insistence on the 
evanescence of the objective world, a profound love of nature, 
of her unending changes, her infinite variety, her avoidance 
of repetition and symmetry, and lastly the indefinable quality 
called_yugen, which Mr. Waley has described as ‘the subtle, as 
opposed to the obvious; the hint, as opposed to the statement’. 
Just as the Koan was a religious device, so yugen was an artistic 
device; it was the method of demonstrating a truth, not by 
describing it, but by pointing at it so that people might be led 
to make an immediate contact with life instead of being con- 


113 


The Spirit of Zen 


tent with someone else’s version of it. Thus yugen was the 
‘reticence’ of Sung and Sumiyc paintings—a way of showing 
that life can never be fastened down or completely revealed by 
the artist’s brush, and that there is something ungraspable and 
ever elusive to which the painter draws one’s attention by the 
slightest hint, leaving the rcst untouched. A Japanese poet has 
said that the means of penetrating yugen, of finding out what 
it is that lies beneath the surface, is ‘to watch the sun sink 
behind a ftower-clad hill, to wander on and on in a huge forest 
without thought of return, to stand upon the shore and gaze 
after a boat that goes hid by far-off islands, to ponder on the 
journey of wild geese seen and lost among the clouds’. Some- 
how these words seem to contain the whole spirit of the tea- 
ceremony, for the feelings which they express lie at the root 
of Chinese and Japancse aesthetics as influenced by Zen; they 
have that strange, haunting beauty, that atmosphere of com- 
plete freedom from care, which has made the Cult of Tea 


recognized throughout Japan as the supreme method of bring- 
ing rest and quietness to the mind and refreshment and insight 
to the spirit. 


“Yet the artistic ideals of Zen may very easily degenerate into 
sentimentalism, especially when the “quietistic’ aspect is 
accepted without the ‘dynamic’ aspect, which is expressed in 
the military arts. The danger is in regarding yugen as an end 
in itself, rather than as a means of discovering a deeper secret. 
The aesthetic technique of Zen is no more the essential reality 
than its religious technique of Koans, smacks on the face and 
abrupt remarks. Many writers have sentimentalized over the 
‘simple life’ of the Zen monk and his taste for unadorned, 
suggestive and unobtrusive things, but that is a life seen from 
the outside. No understanding of Zen could be obtained from 
the tea-ceremony if it were not accompanied by work in the 


114 


Zen and Civilization of Far East 


monastery, for there was nothing scntimental about the 
masters who used to box their disciples’ ears to bring them to 
their senses, and who expcrienccd life ‘close to Nature’ not 
only when she was warm and pleasant but when she was 
freezing, wet and stormy. The sentimental ‘lover of Nature’ 
only sees one side of her facc; when it is wet he gocs indoors 
or puts up his umbrella and speaks of the delightful hissing of 
the rain on the leaves. He does not let it trickle down his neck. 

If anyone suspects Zen of sentimentalism, his suspicions will 
be swiftly set at rest by a consideration of the life of the 
Samurai. In sharp contrast to the quietism of the Cult of Tea, 
Zen becomes fierce and stormy when it is expressed in ju-jutsu 
and kenjutsu, although there is still an underlying calm which, 
however, resembles the solidity of a mighty rock rather than 
poetical detachment. Ju-jutsw or judo means literally ‘the 
gentle art’, and while ju-jutsu is specifically the technique of 
locks, strangles and throws, judo is rather the philosophy upon 
which this technique is based, while the same distinction is 
made between kenjutsu and kendo. Ju-jutsuis a method of self- 
defence without weapons founded on the principle of defeat- 
ing one’s opponent by yielding to him and using his own 
strength. Its origins wil be found in the philosophy of wu- 


wei, and according to a legend it was first discovered through 
watching the snow fall on the branches of trees. On the 
branches of tough and rigid trees the snow piles up until they 
crack beneath its weight, while thin and springy branches 
simply yield and throw it to the ground without being broken 
or bent. Thus Lao Tzu says: 
Man at his birth is tender and weak; at his death he is rigid and 
strong.... Thus rigidity and strength are the concomitants of 


death; softness and weakness are the concomitants of life. 
(Trans. Lionet Gries.) 


115 


The Spirit of Zen 


Ju-jutsu is founded on the two principles of wu-wei and ‘going 
right ahead’ or immediacy of attack and defence. Wu-wwei as 
applied to ju-jutsu may be illustrated by the analogy of a bar 
of wood revolving about its central point of balance. If one 
strikes it on either side of the centre it will swing away, and 
the only chance of knocking it off its balance will be to hit 
straight at the centre. But imagine a bar of wood which can 
move itself at will, and which is therefore capable of moving 
its centre out of the line of an oncoming force. However 
much one may strike at it, it will just shift its centre out of the 
direct line of one’s blows and so make its weakness its strength. 
In the case of the human body the central point of balance is 
at the pit of the stomach; any attack made above that point is 
made ineffectual by bending away from it, while an attack to 
the side is avoided by stepping slightly out of the direct line 
and pivoting in such a way as to let it pass. But the human 
body is unlike the bar of wood in so far as it has to stand with 
one end on the ground; therefore an attack below the point 
of balance is invariably successful unless both feet are placed 
firmly on the ground with the pit of the stomach supported 
evenly above them, neither too far forward nor too far back. 
In this position the legs are slightly bent at the knees to afford 
a certain amount of ‘give’, and anyone skilled in ju-jutsu will 
maintain this position for as long as possible, moving with his 
feet always the same distance apart (directly under the 
shoulders) and never raising them more than a fraction of an 
inch from the ground. Attack in ju-jutsu is effected by 
manceuvring one’s opponent until his balance becomes un- 
steady; this may happen in two ways. Either he will make a 
false step so that the body is not supported evenly by the feet, 
and in this event he can be thrown easily to the ground by a 
sharp sideways blow on one or other of his ankles; or else he 


116 


Zen and Civilization of Far East 


will unbalance himself by making an attack, and in this case 
the defender will simply swing away on his own point of 
balance, causing the force of the attack to overstep itself by 
finding no resistance. And then, by pulling the attacking limb 
in the direction in which it was aimed, or by pushing at a part 
of the attacker’s body on the opposite side of his point of 
balance to the part with which he attacked, he is rendered as 
powerless as a falling tree. 

Therefore the more force one uses in trying to defeat an 
expert in ju-jutsu, the more one is likely to be hurt. It is like 
barging heavily against a door with a weak latch; it simply 
flies open and throws one to the floor. In this way the ex- 
ponent of ju-jutsu is like life itself; try to catch hold of him or 
to strike him down so that he has no more power over you, 
and he is no longer there. The more you struggle, and the 
harder you hit, the faster he slips away, for he is so poised that 
you actually push him away with your own strength. 

Coming to the second principle—immediacy of attack and 
defence—we find that there can be no success in ju-jutsu if 
therc is even the slightest interval between these two move- 
ments. If one stops to think out a counter-move for a fraction 
of a second, one’s opponent has time to regain his balance, for 
it is precisely by yielding correctly to his attack as he makes it 
that he is defeated. If the yielding is at all late he finds just 
enough resistance to prevent his attack from overstepping 
itself; and the moment he finds something which he can fight 
against he has a chance of success. The essence of ju-jutsu is that 
there should never be anything which can be fought against; 
the expert must be as elusive as the truth of Zen; he must make 
himself into a Koan—a puzzle which slips away the more one 
tries to solve it; he must be like water in that he falls through 
the fingers of those who try to clutch him. Water does not 


117 


The Spirit of Zen 


hesitate before it yields, for the moment the fingers begin to 
close it moves away, not of its own strength, but by using the 
pressure applied to it. Therefore in ju-jutsu the two com- 
batants move as one man; attack and defence is one move- 
ment, and there is no straining, no resistance and no hesitation, 
until with a sudden thud one of the men seems to have been 
hurled to the ground with gigantic force. He has made a false 
step, and his opponent has thrown him off his balance so that 
he falls with the full force of his own weight, with perhaps just 
an extra push from behind to add speed to his defeat. 
Somewhat similar principles are applied in kenjutsu—the art 
of fencing with a bamboo substitute for the Samurai’s long, 
two-handed sword with a single edge so sharp that it can 
cleave a man’s body from the collar-bone to the centre of his 
chest. Wu-wei is not so much in evidence here as in ju-jutsu, 
although immediacy of attack and defence is again a principle 
of supreme importance. As before, the pit of the stomach is 
made the centre of activity, and cuts are delivered not so much 
with the arms as with this central point of balance using the 
arms as its levers. Thus in making a cut at the top of the 
opponent’s head the arms are stiff and rigid at the moment of 
impact, the force being derived from a sudden forward move- 
ment of the whole body. As this movement is made, and 
throughout the whole combat, the fencer must move as from 
the pit of his stomach, using it as a firm pivot upon which the 
rest of the body can be swung instantly to the right or to the 
left as occasion requires. Here again we have the principle of 
the calm centre in the midst of lightning activity; throughout 
the quick cuts and parries the point of balance must remain as 
far as possible unmoved. There is no violent jumping from 
side to side or running backwards and forwards, for in kenjutsu 
there must be no waste of energy. Therefore the source of 


118 


Zen and Civilization of Far East 


strength and the centre of action is kept still until the moment 
comes for a deathly blow, and then the blade is brought down 
with a terrific sweep, ending in a swift and powerful forward 
movement of the centre, accompanied with a tremendous 
shout, made as if the breath were being forced up from the 
depths of the stomach. 

The mental attitude of the fencer must be what is known as 
the state of Muga—that is, an absence of the feeling that ‘I am 
doing it’. This feeling is held to be a great hindrance since just 
as in listening to music the concept of oneself listening or 
oneself fencing draws the attention away from the melody or 
from the actual movements of the swords. The consciousness 
of ‘self’ must be subordinated to concentration on the task in 
hand, and the mind must follow the opponent’s movements so 
closely and respond to them so immediately that once more 
the dualism of ‘attack’ and ‘defence’ becomes a unity. It was 
this attitude of mind that lay at the heart of bushido—the “Way 
of the Warrior’. In feudal Japan internal wars between rival 
barons (daimyo) were frequent events, and warriors went in 
constant danger of their lives. It was the ‘straightforwardness’ 
of Zen that preserved their mental stability, and the Samurai 
would make frequent visits to the Zen masters that they might 
gather strength from the religion of ‘going right ahead with 
no looking back’, which taught that life and death were but 


aspects of the same existence ‘self’ 
might be forgotten in its unity with life. Bushido required 


toning loyalty to one’s lord and master, great physical 
courage and fortitude, and above all this attitude of Muga 
which is described in what is known as the Samurai’s creed: 
Ihave no parents; I make heaven and earth my parents. 
Ihave no divine power; I make honesty my power. 
I have no means; I make submission my means. 


119 


The Spirit of Zen 


I have no magic power; I make inward strength my magic. 

I have neither life nor death; I make the Eternal my life and death. 
I have no body; I make fortitude my body. 

I have no eycs; I make the flash of lightning my eyes. 

I have no ears; I make sensibility my ears. 

I have no limbs; I make promptitude my limbs. 

I have no design; I make opportunity my design. 

I have no miracles; I make the Dharma my miracle. 

I have no principles; I make adaptability to all things my principles. 
I have no friends; I make my mind my friend. 

I have no enemy; I make incautiousness my enemy. 

I have no armour; I make goodwill and righteousness my armour. 
I have no castle; I make immovable mind my castle. 

I have no sword; I make ‘the sleep of the mind’ my sword. 


120 


Conclusion 


The history of Zen and of the way in which it has moulded 
the whole culture of the Far East would require a special 
volume to itself. The purpose of this book has beensimply to 
give a clue to the spirit of Zen and to outline some of the ways 
in which it has been translated into thought and action. In 
writing about Zen there are two extremes to be avoided: the 
one to define and explain so little that the reader is completely 
bewildered, and the other to define and explain so much that 
the reader thinks he understands Zen! Throughoutit has been 
emphasized that Zen is an immediate contact with life, a join- 
ing of ‘self’ and ‘life’ into so close a unity and rhythm that the 
distinction between the two is forgotten, that the desire to 
possess is abandoned because there is nothing that can possess 
and nothing that can be possessed. The isolated ‘self’ no longer 
wishes to grasp at the things which flow by in the stream of 
events, for it goes forward with the stream and becomes one 
withit, realizing that all things are but waves in this stream and 
that to try to clutch hold of them is to make them disappear. 
From this it might seem that Zen can be defined as the unity 
of man and the universe, as the rhythm of the mind with 
changing forms, as a state of ‘One-ness’ in which all distinc- 
tions of ‘T’ and ‘not-I’, knower and known, seer and seen, are 
set aside. And yet master Tao-wu said, ‘Even One-ness when 
held on to is wide of the mark.’ 

For the truth is that in Zen as in life there is nothing at all 
which one can hold on to and say, ‘This is it; I have got it.’ 
Therefore any book about Zen is rather like a mystery story 


121 


Conclusion 


with the last chapter missing; there is always something which 
escapes definition, which can never be expressed in words, and 
however hard we may try to catch up with it, it is always one 
pace ahead. But this is because definition and description is 
death, and the truth of Zen can no more be killed than the 
many-headed dragon of the ancient myth which always grew 
another head as soon as one was cut off. For Zen is life; to 
chase after Zen is like chasing one’s own shadow, and all the 
time one is running away from the sun. When at last it is 
realized that the shadow can never be caught, there is a sudden 
‘turning about’, a flash of satori, and in the light of the sun the 
dualism of self and its shadow vanishes; whereatman perceives 
that what he was chasing was only the unreal image of the one 
true Self—of That which he ever was, is and shall be. At last 
he has found Enlightenment. 


123 


Glossary 


Avipya: (Sanskrit), Ignorance or self-delusion; belief in the duality 
of ‘self’ and the external world, as distinct from the realization that 
both are aspects of the same ‘Buddha-nature,’ which is the one 
true Self. 

Boput: (Sanskrit). Enlightenment, the opposite of Avidya. 

Duara: (Sanskrit), This word has many shades of meaning. The 
nearest English equivalent is ‘Law,’ and the three most important 
meanings are: the fundamental Law upon which all the processes 
of life are based, the way in which the universe works; the Law or 
Teaching of the Buddha; as applied to each separate thing, the law 
of its being, its function. 

Karma: (Sanskrit). Its literal meaning is ‘action’ and from this it has 
come to mean the law conditioning action which is cause and 
effect. Karma does not mean ‘Fate,’ except in the sense that man 
cannot escape from the effects of his own deeds, though so far as 
the deeds themselves are concerned he is free to choose. A person’s 
karma is thus the destiny which falls to him as a result of his own 
actions—in other words, the circumstances under which he lives. 

Nirvana: (Sanskrit). Release from Samsara (q.v.). The spiritual 
freedom attained by realizing one’s identity with the ‘Buddha- 
nature’ enables one to be free from karma, for the ‘Buddha-nature’ 
cannot be conditioned by any form of action. This freedom from 
karma makes it possible to enter into eternal rest since the effects 
of one’s deeds can no longer draw one back to the world (v. 
Rebirth). If one chooses to enter the world no more, then Nirvana 
is entered. 

Resmtu: The corollary of karma. The doctrine that each individual 
is born into the world again and again to inherit the effects of his 
deeds, or rather, that by action in this life the individual creates a 
fresh personality for himself in order that the results of his actions 
may be fulfilled in a future life. 

SAMSARA: (Sanskrit). The alternation of birth and death, sometimes 


124 


Glossary 


called the Wheel of Birth and Death. This is explained by reference 
to the other alternating processes of life—day and night, waking 
and sleeping, the seasons, etc. Death is only a pause for rest in the 
life-process of the individual and arises because his physical body 
is worn out. But this wearing out does notimply theend of his life- 
process, and new bodies are created in order that he may continue 
to work out his karma, 

SunyaTa: (Sanskrit). The emptiness of all separate things as such. The 
only abiding principle in life is the ‘Buddha-nature,’ which mani- 
fests itself in separate forms. These forms have no permanence or 
reality as forms, only as ‘Buddha-nature.’ For thisreason Mahayana 
philosophy declares that they are empty. 

Yoca: (Sanskrit). Literally a yoke or discipline; the technique of 
meditation whereby the individual brings himself into unity with 
the Ultimate Reality of the universe. There are four types of Yoga, 
representing the four paths to this union—Gnana, the path of 
Knowledge, Karma, the path of Action, Bhakti, the path of 
Love, and Raja, the Royal Path which is a synthesis of the other 
three. A fifth and debased type of Yoga is Hatha, consisting of 
complicated physical and psychic exercises—a spiritual cul-de~sac, 
which, if undertaken without the greatest care, is apt to have 
dangerous results. 


125 


Bibliography 


ANEsAKI, M. History of Japanese Religion. Kegan Paul, London, 1930. 
Benoit, H. The Supreme Doctrine. Pantheon, New York, and Rout- 
ledge, London, 1955. 
BLoreLp, J. The Path to Sudden Attainment. Buddhist Society, London, 
1948. 
The Zen Teaching of Huang Po. Rider, London, 1958. 
Brytu, R.L. Zen in English Literature and Oriental Classics. Hokuseido, 
Tokyo, 1948. 
Haiku, 4 vols. Hokuseido, Tokyo, 1952. 
Buddhist Sermons on Christian Texts. Tokyo, 1952. 
Dumout., H. ‘Die Entwicklung des chinesischen Ch’an.’ Monumenta 
Serica, 1941, IV. 
‘Das Wu-men-kuan oder “Der Pass ohne Tor.” 
Serica, 1943, VIII. 
‘Bodhidharma und die Anfange des Ch’an Buddhismus,’ Monu- 
menta Nipponica, 1951, VIL. 
Dumoutt, H. & Sasaki, R. F. The Development of Chinese Zen after 
the Sixth Patriarch. First Zen Institute, New York, 1953. 
Extot, Sir CHARLES. Japanese Buddhism. Arnold, London, 1935. 
Func, Yu-1an. A History of Chinese Philosophy. 2 vols. trs. Derk 
Bodde. Princeton, 1953. 
The Spirit of Chinese Philosophy. trs, E. R. Hughes. Kegan Paul, 
London, 1947. 
Gatensy, E. V. The Cloud Men of Yamato, Murray, London, 1929. 
GeRNET, J. ‘Entretiens du Maitre de Dhyana Chen-houei du Ho-tsé.’ 
Bulletin de Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient, 1949, XXXI. 
‘Biographie du Maitre Chen-houei de Ho-tsé.’ Journal Asiatique, 
19SI. 
‘Entretiens du Maitre Ling-yeou du Kouei-chan.’ Bulletin de Ecole 
Frangaise d’Extréme-Orient, 1951, XLV, 1. 
Grosse, E. Die Ostasiatische Tuschmalerei. Cassirer, Berlin, 1923. 


126 


Monumenta 


Bibliography 


Harrison, E. J. The Fighting Spirit of Japan. Unwin, London, 1913. 
Herricet, E. Zen in the Art of Archery. Pantheon, New York, 1953; 
Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1953. 
Humpnreerys, C. Zen Buddhism. Allen & Unwin, London, 1958. 
Hu Sun. ‘The Development of Zen Buddhism in China.’ Chinese 
Political and Social Review, 1932, XV, 4. 
Noxkanrya, K. The Religion of the Samurai. Luzac, London, 1913. 
Oeata, S. Guide to Zen Practice. A translation of the Mu-mon-kwan. 
Bukkasha, Kyoto, 1934. 
OnasamMa, S. & Faust, A. Zen, der lebendige Buddhismus in Japan. 
Gotha, 1925. 
Oxakura, K. The Book of Tea, Foulis, Edinburgh, 1919. 
SASAKI, SOKEI-AN. (ed.) Cat’s Yawn, First Zen Institute of America, 
New York, 1947. 
SENZAK, N. Zen Meditation, Bukkasha, Kyoto, 1936. 
SENZAKI, N. & Reps, P. Zen Flesh, Zen Bones. Tuttle, Tokyo, and 
Rutland, Vermont, 1957. 
SENZAKI, N. & McCanptess, R. Buddhism and Zen. Philosophical 
Library, New York, 1953. 
SHAKU, SOYEN. Seriions of a Buddhist Abbot. Open Court, Chicago, 
1906. 
SOGEN, ASAHINA. Zen. Sakane, Tokyo, 1954. 
STEINILBER-OBERLIN, E, & Matsuo, K. The Buddhist Sects of Japan. 
Allen & Unwin, London, 1938. 
SuzuxI, B. L. Mahayana Buddhism. Marlowe, London, 1948. 
Suzux, D. T. Essays in Zen Buddhism, 3 vols. Luzac, London, 1927, 
1933, 1934. Reprinted, Rider, London, 1949, 1950, I9SI. 
Studies in the Lankavatara Sutra. Routledge, London 1957. 
Introduction to Zen Buddhism, Rider, London, 1949. 
Training of the Zen Buddhist Monk, Eastern Buddhist Society, Kyoto, 
1934. 
Manual of Zen Buddhism. Kyoto, 1935. Repr. Rider, London, 1950. 
Zen and Japanese Culture. Pantheon, New York, 1958. (A revision 
of the Japanese edition of 1938.) 
The Essence of Buddhism. Buddhist Society, London, 1947. 
The Zen Doctrine of No-Mind. Rider, London, 1949. 
Living by Zen. Rider, London, 1950. 
Mysticism: Christian and Buddhist. Harper, New York, 1957. 
Studies in Zen. Rider, London, 1955. 


127 


The Spirit of Zen 


‘Ignorance and World Fellowship.’ Faiths and Fellowship. Watkins, 
London, 1937. 

‘An Interpretation of Zen Experience.’ Philosophy, East and West, 
ed. Charles Moore. Princeton, 1944. 

‘Buddhist Symbolism.’ Symbols and Values. Harper, New York, 


1954. 
‘Zen and Pragmatism.” Philosophy, Eastand West. Honolulu, 1954, 


IV, 2. 
TAKAKUSU, J. Essentials of Buddhist Philosophy. University of Hawaii, 
Honolulu, 1947. 
Watery, A. Zen Buddhism and Its Relation to Art. Luzac, London, 1922. 
Warts, A. W. Zen Buddhism, Buddhist Society, London, 1947. 
Zen, (Same as above, but enlarged.) Delkin, Stanford, 1948. 
The Way of Zen. Pantheon, New York, and Thames & Hudson, 


London, 1957. 
Wonc, Mou-tam. The Sutra of Wei Lang. Luzac, London, 1944. 


I lustrations 


Jrontispiece—Tiger. Chinese painting, Yuan Period (probably). Courtesy The Metropolitan Mu- 
seum of Art, New York, Kennedy Fund, 1913. 
page 8—Shakyamuni Coming Down From Mountain. Kamakura Period. Courtesy Seattle Art 


Museum, Eugene Fuller Memorial Collection. 


page 23—Priest Riding Backward On Horse Led By Servant. Japanese painting, attributed to 
Goshun (Matsumura Gekki), 1752-1811. Courtesy The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New 


York, Rogers Fund, 1936. 

page 44-45—Monkeys and Birds. Sesshi, late 15th century, Ashikaga, Idealistic Chinese school. 
Courtesy Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. 

page 66-67—Chinese Landscape: hills, water and temple buildings. Japanese, late 16th century, 
Ashikaga, Idealistic Chinese school. Courtesy Smithsonian Institution, Freer Gallery of Art, 
Washington, D.C. 

page 82—Haboku Landscape: hanging scroll. Japanese, Ashikaga Period, Sessht, 1420-1506. 
Courtesy The Cleveland Museum of Art, Gift of The Norweb Foundation, 1955. 

page 99—Haboku Landscape (detail). Japanese, Ashikaga Period, Sesshi, 1420-1506. Courtesy 
Seattle Art Museum, Eugene Fuller Memorial Collection. 

page 122—Bamboo (Scction Ill). Chinese painting, Yuan or Early Ming Dynasty (1279-1368; 
1368-1644), attributed to Su Shih, 1036-1101. Courtesy The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 
Fletcher Fund, 1947, The A. W. Bahr Collection. 


128 


