WHATS -EAO? 


A ££ a WN WA. EF FS 


Author of What Is Zen? 


WHAT IS TAO? 


WHAT IS TAO? 


ALAN WATTS 


ot Woe 

oa ‘e 

iy 
Faas’ 


TT 
NEW WORLD LIBRARY 
ORNIA 


ot Woe, 


TEN 


“aw 


New World Library 
14 Pamaron Way 
Novato, California 94949 


Copyright © 2000 by Mark Watts 


The poems on pages v, 22, and 52, are from Tao Te Ching, 
translation © 1988 by Stephen Mitchell 
reprinted with permission from HarperCollins Publishers, Inc. 


Editors: Mark Watts, Marc Allen 
Cover design: Mary Ann Casler 
Text design: Tona Pearce Myers 
Interior Calligraphy: Alan Watts 


All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced in whole or in 
part, or 
transmitted in any form, without written permission from the 
publisher, 
except by a reviewer, who may quote brief passages in a review; nor 
may 
any part of this book be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
trans 
mitted in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, 
recording, or other, without written permission of the publisher. 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 


Watts, Alan, 1915-1973. 
What is Tao? / Alan Watts. 
p. cm. 

ISBN 1-57731-168-X 
1. Tao. I. Title. 


B127.T3 W39 2000 
299’ 514— 
dc21 00-05609 1 
First printing, October 2000 
ISBN 1-57731-168-X 
Printed in Canada on acid-free, recycled paper 
Distributed to the trade by Publishers Group West 


10987654321 


The tao that can be told 

is not the eternal Tao. 

The name that can be named 
is not the eternal Name. 


The unnameable is the eternally real. 
Naming is the origin 
of all particular things. 


Free from desire, you realize the 
mystery. 

Caught in desire, you see 

only the manifestations. 


CONTENTS 


Introduction by Mark Watts 


Part I: The Way of the Tao 
Our Place in Nature 
Taoism and Confucianism 
The World and Its Opposites 
Lao-tzu 
Tao 
Tzu-Jan — By Itself So 
Wu Wei — Not Forcing 
Te — Virtue: Skill at Living 


Part II: The Gentle Way 
The Strength of Weakness 
Judo — The Gentle Way 
Li — The Patterns of Nature 
I Ching — Book of Changes 
Advice from the Oracle 
A Western Point of View 
An Eastern Point of View 
Probabilities and Decisions 
Disadvantages and Advantages 
A Comparison of East and West 
Conclusion 


About the Author 


INTRODUCTION 
By Mark Watts 


The ancient philosophy of the Tao is one of the most intriguing 
and refreshing ways of liberation to arrive in the West from the Far 
East in modern times. With over fifty translations of the Tao Te Ching 
into Western languages to date, the classic work of Taoist literature 
offers its readers great wisdom for living as well as advice on worldly 
affairs. It is also a fascinating window into the mysterious world of 
pre-dynastic China. 


The very practical nature of Taoist thought is often overlooked by 
Western readers who are hesitant to embrace a seemingly strange and 
foreign way of knowing, but in the philosophy of the Tao one finds a 
surprisingly contemporary perspective. The word Tao, properly 
pronounced “dow,” has lent its name to a way of understanding and 
living in the world with profound implications for modern societies. 
Above all else Taoism places great emphasis on the balance between 
our human awareness and our natural being, as an integral part of the 
web of life. It embodies our deepest understanding of ecological 
awareness. 


The mystical side of Taoist thought, on the other hand, is highly 
enigmatic, for here one finds a doorway into the shamanistic world 
that flourished in China over a span of at least five thousand years, 
right up to the period in which the Taoist texts were written. 


As Alan Watts explains it, the word Tao embodies two broad 
meanings in our language: it means approximately the Way — in the 
sense of “the way to go” — and it also refers to nature in the sense of 
one’s own true nature. Everything is said to have its own Tao, but it is 
impossible to define it, to put one’s finger on it exactly. 


As I sat working on this manuscript my eight-year-old son came 
up to me and asked, “Papa, what are you working on?” I told him it 
was a book on the Tao, and began to explain a little bit about it, but 


without a moment’s hesitation he said, “Oh, you mean what’s behind 
everything” — and then he headed off. Intuitively and experientially 
we know what it is, but for most of us the problem arises when we try 
to explain it. 


This enigma reminds me of a story that my father used to tell 
about a debate years ago in the House of Lords in England concerning 
a Church-related matter. Apparently one of the representatives had 
put forth the argument that it was not proper for a governing body 
with so many atheists to rule on a religious issue. One of the members 
rose to the occasion, however, and replied, “Rubbish, Sir! I am quite 
certain that everyone here believes in some sort of something 
somewhere or other.” And by and large we do even if it is no more 
definite than to sense the Tao. 


In classic Chinese literature the Tao is described as following the 
path of least resistance, occupying the invisible or lowest position, 
and embracing the goodness of nature without ever attempting to do 
so. The Tao is passive but not weak, and in his book the legendary 
sage Lao-tzu describes the paradoxical quality of the Tao by asking 
one to consider the following: 


How do coves and oceans become kings of the hundred rivers? 
Because they are good at keeping low — 

That is how they are kings of the hundred rivers. 

Nothing in the world is weaker than water, 


But it has no better in overcoming the hard. 


THE ORIGIN OF THE TAO TE CHING 


The Tao Te Ching has traditionally been attributed to Lao-tzu, the 
legendary sage and founder of the Taoist school. However, the Tao 
Te Ching was originally called the Lao-tzu as well, and this makes it 
difficult for us to fully understand the origin of the earliest texts 
describing its origin because in Chinese it is often impossible to know 


whether “Lao-tzu” refers to the person or the text. Nevertheless the 
original work has been tentatively dated to the sixth century B.C_E., 
the time in which Lao-tzu was supposed to have lived, although it is 
likely that the collection did not come into circulation until the fourth 
century B.C.E. This was the period of the golden age of Chinese 
philosophy that gave rise to tremendous diversity — known as “the 
hundred schools” of thought — and gave us the other great classic of 
Chinese literature, the J Ching. 


It is not until the first century B.C.E., however, that we find a 
history, the Shih chi (or Records of the Historian), that contains one 
of the oldest recorded stories about Lao-tzu. Here we find the story of 
Confucius visiting Lao-tzu at the Court of Chou where, by this 
account, Lao-tzu served as the court librarian. In that meeting, Lao- 
tzu was said to have scolded Confucius for his pompous and self- 
serving ways, and afterward Confucius is reported to have said to his 
disciples: 


“IT know that birds can fly, fish can swim, and animals run. For 
those that run a net may be set, for those that swim a line cast, and for 
those that fly an arrow set free. But a dragon’s ascent to heaven walks 
the wind and swims through clouds, and I know of no way to trap 
him. Today I have met Lao-tzu, who is both man and dragon.” 


The reference to the ascension of the dragon to heaven offers a 
clue to the early origins of Taoist rituals, because it reveals a link to 
the ancient shamanic ancestry of the region. The dragon, like the 
Feathered Serpent in South and Central American mythology, 
combines the scales of the snake with the feathers or wings of the 
bird. The feathers or wings of the dragon or bird are representative of 
the shaman’s flight, and the scales represent rebirth, for the snake 
sheds its skin only to find a new one beneath the old. 


The combination of these attributes accurately describes dream/ 
death and rebirth rituals of the shamans known to date far back into 
the Neolithic period. Pottery dating from 5000 B.C.E. discovered in 
the village of Banpo near Xi’an in the 1950s included a ritualistic 
vessel showing four views of a shaman in a dreaming or trance state, 
and a fifth as a transformed being. This pottery example is fairly 
typical of representations of the wizards who were said to leave their 


bodies in flights of vision, and following such a flight the shaman or 
initiate would be reborn with the sunrise fully transformed. 


Although the antiquity of the underpinning is apparent, the actual 
history of the legendary sage Lao-tzu has proved to be elusive. To 
further obscure matters, the histories we do have that mention Lao-tzu 
were not recorded until hundreds of years after the events they detail, 
and it is possible that some of the facts were adapted to corroborate 
the legendary accounts of the origin of his works. 


One popular legend holds that the Tao Te Ching was written in 
the gatehouse by Lao-tzu as he was about to leave his post in the city 
to retire and become a hermit in the country. According to this story 
the gatekeeper is said to have insisted that Lao-tzu record his wisdom 
before he left. Another more plausible theory is that the philosophy 
was recorded over a period of time by several anonymous writers to 
give the benefit of the country dwellers’ wisdom to the rulers of the 
cities, in the hope they would make life easier for the common people 
— and the gatehouse story may simply be symbolic of the source of 
this knowledge originating outside the pale. This theory fits in with 
the tumultuous climate of the Warring States period, and is supported 
by the fact that the later chapters of the work carry decidedly political 
overtones and candidly offer advice to those in positions of authority. 


In the first century a.d. the Lao-tzu was divided into two works, 
and so we received the Tao Ching and the Te Ching. This division 
reflects the varying emphasis of each section of the book, the first on 
the Tao and the second on Te, which means approximately “virtue,” 
though Alan Watts calls it “skill at living.” These sections were then 
combined to form the book we know today. 


Some scholars firmly believe the Tao Te Ching is in fact a 
compilation of writings by various authors who simply attributed 
their works to the legendary Lao-tzu; however, the consistency of the 
style and the rhythm of the arguments presented in both parts of the 
work suggest otherwise. It seems more likely that this book of sage 
advice was the work of a single author drawing upon the prevailing 
folk wisdom of his day, and that perhaps the two books were written 
during different periods of the author’s life, or in response to different 
issues. 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 


Taoism has often been described as the philosophy of nature, and 
it is in this respect that its wisdom most strongly suggests its origins 
were in the shamanic world of pre-Dynastic China. Living close to 
the earth one sees the wisdom of not interfering with the course of 
life, and of letting things go their way. This is the wisdom that also 
tells us not to get in our own way, and to paddle with the current, split 
wood along the grain, and seek to understand the inner workings of 
our nature instead of trying to change it. 


According to the laws of nature every creature finds its own way, 
and so each of us is known to have our own path or way. In classic 
Chinese texts there are references to the Tao of Earth with all its 
creatures, the Tao of Man, which refers to our awakened path, and to 
the Tao of Heaven, by which the broad forces of heaven and earth 
come together in a field of polar energies. Together these forces 
create the world in which all life plays, and instill in us the instinctive 
knowledge of the primal forces at work in the human psyche. 


In this book, Alan Watts brings his years of study of the Tao into 
focus through lively explanations of the essential ideas and terms of 
Taoist thought. He gives the reader an opportunity to experience the 
Tao as a personal practice of liberation free from the limitations of the 
commonly held beliefs within our culture. This book is based on talks 
given during seminars during the last ten years of his life, and it offers 
a way of understanding the true value of ourselves as free-willed 
individuals enfolded within the ever-changing patterns of the natural 
world. 


We explore the wisdom of the way things are of themselves (tzu- 
jan, or “by itself so”), and of letting life unfold without interference 
and without forcing matters when the time is not right (wu wei, or 
“not forcing’). In the philosophy of the Tao we soon discover that 
striving to succeed — in the theory that “you can’t get something for 
nothing” — must be balanced by the realization that “you can’t have 
something without nothing,” because something always requires its 
opposite, a place to be, whether it is a receptive vessel, a clear mind, 


or an open heart. 


PART I 


THE WAY 
OF THE TAO 


When people see some things as 
beautiful, 


other things become ugly. 
When people see some things as good, 


other things become bad. 


Being and non-being create each other. 
Difficult and easy support each other. 
Long and short define each other. 

High and low depend on each other. 


Before and after follow each other. 


Therefore the Master 
acts without doing anything 


and teaches without saying anything 


OUR PLACE IN NATURE 


Many years ago, when I was only about fourteen years old, I first 
saw landscape paintings from the Far East. It was as a result of 
looking at these paintings that I first became interested in Eastern 
philosophy. What grasped me and excited me about the Asian vision 
of the world was their astonishing sympathy and feeling for the world 
of nature. 


One painting in particular that I remember was called Mountain 
after Rain. \t showed the mist and clouds drifting away after a night 
of pouring rain, and it somehow pulled me into it and made me feel 
part of that mountain scene. It is a fascinating for us to consider that 
pictures of this kind are not just what we would describe as landscape 
paintings, because they are also icons, a kind of religious or 
philosophical painting. 


In the West, when we think of iconographic or religious paintings, 
we are accustomed to pictures of divine human figures and of angels 
and saints. When the mind of the Far East expresses its religious 
feeling, however, it finds appropriate imagery in the objects of nature, 
and in this very important respect their feeling for nature is different 
from ours. The contrast in these two forms of expression arises as a 
result of the sensation that the human being is not someone who 
stands apart from nature and looks at it from the outside, but instead 
is an integral part of it. Instead of dominating nature, human beings fit 
right into it and feel perfectly at home. 


In the West our attitude is strangely different, and we constantly 
use a phrase that sounds peculiar indeed in the ears of a Chinese 
person: We speak of “the conquest of nature” or “the conquest of 
space,” and of the “conquest” of great mountains like Everest. And 
one might very well ask us, “What on Earth is the matter with you? 
Why must you feel as if you are in a fight with your environment all 
the time? Aren’t you grateful to the mountain that it lifted you up as 
you climbed to the top of it? Aren’t you grateful to space that it opens 
itself up for you so you can travel right through it? Why do you even 
think of getting into a fight with it?” 

Indeed, it is this domineering feeling that underlies the way we 
use technology. We use the powers of electricity and the strength of 
steel to carry on a battle with our external world, and instead of trying 
to live with the curvature of the land we flatten it with bulldozers, and 
constantly try to beat our surroundings into submission. 


The problem is that we have been brought up in a religious and 
philosophical tradition that, to a great extent, has taught us to mistrust 
the nature that surrounds us, and to mistrust ourselves as well. We 
have inherited a doctrine of original sin, which tells us not to be too 
friendly, and to be very cautious of our own human nature. It has 
taught us that as reasoning and willing beings we should be suspect of 
our animal and instinctual nature. 


In one sense this is all very well, for we have indeed achieved 
great technological advances through harnessing the powers of 
nature. If we carry thisx effort beyond a certain point, however, our 


manipulations interfere with the very course of nature, and this gets 
us into serious trouble indeed. 


As a result of our interference we are experiencing today what we 
could call the “law of diminishing returns.” For example, we want to 
go faster and faster everywhere we go, and so we attempt to obliterate 
the distance between ourselves and the place we are trying to reach. 
But as the result of this attempt to minimize the span of the Earth 
between these points, two things begin to happen. 


First, all places that become closer and closer to each other by the 
use of jet planes tend to become the same place. The faster you can 
get from Los Angeles to Hawaii, the more Hawaii becomes exactly 
like Los Angeles. This is why the tourists keep asking, “Has it been 
spoiled yet?” What they are really asking is, “Is it just like home?” 


Second, if we begin to think about our goals in life as 
destinations, as points to which we must arrive, this thinking begins 
to cut out all that makes a point worth having. It is as if instead of 
giving you a full banana to eat, I gave you just the two tiny ends of 
the banana — and that would not be, in any sense, a satisfactory meal. 
But as we fight our environment in our tendency to get rid of the 
limitations of time and space, and try to make the world a more 
convenient place to live, this is exactly what happens. 


For a much better understanding of our place in nature, we can 
look to the great religions and philosophies that blossomed and took 
deep root in the consciousness of so much of the population 
throughout Asia and the Far East. 


TAOISM AND CONFUCIANISM 


There are two great main currents in traditional Chinese thinking: 
the Taoist current and the Confucian. Both of them agree on one 
fundamental principle, and that is that the natural world in which we 
live, and human nature itself, must be trusted. They would say of a 
person who cannot trust his own basic nature, “If you cannot trust 
your own nature, how can you trust your own mistrusting of it? How 
do you know that your mistrust is not wrong as well?” If you do not 
trust your own nature, you become as tangled up as anyone can be. 


Their idea of nature is that which happens of itself so, and that is a 
process which is not fundamentally under our control. By definition it 
is that which ishappening all on its own, just as our breathing is 
happening all on its own, andx just as our heart is beating all on its 
own — and the fundamental wisdom behind Taoist philosophy is that 
this “self-so” process is to be trusted. 


Taoist thought is generally attributed to Lao-tzu, who is thought 
to have lived somewhere around 400 B.C.E., and to Chuang-tse, who 
lived from 369 to 286 B.C.E. Taoism is known to us as the uniquely 
Chinese way of thought, living, and liberation, although its roots 
certainly lie in shamanic traditions common to much of northeastern 
Asia, and probably to North America as well. In its final form, 
however, it is so similar to Buddhism that Taoist terms are often used 
to translate Sanskrit texts into Chinese. Once Buddhism was imported 
to China, Taoism so completely permeated Mahayana Buddhism in 
general and Zen Buddhism in particular that the philosophies of these 
schools are often indistinguishable. 


Like Vedanta and yoga in India, older gentlemen in China 
traditionally adopted Taoism after they had made their contribution to 
society, and thereafter they would retire to primitive dwellings or 
caves to live in the wild and meditate for long periods of time. As in 
Buddhist lore, where the return of the sage into the world is known as 
the path of the Bodhisattva, Taoist stories are filled with accounts of 
the return of the liberated sage into worldly affairs. In fact the primary 
text, the Tao Te Ching, was originally written as a manual of advice 
for the ruling class. The teachings of Lao-tzu and of Chuang-tse must 
not be confused, incidentally, with the Taoist cult of alchemy and 
magic preoccupied with life extension — that is Taoist only in name, 
and not in practice. 

Although Taoism proper has never become an organized religion, 
it has attracted the curiosity of scholars and philosophers of the Far 
East for more than two thousand years. 


Taoism regards the entire natural world as the operation of the 
Tao, a process that defies intellectual comprehension. The experience 


of the Tao cannot be obtained through any preordained method, 
although those who seek it often cultivate inner calm through the 
silent contemplation of nature. Taoists understand the practice of wu 
wei, the attribute of not forcing or grasping, and recognize that human 
nature — like all nature — is tzu-jan, or “‘of-itself-so.” 


When we look to Confucian ideas, which governed Chinese moral 
and social life, we find a different word that represents the basis of 
human nature. This wordhas a funny pronunciation, and although we 
Romanize this word in English as jen, it is pronounced “wren,” with a 
sort of rolling “r.” This word is symbolic of mankind’s cardinal virtue 
in the system of Confucian morality, and it is usually translated 
“human-heartedness” or “humanness.” When Confucius was asked to 
give a precise definition of it, though, he refused. He said, “You have 
to feel the meaning of this virtue. You must never put it into words.” 


The wisdom of his attitude toward defining jen is simply that a 
human being will always be greater than anything they can say about 
themselves, and anything they can think about themselves. If we 
formulate ideas about our own nature, about how our own minds and 
emotions work, those ideas are always going to be qualitatively 
inferior — that is to say, far less complicated and far less alive — 
than the actual author of the ideas themselves, and that is us. So there 
is something about ourselves that we can never get at, that we can 
never define — and in just the same way you cannot bite your own 
teeth, you cannot hear your own ears, and you cannot make your own 
hand catch hold of itself. So therefore you must let go and trust the 
goings-on of your humanness. Confucius was the first to say that he 
would rather trust human passions and instincts than trust human 
ideas about what is right, for like the Taoists he realized that we have 
to allow all living things to look after themselves. 


THE WORLD AND ITS OPPOSITES 


When we say what things are, we always contrast them with 
something else, and when we try to talk about the whole universe — 
about all that there is — we find we really have no words for it. It is 
“one what?” 


All of this “one what?” is represented by the symbol of the great 
circle. But in order to think about life, we have to make comparisons, 
and so we split it in two and derive from the circle the symbol of the 
yang and the yin, the positive and the negative. 


We see this symbol over and over on Chinese pottery, and today 
on everything from jewelry to T-shirts. Traditionally this emblem is 
one of the basic symbols of the philosophy of Taoism. It is the 
symbol of the yang, or the male, and the yin, the female, of the 
positive and the negative, the yes and the no, thelight and the dark. 
We always have to divide the world into opposites or categories in 
order to be able to think about it. In the words of Lao-tzu, 


When people see some things as 
beautiful, 


other things become ugly. 
When people see some things as good, 


other things become bad. 


Being and non-being create each other. 
Difficult and easy support each other. 
Long and short define each other. 

High and low depend on each other. 


LAO-TZU 


In the literary tradition of Taoism, the legendary Chinese 
philosopher Lao-tzu is often referred to as a contemporary of 
Confucius. According to some accounts, Lao-tzu was supposed to 
have been a court librarian who wearied of the insincerity and 
intrigue of court life and decided to leave the city and go off and live 
in the mountains. But before he left, the guardian of the gate is said to 
have stopped him and said, 


“Sir, I cannot let you go until you write down something of your 
wisdom.” 


And it is said that he sat down in the guardhouse and recorded the 
book known as the Tao Te Ching, the book of Tao and Te, of the Way 
and its power. 


The core of Lao-tzu’s written philosophy deals with the art of 
getting out of one’s own way, learning how to act without forcing 
conclusions, and living in skillful harmony with the processes of 
nature instead of trying to push them around. Lao-tzu didn’t actually 
say very much about the meaning of Tao; instead, he simply offered 
his advice. 


It is now believed that although this work was probably rendered 
in a single hand during the time of Confucius, or shortly thereafter, 
the author incorporated the wisdom of a much older folk tradition. 
One school believes that Taoist literature was inspired by the oral 
teaching of shamanic hermits in ancient times. Another holds that the 
Tao Te Ching was an attempt to bring the practical, conventional 
wisdom of the Chinese people to the ruling class in order to help them 
to rule with greater wisdom and compassion. Both schools are 


probably partially correct, and in either case Taoist thought remains 
among the most accessible of the world’s great religious philosophies, 
and is perhaps the only one to retain a sense of humor. 


My favorite picture of Lao-tzu is by the master Sengai, and it 
shows him in the sort of disheveled and informal style that is so 
characteristic of Taoist humor, and was later assimilated in Zen 
Buddhism. This playfulness is one of the most delightful 
characteristics of the whole of Taoist philosophy and, as a result, I 
know of no other philosophical works besides those of Lao-tzu and 
his successor Chuang-tse that are so eminently readable. Of all the 
great sages of the world, they alone have a sense of the enjoyment of 
life just as it comes. 


Lao-tzu literally means “the old fellow,” since Lao means “old” 
and tzu means “fellow,” or sometimes boy. So Lao-tzu is the old boy, 
and he is sometimes shown as a white-bearded youth, which is of 
course symbolic of his great wisdom at an early age.* 


Long before Buddhism came to China in about 60 a.d., Lao-tzu’s 
philosophy had revealed to the Chinese that you cannot characterize 
reality, or life itself, as either being or non-being, as either form or 
emptiness, or by any pair of opposites that you might think of. As he 
said, “When all the world knows goodness to be good, there is 
already evil.” 


We do not know what any of these things are except by contrast 
with their opposite. For example, it is difficult to see a figure unless 
there is a contrasting background. Were there no background to the 
figure, the figure would vanish, which is the principle of camouflage. 
Because of the inseparability of opposites, therefore, you realize that 
they always go together, and this hints at some kind of unity that 
underlies them. 


*You will find the writings of both Lao-tzu and his contemporary 
Chuang-tse in a book called The Wisdom of Lao-tzu, translated by Lin 
Yutang. He has arranged the Lao-tzu book that was supposed to have 
been written for the guardian of the gate, and then added quite a few 
substantial excerpts from the book of Chuang-tse as a running 
commentary on Lao-tzu’s passages. [Editor’s note: That book is 


currently out of print. There are of course many other editions in 


print. ] 
Ws 


» 
TAO 


In Lao-tzu’s philosophy this unity is called Tao. Although it is 
written t-a-o, inChinese it is pronounced almost as if it were spelled 
d-o-w. It has the sense of a rhythmic motion, of going on and 
stopping, and also a sense of intelligence, and so you get an idea of a 
sort of rhythmic intelligence that ebbs and flows like the tides. 

The word has two general meanings. One is perhaps best rendered 
into English as “the way,” “the way of things,’ or “the way of 
nature.” The other sense of the word means “to speak,” so when the 
opening words of Lao-tzu’s book say, 


The Tao that can be spoken is not the eternal Tao, 


it makes a pun in Chinese. It says literally, “The Tao that can be Tao 
is not Tao,” or if you read it like a telegram, “Tao can Tao no Tao.” 
The first meaning of Tao is “the way,” and the second meaning of it is 
“to speak,” or in other words, 


The way that can be expressed is not the eternal 
way. 


I prefer not to translate the word Tao at all because to us Tao is a 
sort of nonsense syllable, indicating the mystery that we can never 
understand — the unity that underlies the opposites. In our deepest 
intuition we know that there is some sort of unity underlying these 
various opposites because we find that we can’t separate one from the 
other. We know that a whole universe exists, but we can’t really say 
what it is. So Tao is thus a reality that we apprehend deeply without 
being able to define it. 


A Chinese poet put it this way: 


Plucking chrysanthemums along the 
eastern fence, 


gazing in silence at the southern hills, 
the birds fly home in pairs, 
through the soft mountain air of dusk. 


In all these things there is a deep 
meaning, 


but when we’re about to express it, 


we suddenly forget the words. 


Lao-tzu also said, “Those who speak, do not know; those who 
know, do not speak.” And another Chinese poet satirized him by 
saying, “Those who speak, do not know; those who know, do not 
speak; thus we have heard from Lao-tzu, and yet how does it come 
that he himself wrote a book of five hundred characters?” The point, 
then, is that his whole book does not in any way define what the Tao 
means. He speaks not so much about it, but rather speaks with it, 
using it, as it were, as the power by which to express himself. 


So what is the reason why Tao is inexpressible and yet at the 
same time the basis for a philosophy? The reason is that we cannot 
have any system of thought — whether it be philosophical, or logical, 
or mathematical, or physical — which defines its own basis. This is 


an extremely important principle to understand. In other words, I can 
pick up a paint brush with my right hand, but I can’t pick up my right 
hand. My right hand picks itself up. If I try to pick up my hand, what 
would I pick it up with? There always has to be something, as it were, 
that isn’t picked up, that picks itself up, that works itself and is not 
worked upon. 


In the same way, you will find that if you look up “to be” in a 
dictionary, it is defined as “to exist.” Then when you look up “to 
exist,” you will find it defined as “to be.” And are you any the wiser? 
A dictionary cannot really completely define itself; ultimately it can 
only put words together that correspond to other words. 


In this sense, to try to say anything about the Tao is like trying to 
eat your own mouth, and of course you cannot get outside of it to eat 
it. Or to put it the other way, anything you can chew is not your 
mouth. Anything that is expressed about the Tao is not the Tao. 


J . 
hes 


TZU-JAN 
By Itself So 


There is always something that we don’t know. This is well 
illustrated by the elusive qualities of energy in physics: We cannot 
really define energy, but we can work with it, and this is the case with 
the Tao. The Tao works by itself. Its nature is to be, as is said in 
Chinese, tzu-jan, that which is “of itself,’ “by itself,’ or “itself so.” 
Tzu-jan is almost what we mean when we say that something is 
automatic, or that something happens automatically. We sometimes 


translate this expression in English as “nature,” as when we talk about 
the nature of the mountains, the birds, the bees, and the flowers. That 
sort of nature in Chinese would be tzu-jan. 


The fundamental sense of it is that the Tao operates of itself. All 
that is natural operates of itself, and there is nothing standing over it 
and making it goon. In the same way one’s own body operates of 
itself. You don’t have to decide when and how you’re going to beat 
your heart; it just happens. You don’t decide exactly how you are 
going to breathe; your lungs fill and empty themselves without effort. 
You don’t determine the structure of your own nervous system or of 
your bones; they grow all by themselves. 


So the Tao goes along of itself. And since there is always a basic 
element of life that cannot be defined — in the same way the Tao 
cannot be defined — it cannot be controlled. In other words, you can’t 
get outside yourself to define yourself or to control yourself. Lao-tzu 
would go on to say that since man is an integral part of the natural 
universe, he cannot hope to control it as if it were an object quite 
separate from himself. You can’t get outside of nature to be the 
master of nature. Remember that your heart beats “‘self-so” — and, if 
you give it a chance, your mind can function “self-so,” although most 
of us are afraid to give it a chance. 


WU WEI 
Not Forcing 


Whenever we have the feeling of being able to dominate 
ourselves, master ourselves, or become the lords of nature, what 
happens is that we do not really succeed in getting outside of nature 
or of ourselves at all. Instead we have forced our way of seeing these 
things to conform to an illusion that makes us think they are 
controlled objects, and in doing this we invariably set up a conflict 
inside the system. We soon find that the tension between our idea of 
things and things as they are puts us out of accord with the way of 
things. 

For this reason you might say that not-forcing is the second 
principle of the Tao — the spontaneous or of-itself-so activity (tzu- 
jan) being the first. In Chinese the second principle is called wu wei, 
and it means literally “not doing,” but would be much better 
translated to give it the spirit of “not forcing” or “not obstructing.” In 
reference to the Tao it is the sense that the activity of nature is not 
self-obstructive. It all works together as a unity and does not, as it 
were, split apart from itself to do something to itself. 


Wu wei is also applied to human activity, and refers to a person 
who does not get in his or her own way. One does not stand in one’s 
own light while working, and so the way of wu wei (this sounds like a 
pun but it isn’t) is the way of non-obstruction or noninterference. This 
is the preeminently practical Taoist principleof life. 


What I mean by forcing yourself is something like this: When 
children in school are supposed to be paying attention to the teacher, 
their thoughts will go wandering all over the place, and the teacher 
will soon get angry and say, “Pay attention.” And the children will 
wrap their legs around the legs of the chair, and they will stare at the 
teacher and try to look frightfully intelligent. But what happens was 
expressed very well in a cartoon I saw the other day: A small boy is 
standing and looking at his teacher and saying, “I’m sorry, I didn’t 
hear what you were saying because I was listening so hard.” In other 
words, when we try to be loving, or to be virtuous, or to be sincere, 
we actually think about trying to do it in the same way the child was 
trying to listen, tightening up his muscles and trying to look 
intelligent as he thought about paying attention. But he wasn’t 
thinking about what the teacher is saying, and therefore he wasn’t 


really listening at all. This is a perfect example of what is meant by 
blocking yourself or getting in your own light. 


To offer another illustration of it, suppose you are cutting wood. If 
you go against the way the tree grew, that is to say against the grain 
of the wood, the wood is very difficult to cut. If you go with the grain, 
however, it splits easily. Or again, in sawing wood, some people are 
in a great hurry to get on with sawing and they try and power right 
through the piece. But what happens? When you turn the board over 
you see the back edge of the wood is full of splinters, and you find 
that you are rather tired as well. Any skilled carpenter will tell you, 
“Let the saw do the work, let the teeth do the cutting.” And you find 
that by going at it quite easily, and just allowing the blade to glide 
back and forth, the wood is easily cut. 

As our own proverb says, “Easy does it.” And wu wei means easy 
does it. Look out for the grain of things, the way of things. Move in 
accord with it and work is thereby made simple. 


ode 
DB 
ARS 


TE 
Virtue: Skill at Living 


In one book the philosopher Chuang-tse tells a wonderful story 
about a butcher who was able to keep the same chopper for twenty 
years because he was always careful to let the blade fall on the 
interstices between the bones. And so in this way he never wore it 
out. 


Once again we see that the person who learns the kind of activity 
which is, shall we say, in accord with the Tao, is said to possess 
virtue. This peculiar Chinese sense of virtue is called Te, but it is not 


virtue in quite our ordinary sense of being good. Te is like our word 
virtue when it is used more in the sense of the healing virtues of a 
plant. When we use the word virtue in this way it really designates an 
extraordinary kind of skill at living. And in his book Lao-tzu says the 
superior kind of virtue is not conscious of itself as virtue, and thus 
really is virtue. But the inferior kind of virtue is so anxious to be 
virtuous that it loses its virtue altogether. 


We often come upon the kind of virtuous person who is self- 
consciously virtuous, who has, you might say, too much virtue. These 
are the sorts of people who are a perpetual challenge to all their 
friends, and when you are in their presence you feel they are so good 
that you don’t know quite what to say. And so you are always, as it 
were, sitting on the edge of your chair and feeling a little bit 
uncomfortable in their presence. In a Taoist way of speaking, this 
kind of person stinks of virtue, and doesn’t really have any virtue at 
all. 


The truly virtuous person is unobtrusive. It is not that they are 
affectedly modest; instead they are what they are quite naturally. Lao- 
tzu says that the greatest intelligence appears to be stupidity, the 
greatest eloquence sounds like a stammer, and the greatest brightness 
appears as if it were dull. And of course this is a kind of paradoxical 
way of saying that true virtue, Te, is the living of human life in such a 
fashion as not to get in its own way. 


This is the thing we all admire and envy so much about children. 
We say that they are naive, that they are unspoiled, that they are 
artless, and that they are unself-conscious. When you see a little child 
dancing who has not yet learned to dance before an audience, you can 
see the child dancing all by itself, and there is a kind of completeness 
and genuine integrity to their motion. 


When the child then sees that parents or teachers are watching, 
and learns that they may approve or disapprove, the child begins to 
watch itself while dancing. All at once the dancing becomes stiff, and 
then becomes artful, or worse, artificial, and the spirit of the child’s 
dance is lost. But if the child happens to go on studying dance, it is 
only after years and years that, as an accomplished artist, the dancer 
regains the naivete and the naturalness of their original dance. But 


when the naturalness is regained it is not just the simple, we could say 
embryonic, naturalness of the child, completely uncultivated and 
untutored. Instead it is a new kind of naturalness that takes into itself 
and carries with itself years and years of technique, know-how, and 
experience. 


In all this you will see that there are three stages. There is first 
what we mightwhat we migh call the natural or the childlike stage of 
life in which self-consciousness has not yet arisen. Then there comes 
a middle stage, which we might call one’s awkward age, in which one 
learns to become self-conscious. And finally the two are integrated in 
the rediscovered innocence of a liberated person. 


Of course there is a tremendous advantage in this, because one 
must ask, if you are enjoying life without knowing that you are 
enjoying it, are you really enjoying it? And here, of course, 
consciousness offers an enormous advantage. But there is also a 
disadvantage, even a danger, in developing it, because as 
consciousness grows, and as we begin to know how to look at 
ourselves and beyond ourselves, we may start over and over again, 
and cause much interference with ourselves. This is when we begin to 
get in our own light. 


You know how it is when you get in your own light or get in your 
own way — when it becomes desperately essential that you hurry to 
catch a train or plane, for example, instead of your muscles being 
relaxed and ready to run, your anxiety about not getting there in time 
immediately stiffens you up and you start stumbling over everything. 
It is the same sort of thing on those days when everything goes 
absolutely wrong. First of all, when you’re driving to the office, all 
the traffic lights are against you. Of course this irritates you, and 
because of your irritation you become more tense and more uptight in 
your way of handling things, and this leads to mistakes. It could lead 
to being so furious and going so fast that the police stop you, and so 
on and so forth. It is this way of battering against life, as it were, that 
ties it up in knots. 


And so, the secret in Taoism is to get out of one’s own way, and 
to learn that this pushing ourselves, instead of making us more 
efficient, actually interferes with everything we set about to do. 


PART II 


THE GENTLE 
WAY 


The Tao is like a well: 

used but never used up. 

It is like the eternal void: 

filled with infinite possibilities.... 


The Tao is called the Great Mother, 
empty yet inexhaustible, 


it gives birth to infinite worlds. 


It is always present within you. 


You can use it any way you want. 


THE STRENGTH OF WEAKNESS 


Lao-tzu writes about the philosophy of the strength of weakness. 
It is a strange thing, I think, how it is men in the West do not realize 
how much softness is strength. One of old Lao-tzu’s favorite 
analogies was water. He spoke of water as the weakest of all things in 
the world, and yet there is nothing to be compared with it in 
overcoming what is hard and strong. You can cut water with a knife 
and it lets the knife go right through, yet water alone cut the Grand 
Canyon out of solid rock. 


Lao-tzu also said that while being a man, one should retain a 
certain essential feminine element, and that he who does this will 
become a channel for the whole world. 


The ideal of the hundred-percent tough guy, the rigid, rugged 
fellow with muscles like steel, is really a model for weakness. We 
probably assume this sort of tough exterior will work as a hard shell 
to protect ourselves — but so much of what we fear from the outside 
gets to us because we fear our own weakness on the inside. 


What happens if an engineer builds a completely rigid bridge? If, 
for example, the Golden Gate Bridge or George Washington Bridge 
did not sway in the wind, and if they had no give, and no yielding, 
they would come crashing down. And so you can always be sure that 
when a man pretends to be 100 percent male on the outside, he is in 
doubt of his manhood somewhere on the inside. If he can allow 
himself to be weak, he can allow himself to experience what is really 
his greatest strength. This is so not only of human beings, but of all 
living things. 


JUDO 
The Gentle Way 


The philosophy of the strength of weakness that came from China 
to Japan through the migration of Zen Buddhism has inspired the 
astonishing forms of self-defense known as judo and akido. The word 
judo is fascinating because it means ju, the gentle, do, way. Do is the 
Japanese way of pronouncing the Chinese Tao, and so it is the gentle 
Tao, the philosophy of theTao as applied to self-defense. 


This philosophy has various components, and one of the most 
basic elements to the whole practice of judo is an understanding of 
balance — and balance, indeed, is a fundamental idea in Taoist 
philosophy. The philosophy of the Tao has a basic respect for the 
balance of nature, and if you are sensitive you don’t upset that 
balance. Instead you try to find out what it is doing, and go along with 
it. 


In other words you avoid such mistakes as the wholesale slaughter 
of an insect pest or the intro- duction of rabbits into a country like 
Australia without thought as to whether they have a natural enemy, 
because through such interference with the balance of nature you 
inevitably find yourself in trouble. The philosophy of balance is the 
first thing that all students of judo and akido have to learn, and it is 
the underlying principle of the Tao. 


If we look at the principles of judo, the question of balance is 
easily demonstrated by looking at what happens when we try to lift a 
heavy roll of material. We would be foolish to try and just pick it up 
from the top, because that shows no understanding of the laws of 
balance. If you want to lift something, go below its center of gravity. 
Put your shoulder to it, undermine it, and then swoop it up. That 
principle follows throughout judo. Part of the understanding of 
balance in judo is to learn to walk in such a way that you are never off 
center: your legs form the base of a triangle, and your body is on the 
apex, and when you turn you always try to keep your feet 
approximately under your shoulders, and in this way you are never off 
balance. This is a good practice in everyday life as well as in judo. 


The second principle, beyond understanding and keeping balance, 
is not to oppose strength with strength. When you are attacked by the 
enemy, you do not oppose him. Instead you yield to him, just like the 
matador yields to the bull, and you use his strength and the principle 
of balance to bring about his downfall. 


Suppose, for example, there is a blow coming at me from a certain 
direction. Instead of defending myself, and pushing the blow off, the 
idea in judo is to carry the blow away. But as the adversary goes by, 
the knee goes out, catching him below his point of balance. The 
adversary then falls heavy and hard — brought about by his own 
initiative, and your receptivity. By letting him follow his punch 
through, and not deflecting it, he has fallen into your trap. 


The same attitude of relaxed gentleness is most beautifully seen 
when you watch cats climbing trees. When a cat falls out of a tree, it 
lets go of itself. The cat becomes completely relaxed, and lands 
lightly on the ground. But if a cat were about to fall out of a tree and 
suddenly made up its mind that it didn’t want to fall, it would become 
tense and rigid, and would be just a bag of broken bones upon 
landing. 


In the same way, it is the philosophy of the Tao that we are all 
falling off a tree, at every moment of our lives. As a matter of fact, the 
moment we were born we were kicked off a precipice and we are 
falling, and there is nothing that can stop it. So instead of living in a 


state of chronic tension, and clinging to all sorts of things that are 
actually falling with us because the whole world is impermanent, be 
like a cat. Don’t resist it. 


LI 
The Patterns of Nature 


Thus far, like a typical philosopher, I have been trying to explain 
what Taoism is, and odd as it may seem, this is really quite the wrong 
thing to do. 


Stranger still, if I succeed in giving you some sort of impression 
that you really understand, if I succeed in making the whole problem 
clear in words, I shall have deceived you. One reason life seems 
problematic to us, and one reason why we look to philosophy to try to 
clear it all up, is that we have been trying to fit the order of the 
universe to the order of words. And it simply does not work. 


Yet I continue to talk and write about Eastern philosophy, and I 
have often said that the real basis of Buddhism is not a set of ideas 
but an experience. This of course is equally true of Taoism as well, 
which like Buddhism recognizes that experience is altogether 
something different from words. If you have tasted a certain taste, 
even the taste of water, you know what it is. But to someone who has 
not tasted it, it can never be explained in words because it goes far 
beyond words. 


The order of the world is very different from the order we create 
with the rules of our syntax and grammar. The order of the world is 
extraordinarily complex, while the order of words is relatively simple, 
and to use the order of words to try to explain life is really as clumsy 
an operation as trying to drink water with a fork. Our confusion of the 
order of logic and of words with the order of nature is what makes 
everything seem so problematic to us. 


When we say that we are trying to make sense out of life, that 
means that we are trying to treat the real world as if it were a 


collection of words. Words are symbols, and they mean something 
other than signs formed out of letters, but actual people, mountains, 
rivers, and stars are neither symbols nor signs. And so the difficulty 
that we encounter in trying to make sense out of life is that we are 
trying to fit the very complex order of life itself into a very simple 
system that is not up to the task, and this gets us involved in all sorts 
of unforeseen difficulties. 


In the Chinese language there are two terms that signify these two 
different orders. The first is the word tsu, which means “the order of 
things as measured,” or “the order of things as written down.” In one 
sense this word has the meaning of “law,” and although we 
sometimes speak of the laws of nature, the laws of nature could never 
be tsu unless we made an attempt to describe them or write them 
down in order to think about them in words. 


Since tsu only refers to the order of things as we think about them 
in words or numbers, the Chinese use another word, /i, for the actual 
order of nature. This is a peculiar and interesting term; its original 
meaning is the markings in jade, the grain in wood, or the fiber in 
muscle, and it has been translated by the great student of Chinese 
thought, Joseph Needham, as “organic pattern.” It refers to the kind of 
complex pattern we see when we look at the stars, for example, and 
see a gaseous nebula, which is an extremely indeterminate form, or 
when we look at the sculpted layers forming the patterns in a rock, 
and see the glorious rippling that is incredibly difficult to describe, 
although easy enough to understand with our eyes and our feelings. 
But to try to put that kind of order into words is always beyond us, 
and it is for this reason that the attempt to make sense out of life will 
always fail. 


The order of Ji, of the infinite complexity of organic pattern, is 
also the order of our own bodies, and of our brains and nervous 
systems. We actually live by that order, for as I have often noted we 
do not figure out in words or ordered thoughts how we grow our own 
bodies, structure our bones, or regulate our metabolism. In fact we 
really have no idea how we manage to do any of this, no idea how we 


manage to be conscious, how we actually think, and how we actually 
make decisions. We do these things, but the processes and the order 
of the physical body that underlies them are completely mysterious to 
us. Even though we can do these things, we cannot fully describe 
them. 


All the time we are actually relying on this strange and 
unintelligible form of natural order. It is at the basis of everything we 
do, and even when we try to figure something out and describe it in 
words, and then make a decision on the basis of that process, we are 
still unconsciously relying upon an order that we cannot figure out. 
That order constitutes our basic nature, but we are too close to it to 
see it — and so following the Tao is the art of feeling our way into 
our own nature. 


In the process of our upbringing, however, and particularly in our 
education, our parents and teachers are very careful to teach us not to 
rely on our spontaneous abilities. We are taught to figure things out, 
and our first task is to learn the different names for everything. In this 
way we learn to treat all of the things of the world as separate objects. 


A tree is a tree, and it begins with its roots, and ends with the 
leaves on its branches, and that’s that. We are also taught to behave 
consistently, almost as if we are characters in a book, and you know 
how the critics hate an author who doesn’t make his characters 
consistent. If we were actually consistent in life it would be very 
boring, but I think that sometimes, in this respect, we take our cues 
for living from literature, and attempt to impose a consistency on top 
of our natural, ever-changing spontaneity. 


Since we are brought up to make sense of ourselves, and to be 
able to account for ourselves, we are always expected to be able to 
rationalize our actions in words. When we try to accomplish this we 
develop a kind of second self inside us, which in Zen is called the 
observing self. This observing self can be a very good thing for us to 
develop, and it can also cause problems, and run a commentary on 
who we are and what we are doing all the time. It asks, “What will 
other people say? Am I being proper? Does what I am doing make 
any sense?” 


The sociologist George Herbert Meade called this “the 
interiorized other.” That is to say, we have a kind of interior picture, a 
vague sense of who we are, and of what the reaction of other people 
to us says about who we are. That reaction is almost invariably 
communicated to us through what other people say and think, but 
soon we learn to maintain the commentary on our own, and each 
thought or observation is then compared to the idea we have formed. 
Therefore this image becomes interiorized — a second self who is 
commenting all the time upon what the first one is doing — and in 
any given situation we must either rationalize why a certain behavior 
is consistent with that image, or forceourselves to change that 
behavior, or fail to change it and feel guilty for failing. The difficulty 
with this is that although it is exceedingly important for all purposes 
of civilized intercourse and personal relationships to be able to make 
sense of what we are doing, and of what other people are doing, and 
to be able to talk about it all in words, this nevertheless warps us. 


We have all admired the spontaneity and freshness of children, 
and it is regrettable that as children are brought up they become more 
and more self-conscious. In this way people often lose their freshness, 
and more and more human beings seem to be turned into creatures 
calculated to get in their own way. 


Humans get in their own way because they are always observing 
and questioning themselves. They are always trying to fit the order of 
the world into the order of sense, the order of thought and words. And 
therefore the children lose their naturalness and spontaneity. For this 
reason we admire the people, whether they be sages or artists, who 
have the ability to return in their mature life to a kind of childlikeness 
and freshness. They are not bothered any more by what people are 
thinking or saying. This is the charm that surrounds the Taoist sages 
of ancient China 


I CHING 
Book of Changes 


For an illustration of the pattern intelligence of Ji, and of how it 
can be used in decision making, let’s look at an ancient Chinese 
method of divination that is infused and linked inextricably with 
Taoism. Perhaps you know of divination as a kind of fortune-telling, 
but this particular form of divination is based on what some people 
believe to be the very oldest of all the Chinese tracts, the J Ching, or 
the Book of Changes. As such, I think one would not presume to ask 
such an ancient and honored book of wisdom as the J Ching what to 
bet on the stock market, but rather one asks questions about one’s 
spiritual or psychological state or consults the oracle concerning 
momentous decisions in life. 


The old and orthodox way of consulting the Book of Changes is to 
use the stalks of a yarrow plant, which are long, straight, and narrow. 
A number of stalks are taken and divided at random, and then the 
calculations are made. But this is a rather long and elaborate way of 
casting, and the not-so-ancient but equally respectable way is to use 
coins. I keep three Chinese coins for this purpose; any other coins 
work just as well. 


The kind of question to ask the Book of Changes that would be 


appropriateunder most circumstances is something like this: “What is 
the best thing for me in my present state?” We phrase a clear 
question, and then take the coins and shake them and drop them; 
according to the way they fall on each toss — heads or tails — we 
construct a six-line hexagram consisting of a pair of three-line 
trigrams. 


It works like this: We shake and throw all three coins together at 
the same time; each throw of the three coins gives us a single line. 
The inscribed side of the Chinese coin — or the “tails” side of an 
American coin — counts as yin, with the value of 2. The reverse side 
— or the “heads” side of an American coin — counts as yang, with a 
value of 3. There are then four different possibilities for the three 
coins: 


If all the coins are yin, the total value of all three coins is 6, and a 
broken line, or negative line, is drawn, and forms the bottom line of 
the hexagram. This is the so-called “old yin” line: 


—__ =P 


If two coins are yin and one is yang, the total value is 7, and an 
unbroken, or positive, line is drawn, the so-called “young yang” line: 


5 ae 


If one coin is yin and two are yang, the total value is 8, and a 
broken, or negative, line, the so called “young yin,” is drawn. And if 
all three coins are yang, the total value is 9, and an unbroken, or 
positive, line is drawn: the “old yang.” 


Let’s look at a particular case, and assume that on the first throw 
we get a total of 6, a negative reading, and the symbol that records the 
negative reading is the drawing of a broken line, a yin line. 


We do it again, and this time the total is 8 — the reading is again 
negative, and again we record it, and draw another broken line on top 
of the first broken line, beginning to create our hexagram from the 
bottom to the top. 


We shake them again, drop the coins, and this time the total is 7 
— a positive reading. We record this toss by an unbroken line, or a 
yang line representing the positive principle, and the first trigram is 
completed. 


a ww 


We throw again, and once more the total is 6 and the line is 
negative. And again, and the total is 8 and the line is once more 
negative. And then we throw a final, sixth time, and the total is 9, and 
the line is indisputable: an unbroken, yang line goes on the top. 


And so we arrive at this figure: 


ed 
_ a 4 


wy 


~ 
DP = 


wy 


In order to know what it means we have to take a look at a very 
ancient diagram, one that may be familiar to you. Perhaps you’ve 
seen it on Chinese bowls or jewelry or carving in jade. These are the 
eight trigrams — symbols composed of three vertically stacked lines 
— arranged in a circle, and in the center of the design, you see the 
figure we saw earlier, the symbol of the yang and the yin principles.* 


*You will find the picture at the beginning of this section (page 66). 


In China the symbol in the center is also known as Tai Chi, the 
symbol for the two fundamental principles, the positive and the 
negative, the yang and the yin that are held to lie at the root of all 
phenomena in the world. The Chinese character for the word yang 
looks like a fish; it represents the light side, and means the southern 


or bright side of a mountain. The character for yin is the black fish; it 
represents the shady or dark side of a mountain. Respectively, as we 
have seen, they represent the male and the female principles. 


Notice the symbolism of a light and dark side of a mountain — 
you do not find a mountain with only one side; the two sides must 
always go together. And so, in the same way, the Chinese feel that the 
positive and the negative, the light and the dark, the male and the 
female, the auspicious and the inauspicious always go together in 
human life, because one cannot be distinguished without the other. 


Outside the rotating figure of the positive and negative principles 
you will find the eight trigrams, which are every possible combination 
of broken or unbroken lines. These trigrams represent the eight 
fundamental principles or elements that, according to the Book of 
Changes, are involved in every life situation. 


The one at the top, for example, means heaven, or sky, which is 
symbolic of the creative principle, and the one directly below means 
earth, and is symbolic of the receptive principle. In the Chinese 
system each trigram also corresponds to a family member, and the 
creative symbol is the father, the receptive symbol the mother. 


Over on one side, we find a trigram with two yang or radiant lines 
enclosing a receptive line, and it is associated with the element of fire 
and means clinging, or perhaps holding. Opposite, the trigram has 
two receptive lines surrounding a receptive line, and is associated 
with water, and with the chasm and the dangerous abyss. Between the 
four cardinal trigrams appear the four intercardinal trigrams: thunder, 
wind, lake, and mountain. Within the oracle, every situation in life 
may be represented by two of these principles in preponderance. In 
our example above, one trigram is repeated twice, and what we have 
cast is a mountain over a mountain. 


ADVICE FROM THE ORACLE 


Altogether there are sixty-four possible combinations of these 
eight trigrams, which makes the meaning of each combination pretty 
difficult to remember. So now we will look to the Book of Changes 


itself to see what it has to say about this particular hexagram, and 
what advice the oracle would want to give us in answer to our 
question about our present situation. 


The mountain over the mountain happens to be number 52, called, 
not surprisingly, “the Mountain.” The figure of the mountain is a 
symbol associated with the idea of quietness, or keeping still. And 
when we have “keeping still” or “quietness” above “quietness,” we 
have before us a whole emblem whose meaning is profound calm. 


And so the oracle says, 
THE JUDGMENT 


Keeping still. Keeping his back still 
So that he no longer feels his body. 


He goes into his courtyard 
And does not see his people. 
No blame. 


True quiet means keeping still when the time has come to keep 
still, and going forward when the time has come to go forward. In this 
way rest and movement are in agreement with the demands of the 
time, and thus there is light in life.... 


THE IMAGE 


Mountains standing close together: 
The image of keeping still. 

Thus the superior man 

Does not permit his thoughts 


To go beyond his situation. 


The heart thinks constantly. This cannot be changed. But the 
movements of the heart — that is, a man’s thoughts — should restrict 


themselves to the immediate situation. All thinking that goes beyond 
this only makes the heart sore.* 


*Reprinted by permission of the Princeton University Press from The 
I Ching or Book of Changes, the Richard Wilhelm translation, © 
1950 by Bollingen Foundation, Inc. 


You can see that this is pretty generalized advice, and it is in a 
way appropriate to the question because the question was vague, and 
so the answer is vague. But the symbolism of this answer is simply 
that sitting so as to keep one’s back still, so that one’s back is not 
noticed, is self-forgetfulness. And keeping one’s thoughts to the 
immediate situation suggests the practice of meditation or calmness 
or quietness. That’s what we’re advised to do. It’s good advice. 


A WESTERN POINT OF VIEW 


You may well say, however, that this is a thoroughly crazy way of 
coming to decisions, especially if I were to ask something more 
specific than this, or if I had asked advice on some momentous 
decision I had to make. We would say, from our modern, scientific 
point of view, that flipping coins to come to the great decisions of life 
is the stupidest thing one could possibly do. After all, it neglects all 
rational cogitation about our situations. It takes no account of the data 
available in the situation. It makes no intelligent assessment of the 
probabilities, and before we make any important decision, we like to 
think over all the factors involved. 


We go into the situation and think it out thoroughly. We balance 
the pros against the cons, and we balance assets against deficits. And 
therefore we believe that nothing could be more superstitious than 
relying upon an oracle that in turn relies entirely on the random 
chance of falling coins. We know that the coins have no relation to 
the problem whatsoever, and so naturally our contemporary point of 
view about this — and all other methods of fortune-telling, 
divination, and so on — is that if they work at all, it is nothing more 
than pure chance. 


AN EASTERN POINT OF VIEW 


To someone who believes in this system, however, perhaps a 
traditional Chinese or Japanese person, it does not seem farfetched at 
all. They might say to us, “First of all, when you consider the facts 
that are involved in any particular decision, and calculate all the data, 
how do you select which facts are most relevant? 


“If you are going to enter into a business contract, for instance, 
perhaps the facts you believe pertain to this contract are the state of 
your own business, the state of the other person’s business, and the 
prospects of the market, but you probably would not think about 
many of the personal matters that might affect the plan. And 
nevertheless, something that you may never have considered at all 
may enter into the situation and change it completely. The person 
you’re going into business with may slip on a banana peel and get 
seriously injured and become inefficient or even detrimental in the 
business. How could anyone ever predict such an eventuality by 
taking a sane and rational assessment of the situation?” 


Or perhaps they might say to us, “How do you know when you 
have collected enough data? After all, the data and the potential 
problems involved in any particular situation are virtually infinite. 
What causes you to stop collecting data, or stop gathering information 
about how to solve a problem? I think you just collect information 
until you are either tired of collecting it, or until the time comes to act 
and you have run out of time to collect more data.” And one could 
present a very convincing argument that because you decide when to 
stop investigating in a very arbitrary way, this method is just as 
arbitrary as flipping coins. 


PROBABILITIES AND DECISIONS 


“Well,” we could argue, “what about probabilities? After all, we 
rely a great deal upon statistics in order to make decisions.” But 
statistics have their limitations — they work very well when 
averaging what a large number of people are going to do, but are 
useless in individual cases. The actuarial tables used by insurance 
companies, for example, will tell you quite accurately the average life 


span of an adult male or female, smoker or nonsmoker, but in any 
individual case these tables will not tell us when someone is going to 
die. And the same is probably true if we look at any given decision 
that we may make: The probability is that we will weigh all the 
information, and in the final moment make our decision based upon 
our “hunch,” which is really a gut feeling about the situation that has 
little to do with rational thought. 


Now I am of a somewhat skeptical temperament, and I very much 
doubt if in fact this way of coming to decisions really works. But I 
say this with a certain qualification, because we can never really 
prove whether any method of coming to a decision really works. I 
may make a supremely foolish decision and as a result of it I get 
killed, but there would be absolutely no way of showing that my 
getting killed at that moment did not preserve me from a worse fate, 
and perhaps from making mistakes that involve the lives of many 
other people. If I do happen to succeed by making a right decision in 
business affairs and I earn millions of dollars, there is likewise no 
way of showing that this was not so bad for my character that it was 
the worst thing that could have possibly happened. So we never really 
know whether the outcome of a decision will be a failure or a success 
in the long run, because only the unknown — only what comes next 
— will show whether it was good or bad. And the unknown stretches 
infinitely before us. 


DISADVANTAGES AND ADVANTAGES 


There are advantages and disadvantages to both modern scientific 
inquiry and to the system of this old Chinese book of divination. 
There is a bad side to the Book of Changes and a distinct 
disadvantage in Chinese culture. The Chinese came to rely so much 
on the Book of Changes and its system of symbols for classifying all 
natural phenomena that in the course of time it became a very rigid 
structure and eventually excluded the perception of novelty. 


The warning for us in this, whereby we might take advantage of 
their mistake, is to realize that we are doing the same thing with 
scientific method. There are certain kinds of personalities who tend to 
become very rigid in their scientific ideas and thereafter automatically 


exclude certain possibilities because they do not happen to conform 
with alleged scientific dogma. 


Take for example what we call ESP, or extra-sensory perception, 
although I prefer to call it extraordinary sensory perception. There is 
extremely strong evidence that perception of this kind occurs, and yet 
many scientific people will ignore that evidence because they say that 
it simply can’t happen. Limiting their inquiry in this way is to fall 
into the same rut that the Chinese fell into when they relied too 
exclusively upon the classification of the world and of events found in 
the Book of Changes. 


Both systems, on the other hand, have their advantages. Just as 
there is a positive use for science, there is a positive side to the Book 
of Changes. The picture seen in the book through the interplay of 
these forms is founded on a view of life that is very suggestive to us 
of a new way of looking at our information, and is in accord with 
certain points of view that are now developing in our own science. It 
is a way of looking at life that focuses on not so much the causal 
relationship between the events, as the pattern of events as a whole. 


A COMPARISON OF EAST AND WEST 


Let me try to show the difference between these two ways of 
investigation. When we think of causality, we think chiefly of the way 
events are determined by the past, and by extension the way the 
behavior of people is determined by their past. It is as if events were a 
lot of different marbles that are thrown together and knock each other 
around. In tracing the movement of any particular marble, therefore, 
we will try to find out which other marbles knocked it about, and so 
trace its individual history further and further back. Until quite recent 
times the point of view of Western science was based almost 
exclusively on the idea of causality; it had become a study of the way 
things are influenced by past things. 


The point of view that underlies the Book of Changes is that 
instead of trying to understand events as relationships to past causes, 
it understands events by relation to their present pattern. In other 


words, it comprehends them by taking a total view of the organism 
and its environment instead of what we might call a linear view. 
Although the Chinese have not really applied this approach to their 
technology, they have traditionally applied it to their art and to their 
philosophy of natural law, and their essential point of view is quite 
different from ours. 


We can find a suitable analogy for the Western way of looking at 
things by saying that we are attempting to understand events in 
accordance with the order of words. I can say, “This dog has no 
bark,” and then say, “This tree has no bark,” and the meaning of 
“bark” in these two sentences is determined by what went before 
them — so if I want to know what “bark” means, I have to go back to 
what happened in the past. 


Be: 


If you look at what I would rather call the order of design, 
however, and not the order of words, you find a rather different 
situation because all of the elements of the design come at you 
together. They are, as we would say, “of a piece,” and you see their 
relationship to their context and meaning all at once, much as you see 
the image appear when you develop a photographic plate. The 
meaning of each part of the design is relative to the rest of the design 
just as you see it at this moment. 


In the same way, the fundamental philosophy of the Book of 
Changes and of the Chinese idea of the relationship between events is 
to understand every event in its present context. We do not 
understand something by what went before so much as we do by 
understanding it in terms of what goes with it. So the idea of the Book 
of Changes is to review through its symbols the total pattern of the 
moment when the question is asked, and the supposition is that the 
pattern of this moment governs even the tossing of the coins. 


The interesting comparison that arises out of this comes about 
because we in the West have tended to understand events in 
accordance with linear or sequential orders like the order of words. 


In accordance with the rules of causality, we have evolved or 
constructed a conception of nature based on the structure of written 


law. 


But in the Chinese language we come again to li, the word for 
natural law that originally meant the markings in jade, the grain in 
wood, or the fiber in muscle, which is really the basic fundamental 
pattern of things. Images such as the markings in jade or the grain in 
wood are used because they have an extremely subtle, complex 
pattern that shows a large area of events all happening together at 
once. These patterns have to be taken in and understood at a glance, 
in the same way as we take in a design at a glance. 


The fundamental Chinese idea of the order of nature is not 
compatible with formulation in the order of words, because it is 
organic, and is not linear pattern. 


In other words, when we think of beauty we know very clearly 
what beauty is, but it is absolutely impossible to write down a set of 
laws and rules that can show us how to create beautiful objects. And 
mathematicians, for example, often feel that certain equations, certain 
expressions are peculiarly beautiful. Because they are meticulous 
people, they try to think out exactly why they are beautiful, and ask if 
we could make up a rule or formula to describe when beauty will or 
will not appear. Although they have proposed the criteria of elegance 
as a new kind of proof to be considered, their general conclusion is 
that if we could make up a rule and apply it in mathematics, and if we 
could always by the use of this rule get a beautiful result, eventually 
those results would cease to impress us as being beautiful. They 
would become sterile and dry. 


And in the same way, the order of nature, the order of justice, and 
the order of beauty are things that we can know in ourselves, yet we 
cannot write down in black and white. The wiser person, therefore, is 
one who has the sensibility to see those things in themselves, and to 
know that beauty lies in the variability of experience from one 
situation to another. 


CONCLUSION 


Ultimately, of course, it is absolutely impossible to understand 
and appreciate our natural universe unless you know when to stop 
investigating. 

In our restlessness we are always tempted to climb every hill and 
cross every skyline to find out what lies beyond, yet as you get older 
and wiser it is not just flagging energy but wisdom that teaches you to 
look at mountains from below, or perhaps just climb them a little 
way. For at the top you can no longer see the mountain. And beyond, 
on the other side, there is, perhaps, just another valley like this. 


An old aphorism from India says, “What is beyond, is that which 
is also here.” 


And you must not mistake this for a kind of blasé boredom, or a 
tiring of adventure. It is instead the startling recognition that in the 
place where we are now, we have already arrived. 

This is it. 

What we are seeking is, if we are not totally blind, already here. 

For if you must follow that trail up the mountainside to its bitter 
end, you will discover that it leads eventually right back into the 
suburbs. But only an exceedingly stupid person will think that is 
where the trail really goes. For the actual truth is the trail goes to 
every single place that it crosses, and leads also to where you are 
standing and watching it. Watching it vanish into the hills, you are 
already in the truth beyond, which it leads to ultimately. 


Many a time I have had intense delight listening to some hidden 


waterfall in the mountain canyon, a sound made all the more 
wonderful since I have set aside the urge to ferret the thing out, and 
clear up the mystery. I no longer need to find out just where the 
stream comes from and where it goes. Every stream, every road, if 
followed persistently and meticulously to its end, leads nowhere at 
all. 


And this is why the compulsively investigative mind is always 
ending up in what it believes to be the hard and bitter reality of the 
actual facts. Playing a violin is, after all, only scraping a cat’s entrails 
with horsehair. The stars in heaven are, after all, only radioactive 
rocks and gas. But this is nothing more than the delusion that truth is 
to be found only by picking everything to pieces like a spoiled child 
picking at its food. 


And this is also why the Platos of the Far East so seldom tell all, 
and why they avoid filling in every detail. This is why they leave in 
their paintings great areas of emptiness and vagueness, and yet the 
paintings are not unfinished. These are not just unfilled backgrounds, 
they are integral parts of the whole composition, suggestive and 
pregnant voids and rifts that leave something to our imagination. And 
we do not make the mistake of trying to fill them in with detail in the 
mind’s eye. We let them remain suggestive. 


So it is not by pushing relentlessly and aggressively beyond those 
hills that we discover the unknown and persuade nature to disclose 
her secrets. What is beyond is also here. 


Any place where we are may be considered the center of the 
universe. Anywhere that we stand can be considered the destination 
of our journey. 


To understand this, however, we have to be receptive and open. In 
other words, we have to do what Lao-tzu advised when he said that 
while being a man one should also preserve a certain femininity, and 
thereby one will become a channel for the whole universe. And this is 
not just good advice for men. 


Yet that is one of the misunderstandings in which I believe our 


culture in the West is submerged. The feminine values are despised, 
and we find typically among men a strange kind of reluctance to be 
anything but an all-male man. 


But there is a tremendous necessity for us to value — alongside, 
as it were, the aggressive, masculine element symbolized by the 
sword — the receptive feminine element symbolized, perhaps, by the 
open flower. After all, our human senses are not knives, they are not 
hooks; they are the soft veil of the eye, the delicate drum of the ear, 
the soft skin on the tips of the fingers and on the body. It is through 
these delicate, receptive things that we receive our knowledge of the 
world. 


And therefore it is only through a kind of weakness and softness 
that it is possible for knowledge to come to us. 


To put it another way, we have to come to terms with nature by 
wooing her rather than fighting her, and instead of holding nature at a 
distance through our objectivity as if she were an enemy, realize 
rather that she is to be known by her embrace. 


In the end, we must decide what we really want to know about. 


Do we trust nature, or would we rather try to manage the whole 
thing? 

Do we want to be some kind of omnipotent god, in control of it 
all, or do we want to enjoy it instead? After all, we can’t enjoy what 
we are anxiously trying to control. One of the nicest things about our 
bodies is that we don’t have to think about them all the time. If when 
you woke up in the morning you had to think about every detail of 
your circulation, you would never get through the day. 


It was well said: “The mystery of life is not a problem to be 
solved, but a reality to be experienced.” 


The song of birds, the voices of insects are all means of 
conveying truth to the mind. In flowers and grasses we see messages 
of the Tao. 


The scholar, pure and clear of mind, serene and open of heart, 
should find in everything what nourishes him. 


But if you want to know where the flowers come from, even the 
god of spring doesn’t know. 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


Alan Watts was born in England in 1915. Beginning at age 
sixteen, when he wrote essays for the journal of the Buddhist Lodge 
in London, he developed a reputation over the next forty years as a 
foremost interpreter of Eastern philosophies for the West, eventually 
developing an audience of millions who were enriched through his 
books, tape recordings, radio and television appearances, and public 
lectures. He became widely recognized for his Zen writings and for 
The Book: On the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are. 


In all, Watts wrote more than twenty-five books and recorded 
hundreds of lectures and seminars, all building toward a personal 
philosophy he shared with honesty and joy with his readers and 
listeners throughout the world. His overall works have presented a 
model of individuality and self-expression that can be matched by 
few philosophers. 


Watts came to the United States in 1938, and earned a Master’s 
Degree in Theology from Seabury-Western Theological Seminary. 
He was Episcopal Chaplain at Northwestern University during World 
War II, and held fellowships from Harvard University and the 
Bollingen Foundation. He became professor and dean of the 
American Academy of Asian Studies in San Francisco and lectured 
and traveled widely. 


He died in 1973 at his home in northern California, survived by 
his second wife and seven children. A complete list of his books and 
tapes may be found at www.alanwatts.com. 


The book you have just read was created 
from the Alan Watts Electronic University 
audio tape archive, a vast library of recordings 
of his public lectures and seminars. 

The archive is the source of Alan Watts’ 
audio collections, new publications, 
and ongoing public radio programs. 


For information about ordering 
Alan Watts audio collections, 
go to www.alanwatts.com 
on the Internet, or write or call: 


Electronic University 
Post Office Box 2309 
San Anselmo, CA 94979 


Phone: (800) 969-2887 
Catalog request: Ext. 2 
Ordering: Ext. 3 
E-mail: watts@alanwatts.com 


New World Library is dedicated to 
publishing books, audiocassettes, and videotapes 
that inspire and challenge us to improve the quality 
of our lives and our world. 


Our books and tapes are available 
in bookstores everywhere. 


For a catalog of our complete library 
of fine books and cassettes, contact: 


New World Library 
14 Pamaron Way 
Novato, CA 94949 


Phone: (415) 884-2100 
Or call toll-free (800) 972-6657 
Catalog requests: Ext. 50 
Ordering: Ext. 52 
Fax: (415) 884-2199 


E-mail: escort@newworldlibrary.com 


Website: www.newworldlibrary.com 


