Alan 
Watts 


The Way of 


THE WAY OF ZEN 


Also by Alan Watts, available from Vintage 


Behold the Spirit 

Beyond Theology 

The Book 

Cloud-Hidden, Whereabouts Unknown 
Does It Matter? 

In My Own Way 

Nature, Man and Woman 
Psychotherapy East and West 

The Supreme Identity 

This Is It 


v 
—) ow 
ye 


ALAN W. WATTS | a 
THE WAY OF ZEN 


VINTAGE BOOKS 


Vintage Books Edition, August 1989 


Copyright © 1957 by Pantheon Books Inc. 
Copyright renewed 1985 by Mary Jane Watts 


All rights reserved under Intemational and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. 
Published in the United States by Random House, Inc., New York, and simulta- 
neously in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. Originally 
published, in hardcover, by Pantheon Books, New York, in 1957. 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Watts, Alan, 1915-1973. 
The way of Zen = [Zend6] / Alan W. Watts — Ist Vintage Books ed. 
p. cm. 
Parallel title in Japanese characters. 
Reprint. Originally published: New York: Pantheon, 1957. 
Bibliography: p. 
Includes index. 
ISBN 0-679-72301-3 
1. Zen Buddhism. I. Title. II. Title: Zendo. 
[BQ9265.4.W38 1989] 
294.3'927—dcl19 88-40502 
CIP 


Manulactured in the United States of America 
10 9 


To 
TIA, MARK, AND RICHARD 
who will understand it all the better 
for not being able to read it. 


CoNTENTS 


List of Illustrations 
Preface 
The Pronunciation of Chinese Words 


Part One: BackcrounD AND History 
1 The Philosophy of the Tao 

2 The Origins of Buddhism 

38 Mahayana Buddhism 

4 The Rise and Development of Zen 


Part Two: PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 
1 “Empty and Marvelous” 

2 “Sitting Quietly, Doing Nothing” 
8 Za-zen and the Koan 

4 Zen in the Arts 


Bibliography 
Chinese Notes 
Index 


List oF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Bodhidharma. By Hakuin Zenji (1683-1768). 

Two views of the rock and sand garden at Ryoanji, Kyota, 
Bodhidhamna and Hui-k’e. By Sesshu (1420-1506). 
Haboku Landscape. By Sesshu (1420-1506). 


following page 110 


PREFACE 


During the past twenty years there has been an extraordinary 
growth of interest in Zen Buddhism. Since the Second World 
War this interest has increased so much that it seems to be be- 
coming a considerable force in the intellectual and artistic world 
of the West. It is connected, no doubt, with the prevalent en- 
thusiasm for Japanese culture which is one of the constructive 
results of the late war, but which may amount to no more than 
a passing fashion. The deeper reason for this interest is that the 
viewpoint of Zen lies so close to the “growing edge” of Western 
thought. 

The more alarming and destructive aspects of Western civili- 
zation should not blind us to the fact that at this very time it 
is also in one of its most creative periods. Ideas and insights of 
the greatest fascination are appearing in some of the newer fields 
of Western science-in psychology and psychotherapy, in logic 
and the philosophy of science, in semantics and communications 
theory. Some of these developments might be due to suggestive 
influences from Asian philosophy, but on the whole I am in- 
clined to feel that there is more of a parallelism than a direct 
influence. We are, however, becoming aware of the parallelism, 
and it promises an exchange of views which should be extremely 
stimulating. 

Western thought has changed so rapidly in this century that 
we are in a state of considerable confusion. Not only are there 
serious difficulties of communication between the intellectual 
and the general public, but the course of our thinking and of our 
very history has seriously undermined the common-sense assump- 
tions which lie at the roots of our social conventions and institu- 


tions. Familiar concepts of space, time, and motion, of nature and 
ix 


x PREFACE 


natural law, of history and social change, and of human per- 
sonality itself have dissolved, and we find ourselves adrift with- 
out landmarks in a universe which more and more resembles the 
Buddhist principle of the “Great Void.” The various wisdoms of 
the West, religious, philosophical, and scientific, do not offer 
much guidance to the art of living in such a universe, and we 
find the prospects of making our way in so trackless an ocean of 
relativity rather frightening. For we are used to absolutes, to 
firm principles and laws to which we can cling for spiritual and 
psychological security. 

This is why, I think, there is so much interest in a culturally 
productive way of life which, for some fifteen hundred years, has 
felt thoroughly at home in “the Void,” and which not only feels 
no terror for it but rather a positive delight. To use its own words, 
the situation of Zen has always been- 


Above, not a tile to cover the head; 
Below, not an inch of ground for the foot. 


Such language should not actually be so unfamiliar to us, were 
we truly prepared to accept the meaning of “the foxes have 
holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of Man 
hath not where to lay his head.” 

I am not in favor of “importing” Zen from the Far East, for 
it has become deeply involved with cultural institutions which 
are quite foreign to us. But there is no doubt that there are things 
which we can learn, or unlearn, from it and apply in our own 
way. It has the special merit of a mode of expressing itself which 
is as intelligible-or perhaps as baffling-to the intellectual as to 
the illiterate, offering possibilities of communication which we 
have not explored. It has a directness, verve, and humor, and a 
sense of both beauty and nonsense at once exasperating and de- 
lightful. But above all it has a way of being able to turn one’s 
mind inside out, and dissolving what seemed to be the most op- 
pressive human problems into questions like “Why is a mouse 
when it spins?” At its heart there is a strong but completely un- 


PREFACE xi 


sentimental compassion for human beings suffering and perishing 
from their very attempts to save themselves. 

There are many excellent books about Zen, though some of the 
best are out of print or otherwise difficult to obtain. But as yet 
no one-not even Professor Suzuki-has given us a comprehen- 
sive account of the subject which includes its historical back- 
ground and its relation to Chinese and Indian ways of thought. 
The three volumes of Suzuki’s Essays in Zen Buddhism are an 
unsystematic collection of scholarly papers on various aspects of 
the subject, enormously useful for the advanced student but 
quite baffling to the general reader without an understanding of 
the general principles. His delightful Introduction to Zen Bud- 
dhism is rather narrow and specialized. It omits the essential in- 
formation about the relation of Zen to Chinese Taoism and 
Indian Buddhism, and is in some respects rather more mystifying 
than it need be. His other works are studies of special aspects 
of Zen, all of which require general background and historical 
perspective. 

R. H. Blyth’s Zen in English Literature and Oriental Classics 
is one of the best introductions available, but it is published 
only in Japan and, again, lacks the background information. As 
a series of rambling and marvelously perceptive observations, 
it makes no attempt to give an orderly presentation of the sub- 
ject. My own Spirit of Zen is a popularization of Suzuki's earlier 
works, and besides being very unscholarly it is in many respects 
out of date and misleading, whatever merits it may have in the 
way of lucidity and simplicity. Christmas Humphreys’ Zen Bud- 
dhism, published only in England, is likewise a popularization 
of Suzuki and, once more, does not really begin to put Zen in its 
cultural context. It is written in a clear and sprightly fashion, 
but the author finds identities between Buddhism and Theoso- 
phy which I feel to be highly questionable. Other studies of Zen 
by both Western and Asian authors are of a more specialized 
character, or are discussions of Zen @ propos of something else- 
psychology, art, or cultural history. 


xii PREFACE 


In default, then, of a fundamental, orderly, and comprehen- 
sive account of the subject, it is no wonder that Western im- 
pressions of Zen are somewhat confused, despite all the enthusi- 
asm and interest which it has aroused. The problem, then, is to 
write such a book—and this I have tried to do since no one who 
understands the subject better than I seems willing or able to 
do so. Ideally, I suppose, such a work should be written by an 
accomplished and recognized Zen master. But at present no such 
person has sufficient command of English. Furthermore, when 
one speaks from within a tradition, and especially from within its 
institutional hierarchy, there is always apt to be a certain lack 
of perspective and grasp of the outsider’s viewpoint. Again, one 
of the biggest obstacles to communication between Japanese Zen 
masters and Westerners is the absence of clarity as to difference 
of basic cultural premises. Both sides are so “set in their ways” 
that they are unaware of the limitations of their means of com- 
munication. 

Perhaps, then, the most appropriate author of such a work 
would be a Westerner who had spent some years under a Japa- 
hese master, going through the whole course of Zen training. 
Now from the standpoint of Western “scientific scholarship” this 
would not do at all, for such a person would have become an 
“enthusiast” and “partisan” incapable of an objective and disin- 
terested view. But, fortunately or unfortunately, Zen is above all 
an experience, nonverbal in character, which is simply inacces- 
sible to the purely literary and scholarly approach. To know what 
Zen is, and especially what it is not, there is no alternative but 
to practice it, to experiment with it in the concrete so as to dis- 
cover the meaning which underlies the words. Yet such West- 
erners as have undergone some of the special type of training 
followed in Rinzai Zen tend to become “cagey” and uncommuni- 
cative on the principle that 


Those who know do not speak; 
Those who speak do not know. 


PREFACE xiii 


Although, however, they do not “put up,” they do not completely 
“shut up.” On the one hand, they would love to share their 
understanding with others. But on the other hand, they are con- 
vinced that words are ultimately futile, and are, furthermore, 
under an agreement not to discuss certain aspects of their train- 
ing. They begin, therefore, to take the characteristically Asian 
attitude of “Come and find out for yourself.” But the scientifically 
trained Westerner is, not without reason, a cautious and skeptical 
fellow who likes to know what he is “getting into.” He is acutely 
conscious of the capacity of the mind for self-deception, for go- 
ing into places where entrance is impossible without leaving 
one’s critical perspective at the door. Asians tend so much to 
despise this attitude, and their Western devotees even more so, 
that they neglect to tell the scientific inquirer many things that 
are still well within the possibilities of human speech and in- 
tellectual understanding. 

To write about Zen is, therefore, as problematic for the out- 
side, “objective” observer as for the inside, “subjective” disciple. 
In varying situations I have found myself on both sides of the 
dilemma. I have associated and studied with the “objective ob- 
servers’ and am convinced that, for all their virtues, they in- 
variably miss the point and eat the menu instead of the dinner. 
I have also been on the inside of a traditional hierarchy—not 
Zen-and am equally convinced that from this position one does 
not know what dinner is being eaten. In such a position one be- 
comes technically “idiotic,” which is to say, out of communica- 
tion with those who do not belong to the same fold. 

It is both dangerous and absurd for our world to be a group 
of communions mutually excommunicate. This is especially true 
of the great cultures of the East and the West, where the po- 
tentialities of communication are the richest, and the dangers of 
failure to communicate the worst. As one who has spent some- 
what more than twenty years trying to interpret the East to the 
West, I have become increasingly certain that to interpret such 
a phenomenon as Zen there is a clear principle to be followed. 


xiv PREFACE 


On the one hand, it is necessary to be sympathetic and to ex- 
periment personally with the way of life to the limit of one’s pos- 
sibilities. On the other hand, one must resist every temptation 
to “join the organization,” to become involved with its institu- 
tional commitments. In this friendly neutral position one is apt 
to be disowned by both sides. But, at the worst, one’s misrepre- 
sentations provoke them to express themselves more clearly. For 
the relationship between two positions becomes far more clear 
when there is a third with which to compare them. Thus even 
if this study of Zen does no more than express a standpoint 
which is neither Zen nor anything Western, it will at least pro- 
vide that third point of reference. 

However, there can be no doubt that the essential standpoint 
of Zen refuses to be organized, or to be made the exclusive pos- 
session of any institution. If there is anything in this world which 
transcends the relativities of cultural conditioning, it is Zen—by 
whatever name it may be called. This is an excellent reason for 
Zen’s not being institutionalized, and for the fact that many of 
its ancient exponents were “universal individualists” who were 
never members of any Zen organization, and never sought the 
acknowledgment of any formal authority. 

This, then, is my position with respect to Zen-and I feel I 
should be frank with the reader in a day when there is so much 
anxiety about people’s credentials or “quantifications.” I cannot 
represent myself as a Zenist, or even as a Buddhist, for this seems 
to me to be like trying to wrap up and label the sky. I cannot 
represent myself as a scientifically objective academician, for- 
with respect to Zen-this seems to me to be like studying bird- 
song in a collection of stuffed nightingales. I claim no rights to 
speak of Zen. I claim only the pleasure of having studied its lit- 
erature and observed its art forms since I was hardly more than 
a boy, and of having had the delight of informal association 
with a number of Japanese and Chinese travelers of the same 
trackless way. 


PREFACE Iv 


This book is intended both for the general reader and for the 
more serious student, and I trust that the former will be tolerant 
of the use of some technical terminology, a Chinese character 
appendix, and other critical apparatus most useful for those who 
wish to explore the subject more deeply. The book is divided 
into two parts, the first dealing with the background and history 
of Zen, and the second with its principles and practice. The 
sources of information are of three types. I have, firstly, used 
almost all the studies of Zen in European languages. Naturally, 
I have made considerable use of the works of Professor D. T. 
Suzuki, but at the same time I have tried not to rely upon them 
too heavily-not because of any defect in them, but because I 
think readers are entitled to something more, by way of a fresh 
viewpoint, than a mere summarization of his views. 

Secondly, I have based the essential view of Zen here pre- 
sented upon a careful study of the more important of its early 
Chinese records, with special reference to the Hsin-hsin Ming, 
the T’an Ching or Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, the Lin-chi Lu, 
and the Ku-tsun-hsii Yii-lu. My own knowledge of T'ang dy- 
nasty Chinese is certainly not enough to deal with some of the 
finer points of this literature, but sufficient, I think, to get what I 
wanted, which was a clear view of the essential doctrine. In all 
this, my efforts have been greatly aided by colleagues and re- 
search associates at the American Academy of Asian Studies, and 
I wish in particular to express my thanks to Professors Sabro 
Hasegawa and Gi-ming Shien, to Dr. Paul and Dr. George Fung, 
Dr. Frederick Hong, Mr. Charles Yick, and to Mr. Kazumitsu 
Kato, priest of the Soto-Zen School. 

Thirdly, my information is derived from a large number of 
personal encounters with teachers and students of Zen, spread 
over more than twenty years. 

In the following pages the translations from the original texts 
are my own, unless otherwise indicated. For the convenience of 
those who read Chinese, I have supplied, following the Bibliog- 


xvi PREFACE 


raphy, an appendix of the original Chinese forms of the more 
important quotations and technical terms. I have found these 
almost essential for the more serious student, for even among the 
most highly qualified scholars there is still much uncertainty as 
to the proper translation of Tang dynasty Zen texts. References 
to this appendix are by superscribed index letters in alphabetical 
order. 

References to other works are by surname of the author and 
number, directing the reader to the Bibliography for full details. 
Scholarly readers will have to excuse me for not using the absurd 
diacritical marks in romanized Sanskrit words, since these are 
merely confusing to the general reader and unnecessary to the 
Sanskritist who will at once call to mind the Devanagiri script. 
As to the proper names of Zen masters and titles of Zen texts, 
these are given in the romanized forms of Mandarin or Japanese 
according to the country of origin, and technical terms are 
given in Mandarin unless used in the discussion of specifically 
Japanese Zen. For Mandarin one is almost compelled by general 
usage to adopt the Wade-Giles romanization, for which I have 
appended a table of pronunciation following this Preface, since 
it has so little relation to the actual sounds. 

I am most grateful to Mr. R. H. Blyth for his kind permission 
to quote a number of his translations of haiku poems from his 
magnificent four-volume anthology, Haiku, published by the 
Hokuseido Press in Tokyo; to Professor Sabro Hasegawa for his 
generous help in preparing the jacket and providing illustrations; 
and to my daughter Joan for the photographs of Ryoanji. 

In conclusion, I am most happy to express my thanks to the 
Bollingen Foundation for a three-year fellowship, during which 
much of the preliminary study was done for the writing of this 
book, 


ALan W. Warts 
Mill Valley, California 
July 1956 


THE PRONUNCIATION OF CHINESE WoRDS 


Consonants 


Vowels 


Diphthongs 


Combinations 


Aspirated: Read p’, t’, k’, ch’, and ts’ as in pin, 
tip, kilt, chin, and bits. 
Unaspirated: Read p, t, k, ch, and ts (or tz) as 
in bin, dip, gilt, gin, and bids. 
hs or sh, as in shoe. 
j is nearly like an “unrolled” r, so that jen is 
nearly the English wren. 


Usually Italian values, 

a as in father 

e as in eight 

eh as in brother 

i as in machine and pin 
ih as in shirt 

o as in soap 

u as in goose 

ii as in German iiber 


ai as in light 
ao as in loud 

ei as in weight 
ia as in William 
ieh as in Korea 
ou as in group 
ua as in swan 
ueh as in doer 
ui as in sway 
uo as in whoah! 


an and ang as in bun and bung 

en and eng as in wooden and among 
in and ing as in sin and sing 

un and ung with the wu as in look 


PART ONE 


BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


One 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE TAO 


Zen Buddhism is a way and a view of life which does not belong 
to any of the formal categories of modern Western thought. It 
is not religion or philosophy; it is not a psychology or a type of 
science. It is an example of what is known in India and China 
as a “way of liberation,” and is similar in this respect to Taoism, 
Vedanta, and Yoga. As will soon be obvious, a way of liberation 
can have no positive definition. It has to be suggested by say- 
ing what it is not, somewhat as a sculptor reveals an image by 
the act of removing pieces of stone from a block. 

Historically, Zen may be regarded as the fulfillment of long 
traditions of Indian and Chinese culture, though it is actually 
much more Chinese than Indian, and, since the twelfth century, 
it has rooted itself deeply and most creatively in the culture of 
Japan. As the fruition of these great cultures, and as a unique 
and peculiarly instructive example of a way of liberation, Zen 
is one of the most precious gifts of Asia to the world. 

The origins of Zen are as much Taoist as Buddhist, and, be- 
cause its flavor is so peculiarly Chinese, it may be best to begin 
by inquiring into its Chinese ancestry-illustrating, at the same 
time, what is meant by a way of liberation by the example of 
Taoism. 

Much of the difficulty and mystification which Zen presents 
to the Western student is the result of his unfamiliarity with 
Chinese ways of thinking-ways which differ startlingly from our 
own and which are, for that very reason, of special value to us 
in attaining a critical perspective upon our own ideas. The prob- 
lem here is not simply one of mastering different ideas, differ- 
ing from our own as, say, the theories of Kant differ from those 


of Descartes, or those of Calvinists from those of Catholics. The 
3 


4 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


problem is to appreciate differences in the basic premises of 
thought and in the very methods of thinking, and these are so 
often overlooked that our interpretations of Chinese philosophy 
are apt to be a projection of characteristically Western ideas 
into Chinese terminology. This is the inevitable disadvantage of 
studying Asian philosophy by the purely literary methods of 
Wester scholarship, for words can be communicative only be- 
tween those who share similar experiences. 

This is not to go so far as to say that so rich and subtle a 
language as English is simply incapable of expressing Chinese 
ideas. On the contrary, it can say much more than has been 
believed possible by some Chinese and Japanese students of 
Zen and Taoism whose familiarity with English leaves some- 
thing to be desired. The difficulty is not so much in the language 
as in the thought-patterns which have hitherto seemed in- 
separable from the academic and scientific way of approaching 
a subject. The unsuitability of these patterns for such subjects as 
Taoism and Zen is largely responsible for the impression that 
the “Oriental mind” is mysterious, irrational, and inscrutable. 
Furthermore, it need not be supposed that these matters are so 
peculiarly Chinese or Japanese that they have no point of con- 
tact with anything in our own culture. While it is true that none 
of the formal divisions of Western science and thought corre- 
sponds to a way of liberation, R. H. Blyth’s marvelous study of 
Zen in English Literature has shown most clearly that the es- 
sential insights of Zen are universal. 

The reason why Taoism and Zen present, at first sight, such a 
puzzle to the Western mind is that we have taken a restricted 
view of human knowledge. For us, almost all knowledge is 
what a Taoist would call conventional knowledge, because we 
do not feel that we really know anything unless we can rep- 
resent it to ourselves in words, or in some other system of con- 
ventional signs such as the notations of mathematics or music. 
Such knowledge is called conventional because it is a matter of 
social agreement as to the codes of communication. Just as 


The Philosophy of the Tao 5 


people speaking the same language have tacit agreements as to 
what words shall stand for what things, so the members of every 
society and every culture are united by bonds of communication 
resting upon all kinds of agreement as to the classification and 
valuation of actions and things. 

Thus the task of education is to make children fit to live in a 
society by persuading them to learn and accept its codes-the 
rules and conventions of communication whereby the society 
holds itself together. There is first the spoken language. The 
child is taught to accept “tree” and not “boojum” as the agreed 
sign for that (pointing to the object). We have no difficulty in 
understanding that the word “tree” is a matter of convention. 
What is much less obvious is that convention also governs the 
delineation of the thing to which the word is assigned. For the 
child has to be taught not only what words are to stand for 
what things, but also the way in which his culture has tacitly 
agreed to divide things from each other, to mark out the 
boundaries within our daily experience. Thus scientific con- 
vention decides whether an eel shall be a fish or a snake, and 
grammatical convention determines what experiences shall be 
called objects and what shall be called events or actions. How 
arbitrary such conventions may be can be seen from the ques- 
tion, “What happens to my fist [noun-object] when I open my 
hand?” The object miraculously vanishes because an action was 
disguised by a part of speech usually assigned to a thing! In 
English the differences between things and actions are clearly, 
if not always logically, distinguished, but a great number of 
Chinese words do duty for both nouns and verbs-so that one 
who thinks in Chinese has little difficulty in seeing that objects 
are also events, that our world is a collection of processes rather 
than entities. 

Besides language, the child has to accept many other forms of 
code. For the necessities of living together require agreement as 
to codes of law and ethics, of etiquette and art, of weights, 
measures, and numbers, and, above all, of role. We have dif- 


6 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


ficulty in communicating with each other unless we can identify 
ourselves in terms of roles-father, teacher, worker, artist, “regu- 
lar guy,” gentleman, sportsman, and so forth. To the extent that 
we identify ourselves with these stereotypes and the rules of 
behavior associated with them, we ourselves feel that we are 
someone because our fellows have less difficulty in accepting 
us-that is, in identifying us and feeling that we are “under con- 
trol.” A meeting of two strangers at a party is always somewhat 
embarrassing when the host has not identified their roles in 
introducing them, for neither knows what rules of conversation 
and action should be observed. 

Once again, it is easy to see the conventional character of 
roles. For a man who is a father may also be a doctor and an 
artist, as well as an employee and a brother. And it is obvious 
that even the sum total of these role labels will be far from sup- 
plying an adequate description of the man himself, even though 
it may place him in certain general classifications. But the con- 
ventions which govern human identity are more subtle and much 
less obvious than these. We learn, very thoroughly though far 
less explicitly, to identify ourselves with an equally conven- 
tional view of “myself.” For the conventional “self” or “person” 
is composed mainly of a history consisting of selected memories, 
and beginning from the moment of parturition. According to con- 
vention, I am not simply what I am doing now. I am also what I 
have done, and my conventionally edited version of my past is 
made to seem almost more the real “me” than what I am at this 
moment. For what I am seems so fleeting and intangible, but 
what I was is fixed and final. It is the firm basis for predictions 
of what I will be in the future, and so it comes about that I am 
more closely identified with what no longer exists than with what 
actually is! 

It is important to recognize that the memories and past events 
which make up a man’s historical identity are no more than a 
selection. From the actual infinitude of events and experiences 


some have been picked out-abstracted-as significant, and this 


The Philosophy of the Tao 7 


significance has of course been determined by conventional 
standards. For the very nature of conventional knowledge is 
that it is a system of abstractions. It consists of signs and symbols 
in which things and events are reduced to their general outlines, 
as the Chinese character jen* stands for “man” by being the ut- 
most simplification and generalization of the human form. 

The same is true of words other than ideographs. The English 
words “man,” “fish,” “star,” “Hower,” “run,” “grow,” all denote 
classes of objects or events which may be recognized as mem- 
bers of their class by very simple attributes, abstracted from 
the total complexity of the things themselves. 

Abstraction is thus almost a necessity for communication, since 
it enables us to represent our experiences with simple and 
rapidly made “grasps” of the mind. When we say that we can 
think only of one thing at a time, this is like saying that the 
Pacific Ocean cannot be swallowed at a gulp. It has to be 
taken in a cup, and downed bit by bit. Abstractions and con- 
ventional signs are like the cup; they reduce experience to units 
simple enough to be comprehended one at a time. In a similar 
way, curves are measured by reducing them to a sequence of 
tiny straight lines, or by thinking of them in terms of the squares 
which they cross when plotted on graph paper. 

Other examples of the same process are the newspaper photo- 
graph and the transmission of television. In the former, a natural 
scene is reproduced in terms of light and heavy dots arranged 
in a screen or gridlike pattern so as to give the general impres- 
sion of a black-and-white photograph when seen without a 
magnifying glass. Much as it may look like the original scene, 
it is only a reconstruction of the scene in terms of dots, some- 
what as our conventional words and thoughts are reconstructions 
of experience in terms of abstract signs. Even more like the 
thought process, the television camera transmits a natural scene 
in terms of a linear series of impulses which may be passed along 
a wire. 

Thus communication by conventional signs of this type gives 


8 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


us an abstract, one-at-a-time translation of a universe in which 
things are happening altogether-at-once-a universe whose con- 
crete reality always escapes perfect description in these abstract 
terms. The perfect description of a small particle of dust by 
these means would take everlasting time, since one would have 
to account for every point in its volume. 

The linear, one-at-a-time character of speech and thought is 
particularly noticeable in all languages using alphabets, repre- 
senting experience in long strings of letters. It is not easy to say 
why we must communicate with others (speak) and with our- 
selves (think) by this one-at-a-time method. Life itself does not 
proceed in this cumbersome, linear fashion, and our own or- 
ganisms could hardly live for a moment if they had to control 
themselves by taking thought of every breath, every beat of 
the heart, and every neural impulse. But if we are to find some 
explanation for this characteristic of thought, the sense of sight 
offers a suggestive analogy. For we have two types of vision— 
central and peripheral, not unlike the spotlight and the flood- 
light. Central vision is used for accurate work like reading, in 
which our eyes are focused on one small area after another like 
spotlights. Peripheral vision is less conscious, less bright than 
the intense ray of the spotlight. We use it for seeing at night, and 
for taking “subconscious” notice of objects and movements not 
in the direct line of central vision. Unlike the spotlight, it can 
take in very many things at a time. 

There is, then, an analogy-and perhaps more than mere 
analogy-between central vision and conscious, one-at-a-time 
thinking, and between peripheral vision and the rather mysterious 
process which enables us to regulate the incredible complexity 
of our bodies without thinking at all. It should be noted, further, 
that we call our bodies complex as a result of trying to under- 
stand them in terms of linear thought, of words and concepts. 
But the complexity is not so much in our bodies as in the task of 
trying to understand them by this means of thinking. It is like 


The Philosophy of the Tao 9 


trying to make out the features of a large room with no other 
light than a single bright ray. It is as complicated as trying to 
drink water with a fork instead of a cup. 

In this respect, the Chinese written language has a slight ad- 
vantage over our own, and is perhaps symptomatic of a different 
way of thinking. It is still linear, still a series of abstractions 
taken in one at a time. But its written signs are a little closer to 
life than spelled words because they are essentially pictures, 
and, as a Chinese proverb puts it, “One showing is worth a 
hundred sayings.” Compare, for example, the ease of showing 
someone how to tie a complex knot with the difficulty of telling 
him how to do it in words alone. 

Now the general tendency of the Western mind is to feel that 
we do not really understand what we cannot represent, what we 
cannot communicate, by linear signs-by thinking. We are like 
the “wallflower” who cannot learn a dance unless someone draws 
him a diagram of the steps, who cannot “get it by the feel.” For 
some reason we do not trust and do not fully use the “peripheral 
vision” of our minds. We learn music, for example, by restricting 
the whole range of tone and rhythm to a notation of fixed tonal 
and rhythmic intervals—a notation which is incapable of repre- 
senting Oriental music. But the Oriental musician has a rough 
notation which he uses only as a reminder of a melody. He learns 
music, not by reading notes, but by listening to the performance 
of a teacher, getting the “feel” of it, and copying him, and this 
enables him to acquire rhythmic and tonal sophistications 
matched only by those Western jazz artists who use the same 
approach. 

We are not suggesting that Westerners simply do not use the 
“peripheral mind.” Being human, we use it all the time, and every 
artist, every workman, every athlete calls into play some special 
development of its powers. But it is not academically and 
philosophically respectable. We have hardly begun to realize 
its possibilities, and it seldom, if ever, occurs to us that one of 


10 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


its most important uses is for that “knowledge of reality” which 
we try to attain by the cumbersome calculations of theology, 
metaphysics, and logical inference. 

When we tur to ancient Chinese society, we find two “philo- 
sophical” traditions playing complementary parts—Confucianism 
and Taoism. Generally speaking, the former concems itself with 
the linguistic, ethical, legal, and ritual conventions which pro- 
vide the society with its system of communication. Confucianism, 
in other words, preoccupies itself with conventional knowledge, 
and under its auspices children are brought up so that their 
originally wayward and whimsical natures are made to fit the 
Procrustean bed of the social order. The individual defines him- 
self and his place in society in terms of the Confucian formulae. 

Taoism, on the other hand, is generally a pursuit of older men, 
and especially of men who are retiring from active life in the 
community. Their retirement from society is a kind of outward 
symbol of an inward liberation from the bounds of conventional 
patterns of thought and conduct. For Taoism concerns itself 
with unconventional knowledge, with the understanding of life 
directly, instead of in the abstract, linear terms of representa- 
tional thinking. 

Confucianism presides, then, over the socially necessary task 
of forcing the original spontaneity of life into the rigid rules of 
convention-a task which involves not only conflict and pain, but 
also the loss of that peculiar naturalness and un-self-consciousness 
for which little children are so much loved, and which is some- 
times regained by saints and sages. The function of Taoism is 
to undo the inevitable damage of this discipline, and not only to 
restore but also to develop the original spontaneity, which is 
termed tzu-jan® or “self-so-ness.” For the spontaneity of a child 
is still childish, like everything else about him. His education 
fosters his rigidity but not his spontaneity. In certain natures, the 
conflict between social convention and repressed spontaneity is 
so violent that it manifests itself in crime, insanity, and neurosis, 


The Philosophy of the Tao 11 


which are the prices we pay for the otherwise undoubted benefits 
of order. 

But Taoism must on no account be understood as a revolution 
against convention, although it has sometimes been used as a 
pretext for revolution. Taoism is a way of liberation, which never 
comes by means of revolution, since it is notorious that most 
revolutions establish worse tyrannies than they destroy. To be 
free from convention is not to spurn it but not to be deceived by 
it. It is to be able to use it as an instrument instead of being 
used by it. 

The West has no recognized institution corresponding to 
Taoism because our Hebrew-Christian spiritual tradition iden- 
tifies the Absolute-God-with the moral and logical order of 
convention. This might almost be called a major cultural catas- 
trophe, because it weights the social order with excessive au- 
thority, inviting just those revolutions against religion and tra- 
dition which have been so characteristic of Western history. 
It is one thing to feel oneself in conflict with socially sanctioned 
conventions, but quite another to feel at odds with the very root 
and ground of life, with the Absolute itself. The latter feeling 
nurtures a sense of guilt so preposterous that it must issue either 
in denying one’s own nature or in rejecting God. Because the 
first of these alternatives is ultimately impossible-like chewing 
off one’s own teeth-the second becomes inevitable, where such 
palliatives as the confessional are no longer effective. As is the 
nature of revolutions, the revolution against God gives place to 
the worse tyranny of the absolutist state-worse because it can- 
not even forgive, and because it recognizes nothing outside the 
powers of its jurisdiction. For while the latter was theoretically 
true of God, his earthly representative the Church was always 
prepared to admit that though the laws of God were immutable, 
no one could presume to name the limits of his mercy. When 
the throne of the Absolute is left vacant, the relative usurps it 
and commits the real idolatry, the real indignity against God- 


12 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


the absolutizing of a concept, a conventional abstraction. But it 
is unlikely that the throne would have become vacant if, in a 
sense, it had not been so already-if the Western tradition had had 
some way of apprehending the Absolute directly, outside the 
terms of the conventional order. 

Of course the very word “Absolute” suggests to us something 
abstract and conceptual, such as “Pure Being.” Our very idea 
of “spirit” as opposed to “matter” seems to have more kinship 
with the abstract than the concrete. But with Taoism, as with 
other ways of liberation, the Absolute must never be confused 
with the abstract. On the other hand, if we say that the Tao, 
as the ultimate Reality is called, is the concrete rather than the 
abstract, this may lead to still other confusions. For we are ac- 
customed to associate the concrete with the material, the physio- 
logical, the biological, and the natural, as distinct from the super- 
natural, But from the Taoist and Buddhist standpoints these are 
still terms for conventional and abstract spheres of knowledge. 

Biology and physiology, for example, are types of knowledge 
which represent the real world in terms of their own special 
abstract categories. They measure and classify that world in ways 
appropriate to the particular uses they want to make of it, some- 
what as a surveyor deals with earth in terms of acres, a con- 
tractor in truckloads or tons, and a soil analyst in types of 
chemical structures. To say that the concrete reality of the human 
organism is physiological is like saying that the earth is so many 
tons or acres. And to say that this reality is natural is accurate 
enough if we mean spontaneous (tzu-jan) or natura naturans 
(“nature naturing”). But it is quite inaccurate if we mean 
natura naturata (“nature natured”), that is to say, nature clas- 
sified, sorted into “natures” as when we ask, “What is the nature 
of this thing?” It is in this sense of the word that we must think 
of “scientific naturalism,” a doctrine which has nothing in 
common with the naturalism of Taoism. 

Thus to begin to understand what Taoism is about, we must 
at least be prepared to admit the possibility of some view of 


The Philosophy of the Tao 13 


the world other than the conventional, some knowledge other 
than the contents of our surface consciousness, which can ap- 
prehend reality only in the form of one abstraction (or thought, 
the Chinese nien®) at a time. There is no real difficulty in this, 
for we will already admit that we “know” how to move our 
hands, how to make a decision, or how to breathe, even though 
we can hardly begin to explain how we do it in words. We know 
how to do it because we just do it! Taoism is an extension of this 
kind of knowledge, an extension which gives us a very different 
view of ourselves from that to which we are conventionally ac- 
customed, and a view which liberates the human mind from its 
constricting identification with the abstract ego. 

According to tradition, the originator of Taoism, Lao-tzu, was 
an older contemporary of Kung Fu-tzu, or Confucius, who died 
in 479 B.C.1 Lao-tzu is said to have been the author of the Tao 
Te Ching, a short book of aphorisms, setting forth the principles 
of the Tao and its power or virtue (Te °). But traditional Chinese 
philosophy ascribes both Taoism and Confucianism to a still 
earlier source, to a work which lies at the very foundation of 
Chinese thought and culture, dating anywhere from 3000 to 
1200 B.C. This is the I Ching, or Book of Changes. 

The I Ching is ostensibly a book of divination. It consists of 
oracles based on sixty-four abstract figures, each of which is com- 
posed of six lines. The lines are of two kinds-divided (negative) 
and undivided (positive )—and the six-line figures, or hexagrams, 
are believed to have been based on the various ways in which 
a tortoise shell will crack when heated.? This refers to an ancient 
method of divination in which the soothsayer bored a hole in 


1 Modern scholarship has questioned both the date and the historicity of 
Lao-tzu, but it is hard to say whether this is really more than a manifesta- 
tion of fashion, since there are periodic tendencies to cast doubts on the 
existence of great sages or to question the hoariness of their antiquity. 
One recalls similar doubts in connection with Jesus and the Buddha. There 
are some serious arguments for a later date, but it seems best to keep the 
traditional date until evidence to the contrary becomes more conclusive. 
See Fung Yu-lan (1), vol. 1, pp. 170-76. 

? Fung Yu-lan (1), vol. 1, pp. 379-80. 


14 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


the back of a tortoise shell, heated it, and then foretold the 
future from the cracks in the shell so formed, much as palmists 
use the lines on the hand. Naturally, these cracks were most 
complicated, and the sixty-four hexagrams are supposed to be 
a simplified classification of the various patterns of cracks. For 
many centuries now the tortoise shell has fallen into disuse, and 
instead the hexagram appropriate to the moment in which a 
question is asked of the oracle is determined by the random di- 
vision of a set of fifty yarrow stalks. 

But an expert in the I Ching need not necessarily use tortoise 
shells or yarrow stalks. He can “see” a hexagram in anything- 
in the chance arrangement of a bowl of flowers, in objects scat- 
tered upon a table, in the natural markings on a pebble. A mod- 
em psychologist will recognize in this something not unlike 
a Rorschach test, in which the psychological condition of a 
patient is diagnosed from the spontaneous images which he 
“sees” in a complex ink-blot. Could the patient interpret his own 
projections upon the ink-blot, he would have some useful in- 
formation about himself for the guidance of his future conduct. 
In view of this, we cannot dismiss the divinatory art of the 
I Ching as mere superstition. 

Indeed, an exponent of the I Ching might give us quite a 
tough argument about the relative merits of our ways for mak- 
ing important decisions. We feel that we decide rationally be- 
cause we base our decisions on collecting relevant data about 
the matter in hand. We do not depend upon such irrelevant 
trifles as the chance tossing of a coin, or the patterns of tea leaves 
or cracks in a shell. Yet he might ask whether we really know 
what information is relevant, since our plans are constantly 
upset by utterly unforeseen incidents. He might ask how we 
know when we have collected enough information upon which 
to decide. If we were rigorously “scientific” in collecting in- 
formation for our decisions, it would take us so long to collect 
the data that the time for action would have passed long before 
the work had been completed. So how do we know when we 


The Philosophy of the Tao 15 


have enough? Does the information itself tell us that it is enough? 
On the contrary, we go through the motions of gathering the 
necessary information in a rational way, and then, just because of 
a hunch, or because we are tired of thinking, or because the time 
has come to decide, we act. He would ask whether this is not 
depending just as much upon “irrelevant trifles” as if we had been 
casting the yarrow stalks. 

In other words, the “rigorously scientific’ method of predicting 
the future can be applied only in special cases-where prompt 
action is not urgent, where the factors involved are largely me- 
chanical, or in circumstances so restricted as to be trivial. By 
far the greater part of our important decisions depend upon 
“hunch”-in other words, upon the “peripheral vision” of the 
mind. Thus the reliability of our decisions rests ultimately upon 
our ability to “feel” the situation, upon the degree to which this 
“peripheral vision” has been developed. 

Every exponent of the I Ching knows this. He knows that the 
book itself does not contain an exact science, but rather a useful 
tool which will work for him if he has a good “intuition,” or if, 
as he would say, he is “in the Tao.” Thus one does not consult 
the oracle without proper preparation, without going quietly and 
meticulously through the prescribed rituals in order to bring the 
mind into that calm state where the “intuition” is felt to act more 
effectively. It would seem, then, that if the origins of Taoism 
are to be found in the I Ching, they are not so much in the text 
of the book itself as in the way in which it was used and in the 
assumptions underlying it. For experience in making decisions 
by intuition might well show that this “peripheral” aspect of the 
mind works best when we do not try to interfere with it, when we 
trust it to work by itself-tzu-jan, spontaneously, “self-so.” 

Thus the basic principles of Taoism begin to unfold them- 
selves. There is, first of all, the Tao-the indefinable, concrete 
“process” of the world, the Way of life. The Chinese word means 
originally a way or road, and sometimes “to speak,” so that the 
first line of the Tao Te Ching contains a pun on the two meanings: 


16 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 
The Tao which can be spoken is not eternal Tao. / 
But in trying at least to suggest what he means, Lao-tzu says: 


There was something vague before heaven and earth arose. How 
calm! How void! It stands alone, unchanging; it acts everywhere, 
untiring. It may be considered the mother of everything under 
heaven. I do not know its name, but call it by the word Tao. (25) 


And again: 


The Tao is something blurred and indistinct. 
How indistinct! How blurred! 

Yet within it are images. 

How blurred! How indistinct! 

Yet within it are things. 

How dim! How confused! 

Yet within it is mental power. 

Because this power is most true, 

Within it there is confidence. (21) 


“Mental power” is ching,’ a word which combines the ideas of 
essential, subtle, psychic or spiritual, and skillful. For the point 
seems to be that as one’s own head looks like nothing to the 
eyes yet is the source of intelligence, so the vague, void-seeming, 
and indefinable Tao is the intelligence which shapes the world 
with a skill beyond our understanding. 

The important difference between the Tao and the usual idea of 
God is that whereas God produces the world by making (wei*), 
the Tao produces it by “not-making” (wu-wei ‘)-which is approxi- 
mately what we mean by “growing.” For things made are sepa- 
rate parts put together, like machines, or things fashioned from 
without inwards, like sculptures. Whereas things grown divide 
themselves into parts, from within outwards. Because the nat- 
® Duyvendak (1) suggests that tao did not have the meaning of “to speak” 
at this date, and so translates the passage, “The Way that may truly be 
regarded as the Way is other than a permanent way.” It really comes to 
the same thing, for what Duyvendak means by a “permanent way” is a 
fixed concept of the Tao-i.e., a definition. Almost every other translator, 


and most of the Chinese commentators, take the second tao to mean 
“spoken.” 


The Philosophy of the Tao 17 


ural universe works mainly according to the principles of growth, 
it would seem quite odd to the Chinese mind to ask how it was 
made. If the universe were made, there would of course be 
someone who knows how it is made-who could explain how it 
was put together bit by bit as a technician can explain in one-at- 
a-time words how to assemble a machine. But a universe which 
grows utterly excludes the possibility of knowing how it grows 
in the clumsy terms of thought and language, so that no Taoist 
would dream of asking whether the Tao knows how it produces 
the universe. For it operates according to spontaneity, not ac- 
cording to plan. Lao-tzu says: 


The Tao’s principle is spontaneity. (25) 4 


But spontaneity is not by any means a blind, disorderly urge, 
a mere power of caprice. A philosophy restricted to the al- 
ternatives of conventional language has no way of conceiving 
an intelligence which does not work according to plan, accord- 
ing to a (one-at-a-time) order of thought. Yet the concrete evi- 
dence of such an intelligence is right to hand in our own 
thoughtlessly organized bodies.** For the Tao does not “know” 
how it produces the universe just as we do not “know” how we 
construct our brains. In the words of Lao-tzu’s great successor, 
Chuang-tzu: 


Things are produced around us, but no one knows the whence. 
They issue forth, but no one sees the portal. Men one and all value 
that part of knowledge which is known. They do not know how to 
avail themselves of the Unknown in order to reach knowledge. Is 
not this misguided? * 


88 The above was written before I had seen the second volume of Joseph 
Needham’s masterly Science and Civilization in China, where he discusses 
the organismic nature of the Chinese, and especially the Taoist, conception 
of the universe. See especially Section 13f, pp. 279 ff. Needham also cee 
attention to the essential differences between Hebrew-Christian and Chinese 
views of natural law, the former deriving from the “word” of a lawgiver, 
God, and the latter from a relationship of spontaneous processes workin, 
in an organismic pattern. See Section 18, f and h, esp. pp. 557-64 and 
572-83. 

‘1H. A. Giles (1), p. 345. 


18 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


The conventional relationship of the knower to the known 
is often that of the controller to the controlled, and thus of lord 
to servant. Thus whereas God is the master of the universe, 
since “he knows about it all! He knows! He knows!,” the rela- 
tionship of the Tao to what it produces is quite otherwise. 


The great Tao flows everywhere, 

to the left and to the right. 

All things depend upon it to exist, 

and it does not abandon them. 

To its accomplishments it lays no claim. 
It loves and nourishes all things, 

but does not lord it over them. (34) 


In the usual Western conception God is also self-knowing- 
transparent through and through to his own understanding, the 
image of what man would like to be: the conscious ruler and 
controller, the absolute dictator of his own mind and body. But 
in contrast with this, the Tao is through and through mysterious 
and dark (hsiian*). As a Zen Buddhist said of it in later times: 


There is one thing: above, it supports Heaven; below, it upholds 
Earth. It is black like lacquer, always actively functioning. ! 


Hsiian is, of course, a metaphorical darkness-not the darkness 
of night, of black as opposed to white, but the sheer incon- 
ceivability which confronts the mind when it tries to remember 
the time before birth, or to penetrate its own depths. 

Westem critics often poke fun at such nebulous views of the 
Absolute, deriding them as “misty and mystical” in contrast with 
their own robustly definite opinions. But as Lao-tzu said: 


When the superior man hears of the Tao, 

he does his best to practice it. 

When the middling man hears of the Tao, 
he sometimes keeps it, and sometimes loses it. 


5 T’ung-shan Liang-chieh. Dumoulin and Sasaki (1), p. 74. 


The Philosophy of the Tao 19 


When the inferior man hears of the Tao, 
he will laugh aloud at it. 
If he did not laugh, it would not be the Tao. (41) 


For it is really impossible to appreciate what is meant by the 
Tao without becoming, in a rather special sense, stupid. So long 
as the conscious intellect is frantically trying to clutch the world 
in its net of abstractions, and to insist that life be bound and fitted 
to its rigid categories, the mood of Taoism will remain incom- 
prehensible; and the intellect will wear itself out. The Tao is 
accessible only to the mind which can practice the simple and 
subtle art of wu-wei, which, after the Tao, is the second im- 
portant principle of Taoism. 

We saw that the I Ching had given the Chinese mind some ex- 
perience in arriving at decisions spontaneously, decisions which 
are effective to the degree that one knows how to let one’s mind 
alone, trusting it to work by itself. This is wu-wei, since wu 
means “not” or “non-” and wei means “action,” “making,” “doing,” 
“striving,” “straining,” or “busyness.” To return to the illustration 
of eyesight, the peripheral vision works most effectively—as in the 
dark-when we see out of the corners of the eyes, and do not 
look at things directly. Similarly, when we need to see the de- 
tails of a distant object, such as a clock, the eyes must be re- 
laxed, not staring, not trying to see. So, too, no amount of working 
with the muscles of the mouth and tongue will enable us to 
taste our food more acutely. The eyes and the tongue must be 
trusted to do the work by themselves. 

But when we have learned to put excessive reliance upon 
central vision, upon the sharp spotlight of the eyes and mind, we 
cannot regain the powers of peripheral vision unless the sharp 
and staring kind of sight is first relaxed. The mental or psycho- 
logical equivalent of this is the special kind of stupidity to 
which Lao-tzu and Chuang-tzu so often refer. It is not simply 
calmness of mind, but “non-graspingness” of mind. In Chuang- 


20 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


tzu’s words, “The perfect man employs his mind as a mirror. It 
grasps nothing; it refuses nothing. It receives, but does not 
keep.” One might almost say that it “fuzzes” itself a little to 
compensate for too harsh a clarity. Thus Lao-tzu says of himself: 


Cut out cleverness and there are no anxieties’. . . 
People in general are so happy, as if enjoying a feast, 
Or as going up a tower in spring. 

I alone am tranquil, and have made no signs, 

Like a baby who is yet unable to smile; 

Forlorn as if I had no home to go to. 

Others all have more than enough, 

And I alone seem to be in want. 

Possibly mine is the mind of a fool, 

Which is so ignorant! 

The vulgar are bright, 

And I alone seem to be dull. 

The vulgar are discriminative, 

And I alone seem to be blunt. 

I am negligent as if being obscure; 

Drifting, as if being attached to nothing. 

The people in general all have something to do, 

And I alone seem to be impractical and awkward. 

I alone am different from others, 

But I value seeking sustenance from the Mother (Tao). (20) ¢ 


In most Taoist writings there is a slight degree of exaggera- 
tion or overstatement of the point which is actually a kind of 
humor, a self-caricature. Thus Chuang-tzu writes on the same 
theme: 


The man of character (te) lives at home without exercising his 
mind and performs actions without worry. The notions of right and 
wrong and the praise and blame of others do not disturb him. 
When within the four seas all people can enjoy themselves, that is 
happiness for him. . . . Sorrowful in countenance, he looks like 
a baby who has lost his mother; appearing stupid, lie goes about 


8 Save for the first line, I have followed Ch’u Ta-kao (1), p. 30. 


The Philosophy of the Tao 21 


tike one who has lost his way. He has plenty of money to spend, but 
does not know where it comes from. He drinks and eats just enough 
and does not know where the food comes from. (3:18) 7 


Lao-tzu is still more forceful in his apparent condemnation of 
conventional cleverness: 


Cut out sagacity; discard knowingness, 

and the people will benefit an hundredfold. 
Cut out “humanity”; discard righteousness, 
and the people will regain love of their fellows. 
Cut out cleverness; discard the utilitarian, 

and there will be no thieves and robbers... . 
Become unaffected; ® 

Cherish sincerity; 

Belittle the personal; 

Reduce desires. (19) 


The idea is not to reduce the human mind to a moronic 
vacuity, but to bring into play its innate and spontaneous in- 
telligence by using it without forcing it. It is fundamental to 
both Taoist and Confucian thought that the natural man is to be 
trusted, and from their standpoint it appears that the Western 
mistrust of human nature—-whether theological or technological- 
is a kind of schizophrenia. It would be impossible, in their view, 
to believe oneself innately evil without discrediting the very 
belief, since all the notions of a perverted mind would be per- 
verted notions. However religiously “emancipated,” the techno- 
logical mind shows that it has inherited the same division against 
itself when it tries to subject the whole human order to the 
control of conscious reason. It forgets that reason cannot be 
trusted if the brain cannot be trusted, since the power of reason 


7 Lin Yutang (1), p. 129. 

8 “Unaffected” is an attempt to render su,™ a character which refers origi- 
nally to unbleached silk, or to the unpainted silk background of a picture. 
“Humanity” refers to the central Contucian principle of jen," which would 
ordinarily mean “human-heartedness,” though it is obvious that Lao-tzu 
refers to its self-conscious and affected form. 


22 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


depends upon organs that were grown by “unconscious in- 
telligence.” 

The art of letting the mind alone is vividly described by an- 
other Taoist writer, Lieh-tzu (c. 398 B.C.), celebrated for his 
mysterious power of being able to ride upon the wind. This, 
no doubt, refers to the peculiar sensation of “walking on air” 
which arises when the mind is first liberated. It is said that when 
Professor D. T. Suzuki was once asked how it feels to have at- 
tained satori,° the Zen experience of “awakening,” he answered, 
“Just like ordinary everyday experience, except about two inches 
off the ground!” Thus when asked to explain the art of riding 
on the wind, Lieh-tzu gave the following account of his training 
under his master Lao Shang: 


After I had served him . . . for the space of three years, my mind 
did not venture to reflect on right and wrong, my lips did not ven- 
ture to speak of profit and loss. Then, for the first time, my master 
bestowed one glance upon me—and that was all. 

At the end of five years a change had taken place; my mind was 
reflecting on right and wrong, and my lips were speaking of profit 
and loss. Then, for the first time, my master relaxed his countenance 
and smiled. 

At the end of seven years, there was another change. I let my 
mind reflect on what it would, but it no longer occupied itself with 
right and wrong. I let my lips utter whatsoever they pleased, but 
they no longer spoke of profit and loss. Then, at last, my master led 
me in to sit on the mat beside him. 

At the end of nine years, my mind gave free rein to its reflections,” 
my mouth free passage to its speech. Of right and wrong, profit and 
loss, I had no knowledge, either as touching myself or others. 
. . . Internal and external were blended into unity. After that, 
there was no distinction between eye and ear, ear and nose, nose 
and mouth: all were the same. My mind was frozen, my body in 
dissolution, my flesh and bones all melted together. I was wholly 
unconscious of what my body was resting on, or what was under 
my feet. I was borne this way and that on the wind, like dry chaff 
or leaves falling from a tree. In fact, I knew not whether the wind 
was riding on me or I on the wind.® 


*L. Giles (1), pp. 49-42. From Lieh-tzu, ii. 


The Philosophy of the Tao 23 


The state of consciousness described sounds not unlike being 
pleasantly drunk-though without the “morning after” effects of 
alcohol! Chuang-tzu noticed the similarity, for he wrote: 


A drunken man who falls out of a cart, though he may suffer, does 
not die. His bones are the same as other people’s; but he meets the 
accident in a different way. His spirit is in a condition of security. 
He is not conscious of riding in the cart; neither is he conscious 
of falling out of it. Ideas of life, death, fear, etc., cannot penetrate 
his breast; and so he does not suffer from contact with objective 
existences. And if such security is to be got from wine, how much 
more is it to be got from Spontaneity. (19) 7° 


Since Lao-tzu, Chuang-tzu, and Lieh-tzu were all conscious 
enough to write very intelligible books, it may be assumed that 
some of this language is, again, exaggerated or metaphorical. 
Their “unconsciousness” is not coma, but what the exponents of 
Zen later signified by wu-hsin,? literally “no-mind,” which is to 
say un-self-consciousness. It is a state of wholeness in which 
the mind functions freely and easily, without the sensation of a 
second mind or ego standing over it with a club. If the ordinary 
man is one who has to walk by lifting his legs with his hands, 
the Taoist is one who has learned to let the legs walk by them- 
selves. 

Various passages in the Taoist writings suggest that “no- 
mindedness” is employing the whole mind as we use the eyes 
when we rest them upon various objects but make no special 
effort to take anything in. According to Chuang-tzu: 


The baby looks at things all day without winking; that is because 
his eyes are not focussed on any particular object. He goes without 
knowing where he is going, and stops without knowing what he is 
doing. He merges himself with the surroundings and moves along 
with it. These are the principles of mental hygiene. (23) 1 


And again: 


10H. A. Giles (1), p. 232. 
11 Lin Yutang (1), p. 86. 


24 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


If you regulate your body and unify your attention, the harmony 
of heaven will come upon you. If you integrate vour awareness, and 
unify your thoughts, spirit will make its abode with you. Te (vir- 
tue) will clothe you, and the Tao will shelter you. Your eyes will 
be like those of a new-bom calf, which seeks not the where- 
fore. (22) 


Each of the other senses might similarly be used to illustrate the 
“non-active” functioning of the mind-listening without strain- 
ing to hear, smelling without strong inhalation, tasting without 
screwing up the tongue, and touching without pressing the 
object. Each is a special instance of the mental function which 
works through all, and which Chinese designates with the 
peculiar word hsin." 

This term is so important for the understanding of Zen that 
some attempt must be made to say what Taoism and Chinese 
thought in general take it to mean.’? We usually translate it as 
“mind” or “heart,” but neither of these words is satisfactory. The 
original form of the ideograph* seems to be a picture of the 
heart, or perhaps of the lungs or the liver, and when a Chinese 
speaks of the hsin he will often point to the center of his chest, 
slightly lower than the heart. 

The difficulty with our translations is that “mind” is too in- 
tellectual, too cortical, and that “heart” in its current English 
usage is too emotional-even sentimental. Furthermore, hsin is 
not always used with quite the same sense. Sometimes it is used 
for an obstruction to be removed, as in wu-hsin, “no-mind.” 
But sometimes it is used in a way that is almost synonymous 


12 The central Zen principle of “no-mind” or wu-hsin is already found in 
Chuang-tzu. Cf. Chuang-tzu (22): 


Body like dry bone, 

Mind like dead ashes; 

This is true knowledge, 

Not to strive after knowing the whence. 
In darkness, in obscurity, 

The mindless (wu-hsin) cannot plan;- 
What manner of man is that? 


H. A. Giles (1), p. 28L. 


The Philosophy of the Tao 25 


with the Tao. This is especially found in Zen literature, which 
abounds with such phrases as “original mind” (pen hsin‘), 
“Buddha mind” (fu hsin*), or “faith in mind” (hsin hsin’),. 
This apparent contradiction is resolved in the principle that “the 
true mind is no mind,” which is to say that the hsin is true, is 
working properly, when it works as if it were not present. In the 
same way, the eyes are seeing properly when they do not see 
themselves, in terms of spots or blotches in the air. 

All in all, it would seem that hsin means the totality of our 
psychic functioning, and, more specifically, the center of that 
functioning, which is associated with the central point of the 
upper body. The Japanese form of the word, kokoro, is used with 
even more subtleties of meaning, but for the present it is enough 
to realize that in translating it “mind” (a sufficiently vague word ) 
we do not mean exclusively the intellectual or thinking mind, 
nor even the surface consciousness. The important point is that, 
according to both Taoism and Zen, the center of the mind’s ac- 
tivity is not in the conscious thinking process, not in the ego. 

When a man has learned to let his mind alone so that it func- 
tions in the integrated and spontaneous way that is natural to it, 
he begins to show the special kind of “virtue” or “power” called 
te. This is not virtue in the current sense of moral rectitude but 
in the older sense of effectiveness, as when one speaks of the 
healing virtues of a plant. Te is, furthermore, unaffected or 
spontaneous virtue which cannot be cultivated or imitated by 
any deliberate method. Lao-tzu says: 


Superior te is not te, 

and thus has te. 

Inferior te does not let go of te, 

and thus is not te. 

Superior te is non-active [wu-wei] and aimless. 
Inferior te is active and has an aim. (38) 


The literal translation has a strength and depth which is lost 
in such paraphrases as “Superior virtue is not conscious of itself 


26 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


as virtue, and thus really is virtue. Inferior virtue cannot dispense 
with virtuosity, and thus is not virtue.” 

When the Confucians prescribed a virtue which depended 
upon the artificial observance of rules and precepts, the Taoists 
pointed out that such virtue was conventional and not genuine. 
Chuang-tzu made up the following imaginary dialogue between 
Confucius and Lao-tzu: 


“Tell me,” said Lao-tzu, “in what consist charity and duty to one’s 
neighbour?” 

“They consist,” answered Confucius, “in a capacity for rejoicing 
in all things; in universal love, without the element of self. These 
are the characteristics of charity and duty to one’s neighbour.” 

“What stuff!” cried Lao-tzu. “Does not universal love contradict 
itself? Is not your elimination of self a positive manifestation of 
self? Sir, if you would cause the empire not to lose its source of 
nourishment,-there is the universe, its regularity is unceasing; 
there are the sun and moon, their brightness is unceasing; there 
are the stars, their groupings never change; there are the birds 
and beasts, they flock together without varying; there are trees 
and shrubs, they grow upwards without exception. Be like these: 
follow Tao, and you will be perfect. Why then these vain struggles 
after charity and duty to one’s neighbour, as though beating a 
drum in search of a fugitive. Alas! Sir, you have brought much 
confusion into the mind of man.” (13) 33 


The Taoist critique of conventional virtue applied not only in 
the moral sphere but also in the arts, crafts, and trades. Accord- 
ing to Chuang-tzu: 


Ch’ui the artisan could draw circles with his hand better than 
with compasses. His fingers seerned to accommodate themselves 
so naturally to the thing he was working at, that it was unnecessary 
to fix his attention. His mental faculties thus remained One (i.e., 
integrated), and suffered no hindrance. To be unconscious of one’s 
feet implies that the shoes are easy. To be unconscious of a waist 
implies that the girdle is easy. The intelligence being unconscious 
of positive and negative implies that the heart (hsin) is at ease. 
. .. And he who, beginning with ease, is never not at ease, is 
unconscious of the ease of ease. (19) '* 


13 H. A. Giles (1), p. 167. 
14H. A. Giles (1), p. 242. 


The Philosophy of the Tao 27 


Just as the artisan who had mastered te could do without the 
artificiality of the compass, so the painter, the musician, and the 
cook would have no need for the conventional classifications of 
their respective arts. Thus Lao-tzu said: 


The five colours will blind a man’s sight. 

The five sounds will deaden a man’s hearing. 

The five tastes will spoil a man’s palate. 

Chasing and hunting will drive a man wild. 

Things hard to get will do harm to a man’s conduct. 

Therefore the sage makes provision for the stomach 
and not for the eye. (12) * 


This must by no means be taken as an ascetic’s hatred of sense 
experience, for the point is precisely that the eye’s sensitivity to 
color is impaired by the fixed idea that there are just five true 
colors. There is an infinite continuity of shading, and breaking 
it down into divisions with names distracts the attention from its 
subtlety. This is why “the sage makes provision for the stomach 
and not for the eye,” which is to say that he judges by the con- 
crete content of the experience, and not by its conformity with 
purely theoretical standards. 

In sum, then, te is the unthinkable ingenuity and creative 
power of man’s spontaneous and natural functioning-a power 
which is blocked when one tries to master it in terms of formal 
methods and techniques. It is like the centipede’s skill in using 
a hundred legs at once. 


The centipede was happy, quite, 

Until a toad in fun 

Said, “Pray, which leg goes after which?” 
This worked his mind to such a pitch, 
He lay distracted in a ditch, 
Considering how to run. 


A profound regard for te underlies the entire higher culture of the 
Far East, so much so that it has been made the basic principle of 
every kind of art and craft. While it is true that these arts em- 


15 Ch’u Ta-kao (1), p. 22. 


28 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


ploy what are, to us, highly difficult technical disciplines, it is al- 
ways recognized that they are instrumental and secondary, and 
that superior work has the quality of an accident. This is not 
merely a masterful mimicry of the accidental, an assumed spon- 
taneity in which the careful planning does not show. It lies at a 
much deeper and more genuine level, for what the culture of 
Taoism and Zen proposes is that one might become the kind 
of person who, without intending it, is a source of marvelous 
accidents. 

Taoism is, then, the original Chinese way of liberation which 
combined with Indian Mahayana Buddhism to produce Zen. It 
is a liberation from convention and of the creative power of te. 
Every attempt to describe and formulate it in words and one-at- 
a-time thought symbols must, of necessity, distort it. The fore- 
going chapter has perforce made it seem one of the “vitalist” or 
“naturalistic” philosophical alternatives. For Western philoso- 
phers are constantly bedeviled by the discovery that they cannot 
think outside certain well-worm ruts-that, however hard they 
may try, their “new” philosophies turn out to be restatements of 
ancient positions, monist or pluralist, realist or nominalist, vital- 
ist or mechanist. This is because these are the only alternatives 
which the conventions of thought can present, and they cannot 
discuss anything else without presenting it in their own terms. 
When we try to represent a third dimension upon a two- 
dimensional surface, it will of necessity seem to belong more or 
less to the two alternatives of length and breadth. In the words 
of Chuang-tzu: 


Were language adequate, it would take but a day fully to set forth 
Tao. Not being adequate, it takes that time to explain material ex- 
istences. Tao is something beyond material existences. It cannot be 
conveyed either by words or by silence. (25) 


6 HL. A. Giles (1), p. 351. 


Two 


THE ORIGINS OF BUDDHISM 


Chinese civilization was at least two thousand years old when it 
first encountered Buddhism. Thus the new philosophy entered 
into a solidly established culture in which it could hardly be- 
come acceptable without major adaptations to the Chinese 
mentality, even though there were some resemblances between 
Taoism and Buddhism so strong that they have aroused specula- 
tion as to whether contacts between the two were much earlier 
than has been supposed. China absorbed Buddhism as it has 
absorbed so many other external influences-not only philosophies 
and ideas, but also alien populations and invaders. Undoubtedly 
this is due in some measure to the extraordinary stability and 
maturity which the Chinese have derived from Confucianism. 
Reasonable, unfanatical, humanistic, Confucianism is one of 
the most workable patterns of social convention that the world 
has known. Coupled with the “let well enough alone” attitude 
of Taoism, it nurtured a mellow and rather easygoing type of 
mentality which, when it absorbed Buddhism, did much to 
make it more “practical.” That is to say, it made Buddhism a 
possible way of life for human beings, for people with families, 
with everyday work to do, and with normal instincts and pas- 
sions. 

It was a basic Confucian principle that “it is man who makes 
truth great, not truth which makes man great.” For this reason, 
“humanness” or “human-heartedness” (jen®) was always felt to 
be superior to “righteousness” (i°), since man himself is greater 
than any idea which he may invent. There are times when men’s 
passions are much more trustworthy than their principles. Since 
opposed principles, or ideologies, are irreconcilable, wars fought 
over principle will be wars of mutual annihilation. But wars 

29 


380 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


fought for simple greed will be far less destructive, because the 
aggressor will be careful not to destroy what he is fighting to 
capture. Reasonable-that is, human-men will always be capable 
of compromise, but men who have dehumanized themselves by 
becoming the blind worshipers of an idea or an ideal are fanatics 
whose devotion to abstractions makes them the enemies of life. 

Modified by such attitudes, Far Eastern Buddhism is much 
more palatable and “according to nature” than its Indian and 
Tibetan counterparts, with ideals of life which seem at times to 
be superhuman, more suited to angels than to men. Even so, all 
forms of Buddhism subscribe to the Middle Way between the 
extremes of angel (deva) and demon (preta), ascetic and 
sensualist, and claim that supreme “awakening” or Buddhahood 
can be attained only from the human state. 

There are some serious difficulties in the way of giving an 
historically accurate account of Indian Buddhism, as of the whole 
philosophical tradition from which it arose. No student of Asian 
thought should be unaware of these difficulties, because they 
make it necessary to take almost every important pronounce- 
ment about ancient Indian thought with caution. Thus before 
attempting to describe Indian Buddhism, some of these difficulties 
should be mentioned. 

The first, and most serious, is the problem of interpreting the 
Sanskrit and Pali texts in which ancient Indian literature is 
preserved. This is especially true of Sanskrit, the sacred language 
of India, and more particularly the form of Sanskrit used in the 
Vedic period. Both Western and Indian scholars are uncertain 
as to its exact interpretation, and all modern dictionaries rely 
heavily on a single source-the lexicon compiled by Béthlingk 
and Roth in the latter part of the last century, and now admitted 
to contain a great deal of guesswork. This seriously affects our 
understanding of the primary sources of Hinduism-the Vedas and 
Upanishads. The discovery of proper European equivalents for 
philosophical terms has been hindered by the fact that early 


The Origins of Buddhism 31 


lexicographers were all too ready to find correspondences with 
Western theological terms, since one of the primary objects of 
their studies was to assist the missionaries. 

The second is that it is extremely hard to know what was the 
original form of Buddhism. There are two sets of Buddhist 
scriptures: the Pali Canon of the Theravada or Southern School 
of Buddhism, which flourishes in Ceylon, Burma, and Thailand, 
and the Sanskrit-Tibetan-Chinese Canon of the Mahayana, or 
Northern School. There is a general consensus of scholars that the 
Pali Canon is, on the whole, the earlier of the two, and that the 
principal sutras (as the sacred texts are called) of the Mahayana 
Canon were all compiled after 100 B.C. However, the literary 
form of the Pali Canon does not suggest that it represents the 
actual words of Gautama the Buddha. If the Upanishads are 
characteristic of the style of discourse of an Indian teacher be- 
tween 800 and 300 B.C., they bear little resemblance to the 
tediously repetitious and scholastic style of most Buddhist scrip- 
tures. There can be little doubt that the greater part of both 
Buddhist Canons is the work of the pandits of the Sangha, the 
Buddhist monastic order, for it shows every sign of being the 
reverential elaboration of an original doctrine. As with Russian 
icons, the original painting has been almost lost to sight in the 
overlay of jewels and gold. 

The third is that the Hindu-Buddhist tradition has never had 
the historical sense of the Hebrew-Christian tradition, so that 
there are few, if any, marks to indicate the date of a given text. 
Scriptures were handed down by oral tradition for an in- 
determinable period of time before being committed to writing, 
and it is quite possible that historical references could have been 
changed to suit the times as the oral form was handed down. 
Furthermore, a Buddhist monk writing in A.D. 200 would have 
no compunction in attributing his own words to the Buddha if 
he felt sincerely that they were an expression, not of personal 


1See Monier-Williams, Sanskrit-English Dictionary, p. ix. (Oxford, 1951.) 


82 BACEGROUND AND HISTORY 


opinion, but of the supra-personal state of awakening to which 
he had attained. He would attribute the words to the Buddha 
as speaking in a spiritual rather than material body. 

The danger of scholarship is always that, in extreme specializa- 
tion, it may be unable to see the forest for the trees. But the 
problem of gaining some idea of the thought of India at the time 
of the Buddha, six centuries before Christ, is not to be solved by 
careful piece-work alone-necessary as this may be. There is, 
however, enough reliable information to suggest the grand and 
beautifully ordered form of Upanishadic Hinduism if we do not 
read it with our noses against the page. 

Fundamental to the life and thought of India from the very 
earliest times is the great mythological theme of atma-yajna-the 
act of “self-sacrifice” whereby God gives birth to the world, and 
whereby men, following the divine pattern, reintegrate them- 
selves with God. The act by which the world is created is the 
same act by which it is consummated-the giving up of one’s life- 
as if the whole process of the universe were the type of game 
in which it is necessary to pass on the ball as soon as it is re- 
ceived. Thus the basic myth of Hinduism is that the world is 
God playing hide-and-seek with himself. As Prajapati, Vishnu, or 
Brahma, the Lord under many names creates the world by an 
act of self-dismemberment or self-forgetting, whereby the One 
becomes Many, and the single Actor plays innumerable parts. 
In the end, he comes again to himself only to begin the play 
once more-the One dying into the Many, and the Many dying 
into the One. 


A thousand heads hath Purusha, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet. 
On every side pervading earth he fills a space ten fingers wide. 


This Purusha is all that yet hath been and all that is to be; 
The lord of immortality that waxes greater still by food. 


So mighty is his greatness; yea, greater than this is Purusha. 
All creatures are one fourth of him, three-fourths eternal life in 
heaven. . 


The Origins of Buddhism 33 


When the gods prepared the sacrifice with Purusha as their offering, 

Its oi was spring, the holy gift was autumn; summer was the wood. 

From that great general sacrifice the dripping fat was gathered up. 

He formed the creatures of the air, and animals both wild and 
tame. ... 


When they divided Purusha, how many portions did they make? 

What do they call his mouth, his arms? What do they call his thighs 
and feet? 

The Brahman (caste) was his mouth, of both his arms was the Ra- 
janya (Kshatriya caste) made. 

His thighs became Vaishya, from his feet the Shudra was produced. 


The moon was gendered from his mind, and from his eye the sun had 
birth; 
Indra and Agni from his mouth were born, and Vayu from his breath. 


Forth from his navel came mid-air; the sky was fashioned from his 
head; 

Earth from his feet, and from his ear the regions. Thus they formed 
the worlds 


The thousand heads, eyes, and feet of the Purusha are the 
members of men and other beings, for the point is that That 
which knows in and through every individual is God himself, 
the atman or Self of the world. Every life is a part or role in 
which the mind of God is absorbed, somewhat as an actor absorbs 
himself in being Hamlet and forgets that in real life he is Mr. 
Smith. By the act of self-abandonment God becomes all beings, 
yet at the same time does not cease to be God. “All creatures are 
one fourth of him, three-fourths eternal life in heaven.” For God 
is divided in play, in make-believe, but remains undivided in 
reality. So that when the piay comes to an end, the individualized 
consciousness awakes to find itself divine. 


In the beginning this world was Atman (the Self), alone in the 
form of Purusha. Looking about he saw nothing other than himself. 


2 Rigveda x. 90. The translation is from R. T. H. Griffith. Purusha is “the 
Person,” i.e., the original consciousness behind the world. 


34 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


He said first, “I am.” Thence came the word “I.” Thus even now, 
when one is spoken to, he first answers simply, “It is I,” and thea 
tells whatever name he has.’ 


On all sides That has hands and feet; 
On all sides eyes, heads, and faces; 
On all sides in the world it hears; 

All things it embraces. 


It is important to remember that this picture of the world as 
the play (lila) of God is mythological in form. If, at this stage, 
we were to translate it directly into philosophical statement it 
would be a crude type of pantheism, with which Hindu philoso- 
phy is generally and erroneously confused. Thus the idea of 
each man, each thing, as a part which the Purusha plays in the 
state of self-forgetting must not be confused with a logical or 
scientific statement of fact. The form of statement is poetic, not 
logical. In the words of the Mundaka Upanishad, 


Truly this atman (Self)-the poets say-travels on this earth from 
body to body. (ii. 7) 
Hindu philosophy has not made the mistake of imagining that 
one can make an informative, factual, and positive statement 
about the ultimate reality. As the same Upanishad says, 


Where knowledge is without duality, without action, cause, or 
effect, unspeakable, incomparable, beyond description, what is 
that? It is impossible to say! (vi. 7) 


Every positive statement about ultimate things must be made in 
the suggestive form of myth, of poetry. For in this realm the 
direct and indicative form of speech can say only “Neti, neti” 
(“No, no”), since what can be described and categorized must 
always belong to the conventional realm. 

Hindu mythology elaborates the theme of the divine play on a 
fabulous scale, embracing not only colossal concepts of time and 


8 Brihadaranyaka Upanishad i. 4. 5. 
* Bhagavad-Gite xiii. 18. 


The Origins of Buddhism 85 


space, but also the widest extremes of pleasure and pain, virtue 
and depravity. The inmost Self of saint and sage is no less the 
veiled Godhead than the inmost Self of the debauchee, the 
coward, the lunatic, and the very demons. The opposites 
(dvandva) of light and darkness, good and evil, pleasure and 
pain, are the essential elements of the game, for although the 
Godhead is identified with Truth (sat), Consciousness (chit), 
and Bliss (ananda ), the dark side of life has its integral part in 
the game just as every drama must have its villain, to disrupt the 
status quo, and as the cards must be shuffled, thrown into chaos, 
in order that there may be a significant development of the play. 
For Hindu thought there is no Problem of Evil. The conven- 
tional, relative world is necessarily a world of opposites. Light 
is inconceivable apart from darkness; order is meaningless with- 
out disorder; and, likewise, up without down, sound without 
silence, pleasure without pain. In the words of Ananda Cooma- 
raswamy: 


For anyone who holds that “God made the world,” the question, 
Why did He permit the existence in it of any evil, or of that Evil 
One in whom all evil is personified, is altogether meaningless; one 
might as well enquire why He did not make a world without dimen- 
sions or one without temporal succession.® 


According to the myth, the divine play goes on through endless 
cycles of time, through periods of manifestation and withdrawal 
of the worlds measured in units of kalpas, the kalpa being a span 
of 4,320,000,000 years. From the human standpoint such a con- 
ception presents a terrifying monotony, since it goes on aimlessly 
for ever and ever. But from the divine standpoint it has all the 
fascination of the repetitious games of children, which go on and 
on because time has been forgotten and has reduced itself to a 
single wondrous instant. 

The foregoing myth is not the expression of a formal philoso- 


5 Coomaraswamy (1), p. 77. 


36 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


phy, but of an experience or state of consciousness which is 
called moksha or “liberation.” On the whole it is safer to say that 
Indian philosophy is primarily this experience; it is only quite 
secondarily a system of ideas which attempt to translate the ex- 
perience into conventional language. At root, then, the philoso- 
phy becomes intelligible only by sharing the experience which con- 
sists of the same type of nonconventional knowledge found in 
Taoism. It is also termed atma-jnana (Self-knowledge) or atma- 
bodha (Self-awakening), since it may be considered as the dis- 
covery of who or what I am, when I am no longer identified with 
any role or conventional definition of the person. Indian phi- 
losophy does not describe the content of this discovery except 
in mythological terms, using the phrase “I am Brahman” (aham 
brahman) or “That art thou” (tat tvam asi) to suggest that Self- 
knowledge is a realization of one’s original identity with God. 

But this does not imply what “claiming to be God” means in a 
Hebrew-Christian context, where mythical language is or- 
dinarily confused with factual language so that there is no clear 
distinction between God as described in the terms of conven- 
tional thought and God as he is in reality. A Hindu does not say 
“I am Brahman” with the implication that he is personally in 
charge of the whole universe and informed as to every detail of 
its operation. On the one hand, he is not speaking of identity with 
God at the level of his superficial personality. On the other, his 
“God”-Brahman-is not in charge of the universe in a “personal” 
way; he does not know and act in the manner of a person since 
he does not know the universe in terms of conventional facts nor 
act upon it by means of deliberation, effort, and will. It may be 
of significance that the word “Brahman” is from the root brih-, 
“to grow,” since his creative activity, like that of the Tao, is with 
the spontaneity proper to growth as distinct from the deliberation 
proper to making. Furthermore, though Brahman is said 
to “know” himself, this knowing is not a matter of information, 
a knowledge such as one has of objects distinct from a subject. In 
the words of Shankara, 


The Origins of Buddhism 37 


For He is the Knower, and the Knower can know other things, but 
cannot make Himself the object of His own knowledge, in the same 
way that fire can bum other things, but cannot bum itself. 


To the Western mind the puzzle of Indian philosophy is that 
it has so much to say about what the moksha experience is not, 
and little, or nothing, to say about what it is. This is naturally 
bewildering, for if the experience is really without content, or if 
it is so lacking in relation to the things which we consider im- 
portant, how is one to explain the immense esteem which it holds 
in the Indian scheme of life? 

Even at the conventional level it is surely easy to see that 
knowing what is not so is often quite as important as knowing 
what is. Even when medicine can suggest no effective remedy 
for the common cold, there is some advantage in knowing the 
uselessness of certain popular nostrums. Furthermore, the func- 
tion of negative knowledge is not unlike the uses of space-the 
empty page upon which words can be written, the empty jar 
into which liquid can be poured, the empty window through 
which light can be admitted, and the empty pipe through which 
water can flow. Obviously the value of emptiness lies in the 
movements it permits or in the substance which it mediates and 
contains. But the emptiness must come first. This is why Indian 
philosophy concentrates on negation, on liberating the mind 
from concepts of Truth. It proposes no idea, no description, of 
what is to fill the mind’s void because the idea would exclude the 
fact-somewhat as a picture of the sun on the windowpane would 
shut out the true sun’s light. Whereas the Hebrews would not 
permit an image of God in wocd or stone, the Hindus will not 
permit an image of thought-unless it be so obviously mytho- 
logical as not to be mistaken for the reality. 

Therefore the practical discipline (sadhana) of the way of 
® Bashya on Kena Upanishad, 9-11. “Cannot” may give the wrong impli- 
cation since the word is ordinarily privative. The point is that, as light has 
no need to shine upon itself since it is luminous already, so there is no ad- 


vantage to be gained and, indeed, no meaning in the notion of Brahman’s 
being the object of his own knowledge. 


38 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


liberation is a progressive disentanglement of one’s Self (atman) 
from every identification. It is to realize that I am not this body, 
these sensations, these feelings, these thoughts, this conscious- 
ness. The basic reality of my life is not any conceivable object. 
Ultimately it is not even to be identified with any idea, as of 
God or atman. In the words of the Mandukya Upanishad: 


(It is) That which is conscious neither of the subjective nor of the 
objective, nor of both; which is neither simple consciousness, nor 
undifferentiated sentience, nor mere darkness. It is unseen, without 
relations, incomprehensible, uninferable, and indescribable-the es- 
sence of Self-consciousness, the ending of maya. (vii) 
The atman is to our total consciousness what the head is to the 
sense of sight-neither light nor darkness, neither full nor empty, 
only an inconceivable beyond. In the moment when every last 
identification of the Self with some object or concept has ceased, 
in the state called nirvikalpa or “without conception,” there 
flashes forth from its unknown depths the state of consciousness 
which is called divine, the knowledge of Brahman. 

Translated into conventional and-let it be repeated~mytho- 
poetic language, the knowledge of Brahman is represented as the 
discovery that this world which seemed to be Many is in 
truth One, that “all is Brahman” and that “all duality is falsely 
imagined.” Taken as statements of fact, such utterances are 
logically meaningless and convey no information. Yet they seem 
to be the best possible expression in words of the experience 
itself, though it is as if in the moment of saying the “last word” 
the tongue were paralyzed by its own revelation, and compelled 
to babble nonsense or be silent. 

Moksha is also understood as liberation from maya-one of 
the most important words in Indian philosophy, both Hindu and 
Buddhist. For the manifold world of facts and events is said 
to be maya, ordinarily understood as an illusion which veils the 
one underlying reality of Brahman. This gives the impression 
that moksha is a state of consciousness in which the whole varied 
world of nature vanishes from sight, merged in a boundless 


The Origins of Buddhism 39 


ocean of vaguely luminous space. Such an impression should be 
dismissed at once, for it implies a duality, an incompatibility, 
between Brahman and maya which is against the whole principle 
of Upanishadic philosophy. For Brahman is not One as opposed 
to Many, not simple as opposed to complex. Brahman is without 
duality (advaita), which is to say without any opposite since 
Brahman is not in any class or, for that matter, outside any class. 

Now classification is precisely maya. The word is derived 
from the Sanslcit root matr-, “to measure, form, build, or lay 
out a plan,” the root from which we obtain such Greco-Latin 
words as meter, matrix, material, and matter. The fundamental 
process of measurement is division, whether by drawing a line 
with the finger, by marking off or by enclosing circles with the 
span of the hand or dividers, or by sorting grain or liquids into 
measures (cups). Thus the Sanskrit root dva- from which we 
get the word “divide” is also the root of the Latin duo (two) 
and the English “dual.” 

To say, then, that the world of facts and events is maya is 
to say that facts and events are terms of measurement rather 
than realities of nature. We must, however, expand the concept 
of measurement to include setting bounds of all kinds, whether 
by descriptive classification or selective screening. It will thus 
be easy to see that facts and events are as abstract as lines of 
latitude or as feet and inches. Consider for a moment that it is 
impossible to isolate a single fact, all by itself. Facts come in 
pairs at the very least, for a single body is inconceivable apart 
from a space in which it hangs. Definition, setting bounds, de- 
lineation-these are always acts of division and thus of duality, 
for as soon as a boundary is defined it has two sides. 

This point of view is somewhat startling, and even quite hard 
to understand, for those long accustomed to think that things, 
facts, and events are the very building-blocks of the world, the 
most solid of solid realities. Yet a proper understanding of the 
maya doctrine is one of the most essential prerequisites for the 
study of Hinduism and Buddhism, and in trying to grasp its 


40 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


meaning one must try to put aside the various “idealist” phi- 
losophies of the West with which it is so often confused-even by 
modern Indian Vedantists. For the world is not an illusion of the 
mind in the sense that-to the eyes of the liberated man (jivan- 
mukta )-there is nothing to be seen but a trackless void. He sees 
the world that we see; but he does not mark it off, measure it, 
divide it in the same way. He does not look upon it as really or 
concretely broken down into separate things and events. He 
sees that the skin may just as well be regarded as what joins us to 
our environment as what separates us from it. He sees, further- 
more, that the skin will be considered as joining only if it has 
first been considered as separating, or vice versa. 

Thus his point of view is not monistic. He does not think that 
all things are in reality One because, concretely speaking, there 
never were any “things” to be considered One. To join is as 
much maya as to separate. For this reason both Hindus and 
Buddhists prefer to speak of reality as “nondual” rather than 
“one, since the concept of one must always be in relation to 
that of many. The doctrine of maya is therefore a doctrine of 
relativity. It is saying that things, facts, and events are de- 
lineated, not by nature, but by human description, and that the 
way in which we describe (or divide) them is relative to our 
varying points of view. 

It is easy to see, for example, that an event called the First 
World War can only rather arbitrarily be said to have begun 
on August 4, 1914, and to have ended on November 11, 1918. 
Historians can discover “actual” beginnings of the war long 
before and “resumptions” of the same strife long after these 
formal boundaries of the event. For events can divide and 
merge like blobs of mercury according to the changing fashions 
of historical description. The boundaries of events are con- 
ventional rather than natural, in the sense that a man’s life is 
said to have begun at the moment of parturition, rather than at 
conception on the one hand or weaning on the other. 

Similarly, it is easy to see the conventional character of things. 


The Origins of Buddhism 41 


Ordinarily a human organism is counted as one thing, though 
from the physiological standpoint it is as many things as it has 
parts or organs, and from the sociological standpoint it is merely 
part of a larger thing called a group. 

Certainly the world of nature abounds with surfaces and lines, 
with areas of density and vacuity, which we employ in marking 
out the boundaries of events and things. But here again, the 
maya doctrine asserts that these forms (rupa) have no “own- 
being” or “self-nature” (svabhava): they do not exist in their 
own right, but only in relation to one another, as a solid cannot 
be distinguished save in relation to a space. In this sense, the 
solid and the space, the sound and the silence, the existent and 
the nonexistent, the figure and the ground are inseparable, in- 
terdependent, or “mutually arising,” and it is only by maya or 
conventional division that they may be considered apart from one 
another. 

Indian philosophy also thinks of rupa or form as maya be- 
cause it is impermanent. Indeed, when Hindu and Buddhist 
texts speak of the “empty” or “illusory” character of the visible 
world of nature—as distinct from the conventional world of 
things-they refer precisely to the impermanence of its forms. 
Form is flux, and thus maya in the slightly extended sense that 
it cannot be firmly marked down or grasped. Form is maya when 
the mind attempts to comprehend and control it in the fixed 
categories of thought, that is, by means of names (nama) and 
words. For these are precisely the nouss and verbs by means of 
which the abstract and conceptual categories of things and events 
are designated. 

To serve their purpose, names and terms must of necessity be 
fixed and definite like all other units of measurement. But their 
use is-up to a point-so satisfactory that man is always in danger 
of confusing his measures with the world so measured, of 
identifying money with wealth, fixed convention with fluid 
reality. But to the degree that he identifies himself and his life 
with these rigid and hollow frames of definition, he condemns 


42 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


himself to the perpetual frustration of one trying to catch water 
in a sieve. Thus Indian philosophy speaks constantly of the un- 
wisdom of pursuing things, of striving for the permanence of 
particular entities and events, because it sees in all this nothing 
more than an infatuation with ghosts, with the abstract meas- 
ures of the mind (manas).’ 

Maya is, then, usually equated with nama-rupa or “name-and- 
form,” with the mind’s attempt to grasp the fluid forms of nature 
in its mesh of fixed classes. But when it is understood that form 
is ultimately void-in the special sense of ungraspable and im- 
measurable-the world of form is immediately seen as Brahman 
rather than maya. The formal world becomes the real world in 
the moment when it is no longer clutched, in the moment when 
its changeful fluidity is no longer resisted. Hence it is the very 
transitoriness of the world which is the sign of its divinity, of 
its actual identity with the indivisible and immeasurable infinity 
of Brahman. 

This is why the Hindu-Buddhist insistence on the imper- 
manence of the world is not the pessimistic and nihilistic doc- 
trine which Wester critics normally suppose it to be. Transitori- 
ness is depressing only to the mind which insists upon trying to 
grasp. But to the mind which lets go and moves with the flow of 
change, which becomes, in Zen Buddhist imagery, like a ball in a 
mountain stream, the sense of transience or emptiness becomes a 
kind of ecstasy. This is perhaps why, in both East and West, 
impermanence is so often the theme of the most profound and 
moving poetry~so much so that the splendor of change shines 
through even when the poet seems to resent it the most. 


Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow, 
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day 
To the last syllable of recorded time, 
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools 
7 From the same root as maya, and from which also come our words “mensu- 


ration” (Lat., mensura), “mental” (Lat., mens), “dimension,” and “man” 
himself, “the measure of all things.” Cf. also the Latin mensis (month). 


The Origins of Buddhism 48 


The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candlel 

Life’s but a walking shadow, a poor player 

That struts and frets his hour upon the stage 

And then is heard no more: it is a tale 

Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, 

Signifying nothing. 
Stated thus-as R. H. Blyth observes-it seems not so bad after 
all. 

In sum, then, the maya doctrine points out, firstly, the im- 
possibility of grasping the actual world in the mind’s net of 
words and concepts, and, secondly, the fluid character of those 
very forms which thought attempts to define. The world of facts 
and events is altogether nama, abstract names, and rupa, fluid 
form. It escapes both the comprehension of the philosopher and 
the grasp of the pleasure-seeker like water from a clutching fist. 
There is even something deceptive in the idea of Brahman as the 
eternal reality underlying the flux, and of the atman as the divine 
ground of human consciousness, for in so far as these are con- 
cepts they are as incapable of grasping the real as any other. 

It is precisely this realization of the total elusiveness of the 
world which lies at the root of Buddhism. This is the special 
shift of emphasis which, more than anything else, distinguishes 
the doctrine of the Buddha from the teaching of the Upanishads, 
which is the raison d’étre for the growth of Buddhism as a 
distinct movement in Indian life and thought. 

For Gautama the “Awakened One” or Buddha (died c. 545 
B.C.) lived at a time when the major Upanishads were already 
in existence, and their philosophy must be seen as the point of 
departure for his own teaching. It would be a serious mistake, 
however, to look upon the Buddha as the “founder” or “re- 
former” of a religion which came into being as some kind of or- 
ganized revolt against Hinduism. For we are speaking of a time 
when there was no consciousness of “religions,” when such terms 
as “Hindu-ism” or “Brahman-ism” would have meant nothing. 
There was simply a tradition, embodied in the orally transmitted 


44 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


doctrine of the Vedas and Upanishads, a tradition that was not 
specifically “religious” in that it involved a whole way of life and 
concerned everything from the methods of agriculture to the 
knowledge of the ultimate reality. The Buddha was acting in 
full accord with this tradition when he became a rishi or “forest 
sage,” who had abandoned the life of the householder and di- 
vested himself of caste in order to follow a way of liberation. 
As with every other rishi, the method of his way of liberation had 
certain characteristic features, and his doctrine contained criti- 
cisms of men’s failure to practice the tradition which they 
professed. 

Furthermore, he was being entirely traditional in his abandon- 
ment of caste and in accepting a following of casteless and 
homeless students. For the Indian tradition, even more than the 
Chinese, specifically encourages the abandonment of the con- 
ventional life at a certain age, after the duties of family and 
citizenship have been fulfilled. Relinquishment of caste is the 
cutward and visible sign of the realization that one’s true state 
is “unclassified,” that one’s role or person is simply conventional, 
and that one’s true nature is “no-thing” and “no-body.” 

This realization was the crux of the Buddha’s experience of 
awakening (bodhi) which dawned upon him one night, as he 
sat under the celebrated Bo Tree at Gaya, after seven years of 
meditation in the forests. From the standpoint of Zen, this ex- 
perience is the essential content of Buddhism, and the verbal 
doctrine is quite secondary to the wordless transmission of the 
experience itself from generation to generation. For seven years 
Gautama had struggled by the traditional means of yoga and 
tapas, contemplation and ascesis, to penetrate the cause of man’s 
enslavement to maya, to find release from the vicious circle of 
clinging-to-life (trishna) which is like trying to make the hand 
grasp itself. All his efforts had been in vain. The eternal atman, 
the real Self, was not to be found. However much he con- 
centrated upon his own mind to find its root and ground, he 
found only his own effort to concentrate. The evening before 


The Origins of Buddhism 45 


his awakening he simply “gave up,” relaxed his ascetic diet, and 
ate some nourishing food. 

Thereupon he felt at once that a profound change was coming 
over him. He sat beneath the tree, vowing never to rise until 
he had attained the supreme awakening, and-according to a 
tradition-sat all through the night until the first glimpse of the 
morning star suddenly provoked a state of perfect clarity and un- 
derstanding. This was anuttara samyak sambodhi, “unexcelled, 
complete awakening,” liberation from maya and from the everlast- 
ing Round of birth-and-death (samsara), which goes on and on 
for as long as a man tries in any way whatsoever to grasp at his 
own life, 

Yet the actual content of this experience was never and could 
never be put into words. For words are the frames of maya, the 
meshes of its net, and the experience is of the water which slips 
through. Thus so far as words are concerned the most that may 
be said of this experience are the words attributed to the Buddha 
in the Vajracchedika: 


Just so, Subhuti, I obtained not the least thing from unexcelled, 
complete awakening, and for this very reason it is called “unex- 
celled, complete awakening.” (22) 


Thus from the standpoint of Zen the Buddha “never said a 
word,” despite the volumes of scriptures attributed to him. For 
his real message remained always unspoken, and was such that, 
when words attempted to express it, they made it seem as if it 
were nothing at all. Yet it is the essential tradition of Zen that 
what cannot be conveyed by speech can nevertheless be passed 
on by “direct pointing,” by some nonverbal means of communi- 
cation without which the Buddhist experience could never have 
been handed down to future generations. 

In its own (probably rather late) tradition, Zen maintains that 
the Buddha transmitted awakening to his chief disciple, Maha- 
kasyapa, by holding up a flower and remaining silent. The Pali 
Canon, however, relates that immediately after his awakening the 


46 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


Buddha went to the Deer Park at Benares, and set forth his 
doctrine to those who had formerly been his companions in the 
ascetic life, expressing it in the form of those Four Noble Truths 
which provide so convenient a summary of Buddhism. 

These Four Truths are patterned on the traditional Vedic form 
of a physician’s diagnosis and prescription: the identification of 
the disease, and of its cause, the pronouncement as to whether 
it may be cured, and the prescription for the remedy. 

The First Truth is concerned with the problematic word 
duhkha, loosely translatable as “suffering,” and which designates 
the great disease of the world for which the Buddha’s method 
(dharma) is the cure. 


Birth is duhkha, decay is duhkha, sickness is duhkha, death is 
duhkha, so also are sorrow and grief... . To be bound with 
things which we dislike, and to be parted from things which we like, 
these also are duhkha. Not to get what one desires, this also is 
duhkha. In a word, this body, this fivefold aggregation based on 
clutching (trishna), this is duhkha.® 


This, however, cannot quite be compressed into the sweeping 
assertion that “life is suffering.” The point is rather that life as we 
usually live it is suffering—or, more exactly, is bedeviled by the 
peculiar frustration which comes from attempting the impossible. 
Perhaps, then, “frustration” is the best equivalent for duhkha, 
even though the word is the simple antonym of sukha, which 
means “pleasant” or “sweet.” ® 

In another formulation of the Buddha’s teaching duhkha is 
one of the three characteristics of being, or becoming (bhava), 
whereof the other two are anitya, impermanence, and anatman, 
absence of any Self. These two terms are of basic importance. 
The anitya doctrine is, again, not quite the simple assertion that 
the world is impermanent, but rather that the more one grasps at 


8 Samyutta Nikaya, 421. 

9 Or, if we were to translate duhkha as “sour,” we might say that the Bud- 
dha’s doctrine is that life is soured by man’s grasping attitude towards it~as 
milk tums sour when kept too long. 


The Origins of Buddhism 47 


the world, the more it changes. Reality in itself is neither per: 
manent nor impermanent; it cannot be categorized. But when 
one tries to hold on to it, change is everywhere apparent, since, 
like one’s own shadow, the faster one pursues it, the faster it 
flees. 

In the same way, the anatman doctrine is not quite the bald 
assertion that there is no real Self (atman) at the basis of our 
consciousness. The point is rather that there is no Self, or basic 
reality, which may be grasped, either by direct experience or by 
concepts. Apparently the Buddha felt that the doctrine of the 
atman in the Upanishads lent itself too easily to a fatal mis- 
interpretation. It became an object of belief, a desideratum, a 
goal to be reached, something to which the mind could cling as 
its one final abode of safety in the flux of life. The Buddha’s 
view was that a Self so grasped was no longer the true Self, but 
only one more of the innumerable forms of maya. Thus anatman 
might be expressed in the form, “The true Self is non-Self,” since 
any attempt to conceive the Self, believe in the Self, or seek for 
the Self immediately thrusts it away. 

The Upanishads distinguish between atman, the true, supra- 
individual Self, and the jivatman or individual soul, and the 
Buddha’s anatman doctrine agrees with them in denying the 
reality of the latter. It is fundamental to every school of Bud- 
dhism that there is no ego, no enduring entity which is the con- 
stant subject of our changing experiences. For the ego exists in 
an abstract sense alone, being an abstraction from memory, 
somewhat like the illusory circle of fire made by a whirling torch. 
We can, for example, imagine the path of a bird through the 
sky as a distinct line which it has taken. But this line is as 
abstract as a line of latitude. In concrete reality, the bird left no 
line, and, similarly, the past from which our ego is abstracted has 
entirely disappeared. Thus any attempt to cling to the ego or to 
make it an effective source of action is doomed to frustration. 

The Second Noble Truth relates to the cause of frustration, 
which is said to be trishna, clinging or grasping, based on avidya, 


48 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


which is ignorance or unconsciousness. Now avidya is the formal 
opposite of awakening. It is the state of the mind when hypno- 
tized or spellbound by maya, so that it mistakes the abstract 
world of things and events for the concrete world of reality. At 
a still deeper level it is lack of self-knowledge, lack of the realiza- 
tion that all grasping turns out to be the futile effort to grasp one- 
self, or rather, to make life catch hold of itself. For to one who 
has self-knowledge, there is no duality between himself and the 
external world. Avidya is “ignoring” the fact that subject and 
object are relational, like the two sides of a coin, so that when one 
pursues, the other retreats. This is why the egocentric attempt 
to dominate the world, to bring as much of the world as possible 
under the control of the ego, has only to proceed for a little while 
before it raises the difficulty of the ego’s controlling itself. 

This is really a simple problem of what we now call cyber- 
netics, the science of control. Mechanically and logically it is easy 
to see that any system approaching perfect self-control is also 
approaching perfect self-frustration. Such a system is a vicious 
circle, and has the same logical structure as a statement which 
states something about itself, as for example, “I am lying,” when 
it is implied that the statement is itself a lie. The statement cir- 
culates fatuously forever, since it is always true to the extent that 
it is false, and false to the extent that it is true. Expressed more 
concretely, I cannot throw a ball so long as I am holding on to it- 
so as to maintain perfect control of its movement. 

Thus the desire for perfect control, of the environment and of 
oneself, is based on a profound mistrust of the controller. Avidya 
is the failure to see the basic self-contradiction of this position. 
From it therefore arises a futile grasping or controlling of life 
which is pure self-frustration, and the pattern of life which 
follows is the vicious circle which in Hinduism and Buddhism is 
called samsara, the Round of birth-and-death.’® 
10 The dynamic structure of the Round is called pratitya-samutpada, the 


twelvefold chain of “dependent origination,” in which the twelve causal 
links give rise to one another mutually, constituting a closed circle without 


The Origins of Buddhism 49 


The active principle of the Round is known as karma or “con- 
ditioned action,” action, that is, arising from a motive and seeking 
a result-the type of action which always requires the necessity for 
further action. Man is involved in karma when he interferes with 
the world in such a way that he is compelled to go on inter- 
fering, when the solution of a problem creates still more prob- 
lems to be solved, when the control of one thing creates the need 
to control several others. Karma is thus the fate of everyone who 
“tries to be God.” He lays a trap for the world in which he him- 
self gets caught. 

Many Buddhists understand the Round of birth-and-death 
quite literally as a process of reincarnation, wherein the karma 
which shapes the individual does so again and again in life after 
life until, through insight and awakening, it is laid to rest. But 
in Zen, and in other schools of the Mahayana, it is often taken in 
a more figurative way, as that the process of rebirth is from 
moment to moment, so that one is being reborn so long as one 
identifies himself with a continuing ego which reincarnates itself 
afresh at each moment of time. Thus the validity and interest of 
the doctrine does not require acceptance of a special theory of 
survival. Its importance is rather that it exemplifies the whole 
problem of action in vicious circles and its resolution, and in 
this respect Buddhist philosophy should have a special interest 
for students of communication theory, cybernetics, logical phi- 
losophy, and similar matters. 

The Third Noble Truth is concerned with the ending of self- 
frustration, of grasping, and of the whole viciously circular pat- 
tern of karma which generates the Round. The ending is called 
beginning or end. Thus ignorance (avidya) gives rise to motivation 
(samskara), and this in series to consciousness (vijnana), name-and-form 
(namarupa), the six senses (shadayatana), sense stimulation (sparsa), sense 
experience (vedana), grasping (trishna), possessiveness (upadana), coming- 
to-be (bhava), birth (jati), and old-age-and-death (jaramarana), which 
again gives rise to avidya. The Buddha explained that avidya was put first 
on the list, not because it was the temporal beginning of the series, but for 


simple convenience of exposition. The whole series arises together, and its 
terms exist only in relation to one another. 


50 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


nirvana, a word of such dubious etymology that a simple trans- 
lation is exceedingly difficult. It has been variously connected 
with Sanskrit roots which would make it mean the blowing out 
of a flame, or simply blowing out (ex- or de-spiration), or with 
the cessation of waves, turnings, or circlings (vritti) of the 
mind. 

The two latter interpretations seem, on the whole, to make 
most sense. If nirvana is “de-spiration” it is the act of one who 
has seen the futility of trying to hold his breath or life (prana) 
indefinitely, since to hold the breath is to lose it. Thus nirvana is 
the equivalent of moksha, release or liberation. Seen from one 
side, it appears to be despair-the recognition that life utterly 
defeats our efforts to control it, that all human striving is no more 
than a vanishing hand clutching at clouds. Seen from the other 
side, this despair bursts into joy and creative power, on the 
principle that to lose one’s life is to find it-to find freedom of 
action unimpeded by self-frustration and the anxiety inherent 
in trying to save and control the Self. 

If nirvana is related to the cessation (nir-) of turnings (vritti), 
the term is synonymous with the aim of yoga, defined in the 
Yogasutra as citta vritti nirodha-the cessation of turnings of the 
mind. These “turnings” are the thoughts whereby the mind 
endeavors to grasp the world and itself. Yoga is the practice of 
trying to stop these thoughts by thinking about them, until the 
utter futility of the process is felt so vividly that it simply drops 
away, and the mind discovers its natural and unconfused state. 

It is obvious, however, that both etymologies give us the same 
essential meaning. Nirvana is the way of life which ensues when 
clutching at life has come to an end. In so far as all definition is 
clutching, nirvana is necessarily indefinable. It is the natural, 
“un-self-grasped” state of the mind; and here, of course, the 
mind has no specific meaning, for what is not grasped is not 
known in the conventional sense of knowledge. More popularly 
and literally understood, nirvana is the disappearance of the 


The Origins of Buddhism ol 


being from the Round of incarnations, not into a state of an- 
nihilation, but simply into a state escaping definition, and thus 
immeasurable and infinite. 

To attain nirvana is also to attain Buddhahood, awakening. 
But this is not attainment in any ordinary sense, because no 
acquisition and no motivation are involved. It is impossible to 
desire nirvana, or to intend to reach it, for anything desirable 
or conceivable as an object of action is, by definition, not nirvana. 
Nirvana can only arise unintentionally, spontaneously, when the 
impossibility of self-grasping has been thoroughly perceived. A 
Buddha, therefore, is a man of no rank. He is not above, like 
an angel; he is not below, like a demon. He does not appear any- 
where in the six divisions of the Round, and it would be mistaken 
to think of him as superior to the angels, for the law of the 
Round is that what goes up must come down, and vice versa. 
He has transcended all dualities whatsoever, and thus it would 
mean nothing to him to think of himself as a superior person or a 
spiritual success. 

The Fourth Noble Truth describes the Eightfold Path of the 
Buddha’s Dharma, that is, the method or doctrine whereby self- 
frustration is brought to an end. Each section of the path has a 
name preceded by the word samyak (Pali, samma), which has 
the meaning of “perfect” or “complete.” The first two sections 
have to do with thought; the following four have to do with ac- 
tion; and the final two have to do with contemplation or aware- 
ness. We therefore have: 


Samyag-drishti, or complete view. 
Samyak-samkalpa, or complete understanding. 


Samyag-vak, or complete (i.e., truthful) speech, 
Samyak-karmanta, or complete action. 
Samyagajiva, or complete vocation. 
Samyag-vyayama, or complete application. 


Samyak-smriti, or complete recollectedness. 
Samyak-samadhi, or complete contemplation. 


ON OURO Ne 


52 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


Without discussing these sections in detail, it may simply be 
said that the first two are concerned with a proper understand- 
ing of the doctrine and of the human situation. In some ways the 
first section, “complete view,” contains all the others, since the 
method of Buddhism is above all the practice of clear awareness, 
of seeing the world yathabhutam-just as it is. Such awareness 
is a lively attention to one’s direct experience, to the world as 
immediately sensed, so as not to be misled by names and labels. 
Samyak-samadhi, the last section of the path, is the perfection of 
the first, signifying pure experience, pure awareness, wherein 
there is no longer the dualism of the knower and the known. 

The sections dealing with action are often misunderstood be- 
cause they have a deceptive similarity to a “system of morals.” 
Buddhism does not share the Western view that there is a moral 
law, enjoined by God or by nature, which it is man’s duty to obey. 
The Buddha's precepts of conduct-abstinence from taking life, 
taking what is not given, exploitation of the passions, lying, and 
intoxication-are voluntarily assumed rules of expediency, the 
intent of which is to remove the hindrances to clarity of aware- 
ness. Failure to observe the precepts produces “bad karma,” not 
because karma is a law or moral retribution, but because all 
motivated and purposeful actions, whether conventionally good 
or bad, are karma in so far as they are directed to the grasping of 
life. Generally speaking, the conventionally “bad” actions are 
rather more grasping than the “good.” But the higher stages of 
Buddhist practice are as much concerned with disentanglement 
from “good karma” as from “bad.” Thus complete action is ulti- 
mately free, uncontrived, or spontaneous action, in exactly the 
same sense as the Taoist wu-wei.4 

Smriti, recollectedness, and samadhi, contemplation, constitute 
the section dealing with the life of meditation, the inner, mental 
practice of the Buddha’s way. Complete recollectedness is a con- 
stant awareness or watching of one’s sensations, feelings, and 


11 Technically such action would be called akarma, unconditioned action, 
or asamskrita, uncontrived action. 


The Origins of Buddhism 53 


thoughts~without purpose or comment. It is a total clarity and 
presence of mind, actively passive, wherein events come and go 
like reflections in a mirror: nothing is reflected except what is. 


In walking, standing, sitting, or lying down he understands that 
he is so doing, so that, however his body is engaged, he understands 
it just as it is. . . . In setting out or retuming, in looking before 
or around, in bending or stretching his arm, . . . he acts with clear 
awareness.}? 


Through such awareness it is seen that the separation of the 
thinker from the thought, the knower from the known, the sub- 
ject from the object, is purely abstract. There is not the mind on 
the one hand and its experiences on the other: there is just a 
process of experiencing in which there is nothing to be grasped, 
as an object, and no one, as a subject, to grasp it. Seen thus, the 
process of experiencing ceases to clutch at itself. Thought follows 
thought without interruption, that is, without any need to divide 
itself from itself, so as to become its own object. 


“Where there is an object, there thought arises.” Is then the thought 
one thing, and the object another? No, what is the object, just 
that is the thought. If the object were one thing, and the thought 
another, then there would be a double state of thought. So the 
object itself is just thought. Can then thought review thought? No, 
thought cannot review thought. As the blade of a sword cannot 
cut itself, as a finger-tip cannot touch itself, so a thought cannot 
see itself.13 


This nonduality of the mind, in which it is no longer divided 
against itself, is samadhi, and because of the disappearance of 
that fruitless threshing around of the mind to grasp itself, samadhi 
is a state of profound peace. This is not the stillness of total 
inactivity, for, once the mind returns to its natural state, samadhi 
persists at all times, in “walking, standing, sitting, and lying.” 
But, from the earliest times, Buddhism has especially emphasized 
the practice of recollectedness and contemplation while sitting. 


12 Majjhima Nikaya, I. 56. 
13 Sikshasamuccaya, 234. In Conze (2), p. 163. 


54 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


Most iinages of the Buddha show him in the posture of sitting 
meditation, in the particular attitude known as padmasana, the 
posture of the lotus, with the legs crossed and the feet resting, 
soles upward, upon the thighs. 

Sitting meditation is not, as is often supposed, a spiritual “ex- 
ercise,” a practice followed for some ulterior object. From a 
Buddhist standpoint, it is simply the proper way to sit, and it 
seems perfectly natural to remain sitting so long as there is noth- 
ing else to be done, and so long as one is not consumed with 
nervous agitation. To the restless temperament of the West, 
sitting meditation may seem to be an unpleasant discipline, be- 
cause we do not seem to be able to sit “just to sit” without 
qualms of conscience, without feeling that we ought to be doing 
something more important to justify our existence. To propitiate 
this restless conscience, sitting meditation must therefore be 
regarded as an exercise, a discipline with an ulterior motive. Yet 
at that very point it ceases to be meditation (dhyana) in the 
Buddhist sense, for where there is purpose, where there is seek- 
ing and grasping for results, there is no dhyana. 

This word dhyana (Pali, jhana) is the original Sanskrit form 
of the Chinese ch’an ¢ and the Japanese zen, and thus its meaning 
is of central importance for an understanding of Zen Buddhism. 
“Meditation” in the common sense of “thinking things over” or 
“musing” is a most misleading translation. But such alternatives 
as “trance” or “absorption” are even worse, since they suggest 
states of hypnotic fascination. The best solution seems to be to 
leave dhyana untranslated and add it to the English language as 
we have added Nirvana and Tao.** 

14 The Pali Canon (Vinaya Pitaka, III. 3-6, and Majjhima Nikaya, 1 349- 
52) lists eight types of jhana—the four rupa-jhana and the four arupa-jhana 
-the states of jhana with form and without form. The first four involve the 
progressive settling of conception (vitakka) and discursive thought (vicara) 
into a state of equanimity (upekkha) through the practice of samadhi. In 
other words, as the mind retums to its natural state of integrity and non- 
duality, it ceases to clutch at experience with the symbols of discursive 


thought. It simply perceives without words or concepts. Beyond this lie the 
four erupa-jhana, described as the spheres of Boundless S ace, Boundless 


The Origins of Buddhism 55 


As used in Buddhism, the term dhyana comprises both recol- 
lectedness (smriti) and samadhi, and can best be described as 
the state of unified or one-pointed awareness. On the one hand, 
it is one-pointed in the sense of being focused on the present, 
since to clear awareness there is neither past nor future, but just 
this one moment (ekaksana) which Western mystics have called 
the Eternal Now. On the other hand, it is one-pointed in the 
sense of being a state of consciousness without differentiation 
of the knower, the knowing, and the known. 


A Tathagata (i.e., a Buddha) is a seer of what is to be seen, but 

he is not mindful (na mannati, or does not conceive) of the seen, 

the unseen, the seeable, or the seer. So too with the heard, the 

sensed, and the known: he does not think of them in these cate- 

gories.*® 

The difficulty of appreciating what dhyana means is that the 
structure of our language does not permit us to use a transitive 
verb without a subject and a predicate. When there is “knowing,” 
grammatical convention requires that there must be someone 
who knows and something which is known. We are so accus- 
tomed to this convention in speaking and thinking that we fail 
to recognize that it is simply a convention, and that it does not 
necessarily correspond to the actual experience of knowing. Thus 
when we say, “A light flashed,” it is somewhat easier to see 
through the grammatical convention and to realize that the flash- 
ing is the light. But dhyana as the mental state of the liberated 
or awakened man is naturally free from the confusion of conven- 
tional entities with reality. Our intellectual discomfort in trying 
to conceive knowing without a distinct “someone” who knows 
and a distinct “something” which is known, is like the discom- 
fort of arriving at a formal dinner in pajamas. The error is con- 
ventional, not existentiaL 
Consciousness, Nothingness, and Neither-Perception-nor-Nonperception, 
which are stages of the mind’s realization of its own nature. At the time of 
his death, the Buddha is said to have entered into parinirvana (i.e., 


nirvana) from the fourth rupa-jhana. 
45 Anguttara Nikaya, II. 25. 


56 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


Once again, therefore, we see how convention, how the maya 
of measurement and description, populates the world with those 
ghosts which we call entities and things. So hypnotic, so per- 
suasive is the power of convention that we begin to feel these 
ghosts as realities, and make of them our loves, our ideals, our 
prized possessions. But the anxiety-laden problem of what will 
happen to me when I die is, after all, like asking what happens 
to my fist when I open my hand, or where my lap goes when I 
stand up. Perhaps, then, we are now able to understand the 
celebrated summary of the Buddha’s doctrine given in the Visud- 


dhimagga: 


Suffering alone exists, none who suffer; 

The deed there is, but no doer thereof; 

Nirvana is, but no one seeking it; 

The Path there is, but none who travel it. (16) 


Three 


MAHAYANA BUDDHISM 


Because the teaching of the Buddha was a way of liberation, it 
had no other object than the experience of nirvana. The Buddha 
did not attempt to set forth a consistent philosophical system, 
trying to satisfy that intellectual curiosity about ultimate things 
which expects answers in words. When pressed for such answers, 
when questioned about the nature of nirvana, the origin of the 
world, and the reality of the Self, the Buddha maintained a “noble 
silence,” and went on to say that such questions were irrelevant 
and did not lead to the actual experience of liberation. 

It has often been said that the later development of Buddhism 
was due to the inability of the Indian mind to rest content with 
that silence, so that at last it had to indulge its overwhelming 
urge for “abstract metaphysical speculations” about the nature of 
reality. Such a view of the genesis of Mahayana Buddhism is, 
however, rather misleading. The vast body of Mahayana doc- 
trine arose not so much to satisfy intellectual curiosity as to deal 
with the practical psychological problems encountered in fol- 
lowing the Buddha’s way. Certainly the treatment of these prob- 
lems is highly scholastic, and the intellectual level of the 
Mahayana texts is very lofty. But the consistent aim is to bring 
about the experience of liberation, not to construct a philosoph- 
ical system. In the words of Sir Arthur Berriedale Keith: 


The metaphysics of the Mahayana in the incoherence of its systems 
shows clearly enough the secondary interest attaching to it in the 
eyes of the monks, whose main interest was concentrated on the 
attainment of release; the Mahayana no less than the Hinayana is 
concermed vitally with this practical end, and its philosophy is of 
value merely in so far as it helps men to attain their aim.} 


‘Keith (1), p. 273, 
yi 


58 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


There are, no doubt, respects in which Mahayana Buddhism is 
a concession both to intellectual curiosity and to a popular 
desire for short cuts to the goal. But at root it is the work of 
highly sensitive and perceptive minds studying their own inner 
workings. To anyone who is highly self-aware, the Buddhism of 
the Pali Canon leaves many practical problems unanswered. Its 
psychological insight goes little further than the construction of 
analytical catalogues of mental functions, and though its pre- 
cepts are clear it is not always helpful in explaining their prac- 
tical difficulties. Perhaps it is too sweeping a generalization, but 
one receives the impression that whereas the Pali Canon would 
unlock the door to nirvana by sheer effort, the Mahayana would 
jiggle the key until it turns smoothly. Thus the great concern of 
the Mahayana is the provision of “skillful means” (upaya) for 
making nirvana accessible to every type of mentality. 

How and when the Mahayana doctrines arose is a matter of 
historical guesswork. The great Mahayana sutras are ostensibly 
the teachings of the Buddha and his immediate disciples, but 
their style is so different and their doctrine so much more subtle 
than that of the Pali Canon that scholars almost unanimously 
assign them to later dates. There is no evidence of their existence 
in the time of the great Buddhist emperor Asoka, grandson of 
Chandragupta Maurya, who was converted to Buddhism in 
262 B.C. Asoka’s rock inscriptions reflect no more than the social 
teachings of the Pali Canon, its insistence on ahimsa or non- 
violence to both men and animals and its general precepts for 
the life of the laity. The principal Mahayana texts were being 
translated into Chinese by Kumarajiva shortly after A.D. 400, 
but our knowledge of Indian history during the intervening six 
hundred years from Asoka’s death is so fragmentary, and the 
internal evidences of the sutras themselves so vague, that we can 
do little more than assign them to the four hundred years between 
100 B.C. and A.D. 300. Even specific individuals associated with 
their development-Asvaghosha, Nagarjuna, Asanga, and Vasu- 
bandhu-can be dated only very approximately. 

The traditional Mahayanist account of its own origin is that its 


Mahayana Buddhism 59 


teachings were delivered by the Buddha to his intimate disciples 
but their public revelation withheld until the world was ready for 
them. The principle of “delayed revelation” is a well-known 
expedient for permitting the growth of a tradition, for exploring 
the implications contained in the original seed. Apparent con- 
tradictions between earlier and later doctrines are explained by 
assigning them to different levels of truth, ranging from the most 
relative to the absolute, and of which the (probably quite late) 
Avatamsaka School distinguishes no less than five. However, the 
problem of the historical origins of the Mahayana is of no very 
direct importance for an understanding of Zen, which, as a Chi- 
nese rather than Indian form of Buddhism, came into being 
when Indian Mahayana was fully grown. We can pass on, there- 
fore, to the central Mahayana doctrines from which Zen 
arose. 

The Mahayana distinguishes itself from the Buddhism of the 
Pali Canon by terming the latter the Little (hina) Vehicle 
(yana) of liberation and itself the Great (maha) Vehicle-great 
because it comprises such a wealth of upaya, or methods for the 
realization of nirvana, These methods range from the sophisti- 
cated dialectic of Nagarjuna, whose object is to free the mind 
of all fixed conceptions, to the Sukhavati or Pure Land doctrine 
of liberation through faith in the power of Amitabha, the Buddha 
of Boundless Light, who is said to have attained his awakening 
many aeons before the time of Gautama. They include even the 
Tantric Buddhism of medieval India, wherein liberation may 
be realized through the repetition of sacred words and formulae 
called dharani, and through special types of yoga involving 
sexual intercourse with a shakti or “spiritual wife.” ? 

? The alleged “obscenity” of maithuna, as this practice is called, is entirely 
in the minds of Christian missionaries. In fact, the relationship with the 
shakti was anything but promiscuous, and involved the mature and all- 
too-infrequent notion of a man and a woman undertaking their spiritual 
development in common. This included a sanctification of the sexual rela- 
tionship which should logically have been part of the Catholic view of mar- 
riage as a sacrament. For a full treatment see S. B. Dasgupta, An Introduc- 


tion to Tantric Buddhism (Calcutta, 1952), and Sir John Woodroffe, Shakti 
and Shakta (Madras and London, 1929). 


60 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


A preliminary study of the Pali Canon will certainly give the 
impression that nirvana is to be realized only through rigorous 
effort and self-control, and that the aspirant should lay aside all 
cther concerns for the pursuit of this ideal. Mahayanists may be 
perfectly correct in assuming that the Buddha intended this 
emphasis as an upaya, a skillful means of enabling one to realize, 
concretely and vividly, the absurd vicious circle of desiring not 
to desire, or of trying to get rid of selfishness by oneself. For this 
is certainly the conclusion to which the practice of the Buddha’s 
doctrine led. It may be attributed to laziness and loss of nerve, 
but it seems more plausible to suggest that those who remained 
in the path of self-deliverance were merely unconscious of the 
paradox involved. For wherever the Mahayana continues to 
teach the way of liberation by one’s own effort, it does so as an 
expedient for bringing the individual to a vivid awareness of his 
own futility. 

Various indications suggest that one of the earliest notions of 
the Mahayana was the conception of the Bodhisattva, not simply 
as a potential Buddha, but as one who by renouncing nirvana 
was at a higher spiritual level than one who attained it and so 
withdrew from the world of birth-and-death. In the Pali Canon 
the disciples of the Buddha who attain nirvana are termed 
Arhans or “worthy ones,” but in the Mahayana texts the ideal of 
the Arhan is accounted almost selfish. It is fit only for the sravaka, 
the “hearer” of the doctrine who has progressed only so far as to 
get a theoretical understanding. The Bodhisattva, however, is 
one who realizes that there is a profound contradiction in a 
nirvana attained by himself and for himself. From the popular 
standpoint, the Bodhisattva became a focus of devotion (bhakti), 
a savior of the world who had vowed not to enter the final 
nirvana until all other sentient beings had likewise attained it. 
For their sakes he consented to be born again and again into the 
Round of samsara, until, in the course of innumerable ages, even 
the grass and the dust had attained Buddhahood. 

But from a deeper standpoint it became obvious that the idea 


Mahayana Buddhism 61 


of the Bodhisattva is implicit in the logic of Buddhism, that it 
flows naturally from the principle of not-grasping and from the 
doctrine of the unreality of the ego. For if nirvana is the state in 
which the attempt to grasp reality has wholly ceased, through the 
realization of its impossibility, it will obviously be absurd to 
think of nirvana itself as something to be grasped or attained. If, 
furthermore, the ego is merely a convention, it is nonsense to 
think of nirvana as a state to be attained by some being. As is 
said in the Vajracchedika: 
All Bodhisattva-heroes should cultivate their minds to think: all 
sentient beings of whatever class . . . are caused by me to attain 
the boundless liberation of nirvana. Yet when vast, innumerable, 
and immeasurable numbers of beings have thus been liberated, in 
truth no being has been liberated! Why is this, Subhuti? It is be- 
cause no Bodhisattva who is truly a Bodhisattva holds to the idea 
of an ego, a personality, a being, or a separate individual. (3) 
The corollary of this position is that if there is no nirvana 
which can be attained, and if, in reality, there are no individual 
entities, it will follow that our bondage in the Round is merely 
apparent, and that in fact we are already in nirvana-so that to 
seek nirvana is the folly of looking for what one has never lost. 
Naturally, then, the Bodhisattva makes no motion to depart from 
the Round of samsara, as if nirvana were somewhere else, for to 
do so would imply that nirvana is something that needs to be 
attained and that samsara is an actual reality. In the words of the 
Lankavatara Sutra: 
Those who, afraid of the sufferings arising from the discrimination 
of birth-and-death (samsara), seek for Nirvana, do not know that 
birth-and-death and Nirvana are not to be separated from one an- 
other; and, seeing that all things subject to discrimination have 
no reality, (they) imagine that Nirvana consists in the future an- 
nihilation of the senses and their fields. (II. 18) 3 
To strive, then, to blot out the conventional world of things and 
events is to admit that it exists in reality. Hence the Mahayanist 


3 In Suzuki (3), p. 55. The “fields” of the senses are the areas or aspects of 
the external world to which the particular sense organs are related. 


62 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


principle that “what has never arisen does not have to be an- 
nihilated.” ¢ 

These are not the idle speculations and sophistries of a system 
of subjective idealism or nihilism. They are answers to a prac- 
tical problem which may be expressed thus: “If my grasping of 
life involves me in a vicious circle, how am I to learn not to 
grasp? How can I try to let go when trying is precisely not letting 
go?” Stated in another way, to try not to grasp is the same thing 
as to grasp, since its motivation is the same-my urgent desire to 
save myself from a difficulty. I cannot get rid of this desire, since 
it is one and the same desire as the desire to get rid of it! This is 
the familiar, everyday problem of the psychological “double- 
bind,” of creating the problem by trying to solve it, of worrying 
because one worries, and of being afraid of fear. 

Mahayana philosophy proposes a drastic but effective answer 
which is the theme of a class of literature called Prajna-paramita, 
or “wisdom for crossing to the other shore,” a literature closely 
associated with the work of Nagarjuna (c. A.D. 200), who ranks 
with Shankara as one of the greatest minds of India. Stated 
baldly, the answer is that all grasping, even for nirvana, is futile- 
for there is nothing to be grasped. This is Nagarjuna’s celebrated 
Sunyavada, his “Doctrine of the Void,” otherwise known as the 
Madhyamika, the “middle way,” because it refutes all meta- 
physical propositions by demonstrating their relativity. From the 
standpoint of academic philosophy, the Prajna-paramita and the 
doctrine of Nagarjuna are no doubt some form of nihilism or 
“absolute relativism.” But this is not Nagarjuna’s standpoint. The 
dialectic with which he demolishes every conception of reality 
is merely a device for breaking the vicious circle of grasping, and 
the terminus of his philosophy is not the abject despair of 
nihilism but the natural and uncontrived bliss (ananda) of 
liberation. 

The Sunyavada takes its name from the term sunya, void, or 
sunyata, voidness, with which Nagarjuna described the nature of 
reality, or rather, of the conceptions of reality which the human 


Mahayana Buddhism 63 


mind ~an form. Conceptions here include not only metaphysical 
views but also ideals, religious beliefs, ultimate hopes and am- 
bitions of every kind-everything which the mind of man seeks 
and grasps for his physical or spiritual security. Not only does 
the Sunyavada demolish the beliefs which one consciously 
adopts; it also seeks out the hidden and unconscious premises 
of thought and action, and submits them to the same treatment 
until the very depths of the mind are reduced to a total silence. 
Even the idea of sunya is itself to be voided. 


It cannot be called void or not void, 
Or both or neither; 

But in order to point it out, 

It is called “the Void.” + 


Stcherbatsky (1) is certainly right in thinking that the Sun- 
yavada is best called a doctrine of relativity. For Nagarjuna’s 
method is simply to show that all things are without “self- 
nature” (svabhava) or independent reality since they exist only 
in relation to other things. Nothing in the universe can stand by 
itself-no thing, no fact, no being, no event-and for this reason 
it is absurd to single anything out as the ideal to be grasped. 
For what is singled out exists only in relation to its own opposite, 
since what is is defined by what is not, pleasure is defined by 
pain, life is defined by death, and motion is defined by stillness. 
Obviously, the mind can form no idea of what “to be” means 
without the contrast of “not to be,” since the ideas of being and 
non-being are abstractions from such simple experiences as that 
there is a penny in the right hand and no penny in the left. 

From one point of view, the same relativity exists between 
nirvana and samsara, bodhi (awakening ) and klesa (defilement). 
That is to say, the search for nirvana implies the existence and 
the problem of samsara, and the quest for awakening implies that 
one is in the state of defilement with delusion. To put it in an- 
other way: as soon as nirvana is made an object of desire, it be- 


4 Madhyamika Shastra, XV. 8. 


64 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


comes an element of samsara. The real nirvana cannot be desired 
because it cannot be conceived. Thus the Lankavatara Sutra says: 


Again, Mahamati, what is meant by non-duality? It means that 
light and shade, long and short, black and white, are relative terms, 
Mahamati, and not independent of each other; as Nirvana and 
Samsara are, all things are not-two. There is no Nirvana except 
where is Samsara; there is no Samsara except where is Nirvana; for 
the condition of existence is not of a mutually exclusive character. 
Therefore it is said that all things are non-dual as are Nirvana and 
Samsara. (II. 28) * 


But the equation “Nirvana is samsara” is true in another sense 
as well—namely, that what appears to us to be samsara is really 
nirvana, and that what appears to be the world of form (rupa) 
is really the void (sunya). Hence the famous saying: 


Form is not different from emptiness; emptiness is not different 
from form. Form is precisely emptiness; emptiness is precisely 
form.® 


Once again, this is not to say that awakening will cause the 
world of form to vanish without trace, for nirvana is not to be 
sought as “the future annihilation of the senses and their fields.” 
The sutra is saying that form is void just as it is, in all its prickly 
uniqueness. 

The point of this equation is not to assert a metaphysical 
proposition but to assist the process of awakening. For awaken- 
ing will not come to pass when one is trying to escape or change 
the everyday world of form, or to get away from the particular 
experience in which one finds oneself at this moment. Every 
such attempt is a manifestation of grasping. Even the grasping 
itself is not to be changed by force, for 


bodhi [awakening] is the five offenses, and the five offenses are 
bodhi. . . . If anyone regards bodhi as something to be attained, 
to be cultivated by discipline, he is guilty of the pride of self." 


5 In Suzuki (3), p. 67. 
® Prajna-paramita-hridaya Sutra (Chinese version }. 
7 Saptasatika-prajna-paramita Sutra, 232, 234. 


Mahayana Buddhism 65 


Some of these passages may suggest that the Bodhisattva may 
just as well be an easygoing, worldly fellow, who—because 
samsara is nirvana anyhow-can go on living just as he pleases. 
He may be thoroughly deluded, but since even delusion is bodhi 
there would be no point in trying to change it. There is often a 
deceptive resemblance between opposite extremes. Lunatics fre- 
quently resemble saints, and the unaffected modesty of the sage 
often lets him seem to be a very ordinary person. Yet there is 
no easy way of pointing out the difference, of saying what it is 
that the ordinary, worldly fcllow does or does not do which makes 
him different from a Bodhisattva, or vice versa. The entire 
mystery of Zen lies in this problem, and we shall return to it at 
the proper time. It is enough to say here that the so-called 
“ordinary person” is only apparently natural, or perhaps that his 
real naturalness feels unnatural to him. In practice it is simply 
impossible to decide, intentionally, to stop seeking for nirvana 
and to lead an ordinary life, for as soon as one’s “ordinary” life is 
intentional it is not natural. 

It is for this reason that the insistence of the Mahayana texts 
on the unattainability of nirvana and bodhi is not something to 
be accepted theoretically, as a mere philosophical opinion. One 
has to know “in one’s bones” that there is nothing to be grasped. 


Thereupon the thought came to some of the Gods in that assembly: 
What the fairies talk and murmur, that we understand though 
mumbled. What Subhuti has just told us, that we do not understand! 

Subhuti read their thoughts and said: There is nothing to under- 
stand, there is nothing to understand. For nothing in particular 
has been indicated, nothing in particular has been explained. . . . 
No one will grasp this perfection of wisdom as here explained. For 
no Dharma (doctrine) at all has been indicated, lit up, or com- 
municated. So there will be no one who can grasp it.® 


The point arrives, then, when it is clearly understood that all 
one’s intentional acts—desires, ideals, stratagems—are in vain. In 
the whole universe, within and without, there is nothing whereon 


8 Ashtasahasrika, II. 38, 40. In Conze (2), pp. 177-78 


66 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


to lay any hold, and no one to lay any hold on anything. This 
has been discovered through clear awareness of everything that 
seemed to offer a solution or to constitute a reliable reality, 
through the intuitive wisdom called prajna, which sees into the 
relational character of everything. With the “eye of prajna” the 
human situation is seen for what it isa quenching of thirst with 
salt water, a pursuit of goals which simply require the pursuit of 
other goals, a clutching of objects which the swift course of time 
renders as insubstantial as mist. The very one who pursues, who 
sees and knows and desires, the inner subject, has his existence 
only in relation to the ephemeral objects of his pursuit. He sees 
that his grasp upon the world is his strangle-hold about his own 
neck, the hold which is depriving him of the very life he so longs 
to attain. And there is no way out, no way of letting go, which he 
can take by effort, by a decision of the will. . . . But who is it 
that wants to get out? 

There comes a moment when this consciousness of the in- 
escapable trap in which we are at once the trapper and the 
trapped reaches a breaking point. One might almost say that it 
“matures” or “ripens,” and suddenly there is what the Lan- 
kavatara Sutra calls a “turning about in the deepest seat of con- 
sciousness.” In this moment all sense of constraint drops away, 
and the cocoon which the silkworm spun around himself opens 
to let him go forth winged as a moth. The peculiar anxiety which 
Kierkegaard has rightly seen to lie at the very roots of the 
ordinary man’s soul is no longer there. Contrivances, ideals, 
ambitions, and self-propitiations are no longer necessary, since 
it is now possible to live spontaneously without trying to be 
spontaneous. Indeed, there is no alternative, since it is now seen 
that there never was any self to bring the self under its control. 

Reduced to the bare essentials, such is the inner process which 
the Sunyavada is trying to set in motion with its philosophy of 
total negation. Thus the greater part of Nagarjuna’s work was a 
carefully logical and systematic refutation of every philosoph- 


Mahayana Buddhism 67 


ical position to be found in the India of his time.® Granting that 
its object is an inner experience, Western students have always 
had difficulty in understanding how such a purely negative point 
of view could have any creative consequences. It must therefore 
be repeated that the negations apply, not to reality itself, but to 
our ideas of reality. The positive and creative content of the 
Sunyavada is not in the philosophy itself, but in the new vision 
of reality which is revealed when its work is done, and Nagarjuna 
does not spoil this vision by trying to describe it. 

The Mahayana does, however, have another term for reality 
which is perhaps rather more indicative than sunya, the void. This 
is the word tathata, which we may translate as “suchness,” “thus- 
ness,” or “thatness.” Similarly, the Buddhas are called Tathagatas- 
they who go, or come, “thus.” The Sanskrit word tat (our “that”) 
is probably based on a child’s first efforts at speech, when it 
points at something and says, “Ta” or “Da.” Fathers flatter them- 
selves by imagining that the child is calling them by name- 
“Dada” or “Daddy.” But perhaps the child is just expressing its 
recognition of the world, and saying “That!” When we say just 
“That” or “Thus,” we are pointing to the realm of nonverbal 
experience, to reality as we perceive it directly, for we are trying 
to indicate what we see or feel rather than what we think or say. 
Tathata therefore indicates the world just as it is, unscreened and 
undivided by the symbols and definitions of thought. It points to 
the concrete and actual as distinct from the abstract and con- 
ceptual. A Buddha is a Tathagata, a “thus-goer,” because he is 
awakened to this primary, nonconceptual world which no words 
can convey, and does not confuse it with such ideas as being or 
non-being, good or bad, past or future, here or there, moving or 


9 The reader who is interested in exploring Nagarjuna’s philosophy more 
deeply should refer to the magnificent work of Professor T. R. V. Murti, 
The Central Philosophy of Buddhism. (See Bibliography.) Unhappily, there 
are now available only fragmentary translations of Nagarjuna’s writings in 
English, unless he was indeed the author of the Prajna-paramita literature, 
for which see Conze (2, 3). 


68 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


still, permanent or impermanent. As the Bodhisattva Manjusri 
speaks of the Tathagata in the Saptasatika: 


Suchness (tathata) neither becomes nor ceases to become; thus do 
I see the Tathagata. Suchness does not stand at any point or place; 
thus do I see the Tathagata. Suchness is neither past, future, nor 
present; thus do I see the Tathagata. Suchness does not arise from 
the dual or the non-dual; thus do I see the Tathagata. Suchness 
is neither impure nor pure; thus do I see the Tathagata. Suchness 
neither arises nor comes to an end; thus do I see the Tathagata. 
(195) 2° 


Because tathata is the true state of a Buddha and of all beings 
whatsoever, it is also referred to as our true or original nature, 
and thus our “Buddha nature.” One of the cardinal doctrines of 
the Mahayana is that all beings are endowed with Buddha na- 
ture, and so have the possibility of becoming Buddhas. Because 
of the identity of Buddha nature and tathata, the term “Buddha” 
is frequently used of reality itself and not just of the awakened 
man. It so comes about that in the Mahayana a Buddha is often 
seen as a personification of reality, forming the basis of those 
popular cults in which the Buddhas seem to be worshiped as 
gods. I say “seem to be” because even Mahayana Buddhism has 
no real equivalent of Judaeo-Christian theism, with its strict 
identification of God with the moral principle. Furthermore, the 
various Buddhas who are so venerated~Amitabha, Vairocana, 
Amitayus, Ratnasambhava, etc.~are always personifications of 
one’s own true nature. 

Here, too, lies the basis of the Buddhism of faith, of the 
Sukhavati or Pure Land school, in which it is held that all efforts 
to become a Buddha are merely the false pride of the ego. All that 
is necessary is to repeat the formula namo-amitabhaya (literally, 
“the Name of Amitabha” or “Hail, Amitabha”) in the faith that 
this alone is sufficient to bring about one’s rebirth in the Pure 
10“Suchness is neither past, future, nor present,” for when it is seen that 


there is neither past nor future there is no more a present, since the ides 
of the present has meaning only in relation to past and future. 


Mahayana Buddhism 69 


Land over which Amitabha presides. In this Pure Land all the 
obstacles which stand in the way of becoming a Buddha in this 
world are removed, so that rebirth in the Pure Land is virtually 
equivalent to becoming a Buddha. The repetition of the Name 
is held to be effective because, in ages past, Amitabha vowed 
that he would not enter into supreme Buddhahood unless re- 
birth in the Pure Land were assured for all beings who invoked 
his name. Because he subsequently entered the state of Buddha- 
hood, the vow is effectively fulfilled. 

Even Nagarjuna was in sympathy with this doctrine, for it is 
obviously a popular and more graphic way of saying that since 
one’s own true nature is already the Buddha nature, one does 
not have to do anything to make it so. On the contrary, to seek 
to become Buddha is to deny that one is already Buddha~and 
this is the sole basis upon which Buddhahood can be realized! 
In short, to become a Buddha it is only necessary to have the 
faith that one is a Buddha already. Shinran, the great Japanese 
exponent of the Pure Land, went even so far as to say that it was 
only necessary to repeat the Name, for he saw that the attempt 
to make an act of faith was too artificial, and led one to doubt 
one’s own faith. 

Pure Land Buddhism is clearly an outgrowth of the Bodhi- 
sattva doctrine that the proper work of the liberated man is 
the liberation of all other beings by upaya or “skillful means.” 
By prajna or intuitive wisdom he sees into the nature of reality, 
and this in turn awakens karuna or compassion for all who are 
still in the bonds of ignorance. At its deepest level karuna means 
something rather more than compassion for the ignorance of 
others. For we saw that the Bodhisattva’s return into the world 
of samsara was based on the principle that samsara is in fact 
nirvana, and that “the void is precisely form.” If prajna is to see 
that “form is void,” karuna is to see that “the void is form.” It 
is therefore an “affirmation” of the everyday world in its natural 
“suchness,” and this is one of the features of the Mahayana most 
strongly emphasized in Zen. Indeed, it makes nonsense of the 


70 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


idea that Buddhism is always a philosophy of world-denial, in 
which the uniqueness of forms has no importance. It was because 
of karuna that Mahayana Buddhism became the principal in- 
spiration of Chinese art in the Sung and Yiian dynasties, an art 
which stressed natural forms rather than religious symbols. For 
by karuna it is seen that the dissolution of forms into the void 
is in no way different from the particular characteristics of the 
forms themselves. The life of things is only conventionally 
separable from their death; in reality the dying is the living. 

The perception that each single form, just as it is, is the void 
and that, further, the uniqueness of each form arises from the 
fact that it exists in relation to every other form is the basis of 
the Dharmadhatu (“Dharma realm”) doctrine of the enormous 
Avatamsaka Sutra. This voluminous work is probably the final 
culmination of Indian Mahayana, and one of its central images is 
a vast network of gems or crystals, like a spider's web at dawn, 
in which each gem reflects all the others. This net of gems is the 
Dharmadhatu, the universe, the realm of innumerable dharmeas 
or “thing-events.” 

Chinese commentators worked out a fourfold classification of 
the Dharmadhatu which became of considerable importance for 
Zen late in the T’ang dynasty. Their classification of the “Four 
Dharma Realms”? was as follows: 

1. Shih, the unique, individual “thing-events” of which the 
universe is composed. 

2. Li,* the “principle” or ultimate reality underlying the mul- 
tiplicity of things. 

3. Li shih wu ai,’ “between principle and thing no obstruc- 
tion,” which is to say that there is no incompatibility between 
nirvana and samsara, void and form. The attainment of the one 
does not involve the annihilation of the other. 

4, Shih shih wu ai,’ “between thing and thing no obstruction,” 
which is to say that each “thing-event” involves every other, 
and that the highest insight is simply the perception of them in 
their natural “suchness.” At this level every “thing-event” is seen 


Mahayana Buddhism 71 


to be self-determinative, self-generating, or spontaneous, for to 
be quite naturally what it is, to be tatha—just “thus”-is to be free 
and without obstruction. 

The doctrine of the Dharmadhatu is, approximately, that the 
proper harmony of the universe is realized when each “thing- 
event” is allowed to be freely and spontaneously itself, without 
interference. Stated more subjectively, it is saying, “Let every- 
thing be free to be just as it is. Do not separate yourself from 
the world and try to order it around.” There is a subtle distinc- 
tion between this and mere laissez faire, which may be suggested 
by the way in which we move our various limbs. Each one moves 
by itself, from within. To walk, we do not pick up our feet with 
our hands. The individual body is therefore a system of shih 
shih wu ai, and a Buddha realizes that the whole universe is his 
body, a marvelously interrelated harmony organized from within 
itself rather than by interference from outside. 

Mahayana philosophy thinks of the Buddha’s body as three- 
fold, as the Trikaya or “Triple Body.” His body, considered 
either as the multitude of “thing-events” or as his particular 
human forms, is termed the Nirmanakaya, or “Body of Trans- 
formation.” The particular human forms are such historic and 
prehistoric Buddhas as Gautama, Kasyapa, or Kanakamuni, and 
since these appear “in the flesh” the Nirmanakaya includes, in 
principle, the entire universe of form. There is next the Sam- 
bhogakaya, or “Body of Enjoyment.” This is the sphere of prajna, 
wisdom, and karuna, compassion, the latter looking down to the 
world of form, and the former looking up to the realm of the 
void. Sambhogakaya might also be called the “Body of Realiza- 
tion” since it is in this “body” that a Buddha realizes that he is a 
Buddha. Finally there is the Dharmakaya, the “Dharma Body,” 
which is the void, the sunyca itself. 

Nagarjuna did not discuss the way in which the void appears 
as form, the Dharmakaya as the Nirmanakaya, feeling, perhaps, 
that this would be completely unintelligible to those who had not 
actually realized awakening. For the Buddha himself had com- 


72 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


pared such inquiries to the foolishness of a man shot with an 
arrow, who would not permit it to be taken out of his flesh until 
he had been told all the details of his assailant’s appearance, 
family, and motivations. Nevertheless, Nagarjuna’s successors, the 
brothers Asanga and Vasubandhu (c. 280-360), who worked 
out the type of Mahayana philosophy generally known as Yoga- 
cara, made some attempt to discuss this particular problem. 

According to the Yogacara the world of form is cittamatra- 
“mind only”-or vijnaptimatra—“representation only.” This view 
seems to have a very close resemblance to Western philosophies 
of subjective idealism, in which the external and material world 
is regarded as a projection of the mind. However, there seem to 
be some differences between the two points of view. Here, as 
always, the Mahayana is not so much a theoretical and specula- 
tive construction as an account of an inner experience, and a 
means of awakening the experience in others. Furthermore, the 
word citta is not precisely equivalent to our “mind.” Western 
thought tends to define mind by opposition to matter, and to 
consider matter not so much as “measure” as the solid stuff 
which is measured. Measure itself, abstraction, is for the West 
more of the nature of mind, since we tend to think of mind and 
spirit as more abstract than concrete. 

But in Buddhist philosophy citta does not stand over against a 
conception of solid stuff. The world has never been considered 
in terms of a primary substance shaped into various forms by 
the action of mind or spirit. Such an image is not in the history of 
Buddhist thought, and thus the problem of how impalpable 
mind can influence solid matter has never arisen. Wherever we 
should speak of the material or physical or substantial world, 
Buddhism employs the term rupa, which is not so much our 
“matter” as “form.” There is no “material substance” underlying 
rupa unless it be citta itself| 

The difficulty of making equations and comparisons between 
Eastern and Western ideas is that the two worlds do not start 
with the same assumptions and premises. They do not have the 


Mahayana Buddhism 73 


same basic categorizations of experience. When, therefore, the 
world has never been divided into mind and matter, but rather 
into mind and form, the word “mind” cannot mean quite the 
same thing in both instances. The word “man,” for example, 
does not have quite the same meaning when contrasted with 
“woman” as when contrasted with “animal.” 

A simplified, and somewhat rough, way of stating the dif- 
ference is that Western idealists have begun to philosophize 
from a world consisting of mind (or spirit), form, and matter, 
whereas the Buddhists have begun to philosophize from a world 
of mind and form. 

The Yogacara does not, therefore, discuss the relation of forms 
of matter to mind; it discusses the relation of forms to mind, and 
concludes that they are forms of mind. As a result, the term 
“mind” (citta) becomes logically meaningless. But because the 
main concern of Buddhism is with a realm of experience which 
is nonlogical and meaningless, in the sense that it does not 
symbolize or signify anything other than itself, there is no ob- 
jection to “meaningless” terms. 

From the logical standpoint the proposition “Everything is 
mind” says no more than that everything is everything. For if 
there is nothing which is not mind, the word belongs to no class, 
and has no limits, no definition. One might as well use “blah”- 
which is almost exactly what Buddhism does with the nonsense 
word tathata. For the function of these nonsense terms is to draw 
our attention to the fact that logic and meaning, with its in- 
herent duality, is a property of thought and language but not of 
the actual world. The nonverbal, concrete world contains no 
classes and no symbols which signify or mean anything other 
than themselves. Consequently it contains no duality. For duality 
arises only when we classify, when we sort our experiences into 
mental boxes, since a box is no box without an inside and an 
outside. 

Mental boxes are probably formed in our minds long before 
formal thought and language supply labels to identify them. We 


TA BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


have begun to classify as soon as we notice differences, regu- 
larities and irregularities, as soon as we make associations of any 
kind. But-if the word “mental” means anything at all-this act 
of classification is certainly mental, for to notice differences and 
to associate them with one another is something more than simply 
to respond to sense contacts. Yet if classes are a product of the 
mind, of noticing, association, thought, and language, the world 
considered simply as all classes of objects is a product of the 
mind. 

This is, I think, what the Yogacara means by the assertion that 
the world is mind-only (cittamatram lokam). It means that ex- 
ternal and internal, before and after, heavy and light, pleasant 
and painful, moving and still are all ideas, or mental classifica- 
tions. Their relation to the concrete world is the same as that of 
words. Thus the world that we know, when understood as the 
world as classified, is a product of the mind, and as the sound 
“water” is not actually water, the classified world is not the real 
world. 

The problem of “what” the mind is can now be seen to be the 
same as the problem of “what” the real world is. It cannot be 
answered, for every “what” is a class, and we cannot classify the 
classifier. Is it not, then, merely absurd to speak of the mind, 
the citta, at alf if there is no way of saying what it is? On the 
contrary, the mathematician Kurt Godel has given us a rigorous 
proof of the fact that every logical system must contain a premise 
which it cannot define without contradicting itself.1 The Yoga- 
cara takes citta as its premise and does not define it, since citta 
is here the equivalent of sunya and tathata. For the mind 


is beyond all philosophical views, is apart from discrimination, it 
is not attainable, nor is it ever born: I say there is nothing but Mind. 
It is not an existence, nor is it a non-existence; it is indeed beyond 
both existence and non-existence. . . . Out of Mind spring in- 
numerable things, conditioned by discrimination (i.e., classifica- 


11 For a general account see E. Nagel and J. R. Newman, “Gédel’s Proof,” 
Scientific American, CXCVI. 6 (June, 1956), pp. 71-86. 


Mahayana Buddhism 15 


tion) and habit-energy; these things people accept as an external 
world. . . . What appears to be external does not exist in reality; 
it is indeed Mind that is seen as multiplicity; the body, property, 
and abode-all these, I say, are nothing but Mind. 


Within this undefined continuum of citta the Yogacara de- 
scribes eight kinds of vijnana, or “discriminating consciousness.” 
There is a consciousness appropriate to each of the five senses; 
there is the sixth sense-consciousness (mano-vijnana), unifying 
the other five so that what is touched or heard may be related to 
what is seen; there is manas, center of the mind’s discriminative 
and classifying activity; and finally there is the “store-conscious- 
ness” (alaya-vijnana), the supra-individual mind which contains 
the seeds of all possible forms. 

The “store-consciousness” is almost equivalent to the citta 
itself, and is supra-individual because it stands prior to every 
differentiation. It is not to be conceived as a sort of ghostly gas 
permeating all beings, since space and extension are likewise 
here only in potentiality. In other words, the “store-consciousness” 
is that from which the formal world arises spontaneously or 
playfully (vikridita). For the Mahayana does not make the 
mistake of trying to account for the production of the world 
from the mind by a series of necessary causes. Whatever is linked 
by causal necessity is of the world of maya, not beyond it. Speak- 
ing somewhat poetically, the world illusion comes out of the 
Great Void for no reason, purposelessly, and just because there is 
no necessity for it to do so. For the “activity” of the Void is play- 
ful or vikridita because it is not motivated action (karma). 

Thus, as the Yogacara describes it, the production of the formal 
world arises spontaneously from the “store-consciousness,” flows 
up into the manas, where the primordial differentiations are 
12 Lankavatara Sutra, 154, 29-30, 32-33. In Suzuki (2), p. 242. I have 
cited the Lankavatara for both Madhyamika and Yogacara viewpoints, since 
either both schoels have used the sutra or else it is a work of the latter in- 
corporating views of the former. Since historical order is here a matter of 


conjecture, I have simply chosen sources which seem to express the ideas in 
question most effectively. 


76 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


made, passes thence into the six sense-consciousnesses, which in 
turn produce the sense organs or “gates” (ayatana) through 
which it finally projects the classified external world. 

The Buddhist yoga therefore consists in reversing the process, 
in stilling the discriminative activity of the mind, and letting the 
categories of maya fall back into potentiality so that the world 
may be seen in its unclassified “suchness.” Here karuna awakens, 
and the Bodhisattva lets the projection arise again, having be- 
come consciously identified with the playful and purposeless 
character of the Void. 


Four 


Tue RISE AND DEVELOPMENT OF ZEN 


The qualities which distinguish Zen or Ch’an from other types 
of Buddhism are rather elusive when it comes to putting them 
in words, yet Zen has a definite and unmistakable “flavor.” Al- 
though the name Zen is dhyana, or meditation, other schools of 
Buddhism emphasize meditation as much as, if not more than, 
Zen-and at times it seems as if the practice of formal meditation 
were not necessary to Zen at all. Nor is Zen peculiar in “having 
nothing to say,” in insisting that the truth cannot be put into 
words, for this is already the Madhyamika as well as the teach- 
ing of Lao-tzu. 


Those who know do not speak; 
Those who speak do not know. (56) 


Perhaps the special flavor of Zen is best described as a certain 
directness. In other schools of Buddhism, awakening or bodhi 
seems remote and almost superhuman, something to be reached 
only after many lives of patient effort. But in Zen there is always 
the feeling that awakening is something quite natural, some- 
thing startlingly obvious, which may occur at any moment. If it 
involves a difficulty, it is just that it is much too simple. Zen is 
also direct in its way of teaching, for it points directly and 
openly to the truth, and does not trifle with symbolism. 

Direct pointing (chih-chih*) is the open demonstration of 
Zen by nonsymbolic actions or words, which usually appear to 
the uninitiated as having to do with the most ordinary secular 
affairs, or to be completely crazy. In answer to a question about 
Buddhism, the master makes a casual remark about the weather, 
or performs some simple action which seems to have nothing to 


do with philosophical or spiritual matters. However, it is dif- 
77 


78 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


ficult to find many instances of this method before the middle of 
the T’ang dynasty, by which time Zen was already well estab- 
lished. But it is certainly consistent with the emphasis of the 
earlier masters on immediate awakening in the midst of everyday 
affairs, 

No one has been able to find any trace of a specific Dhyana 
School in Indian Buddhism, though because of our lack of his- 
torical materials this is no evidence that it did not exist. If the 
characteristic note of Zen is immediate or instantancous awaken- 
ing (tun wu”) without passing through preparatory stages, there 
are certainly evidences of this principle in India. The Lan- 
kavatara Sutra states that there are both gradual and sudden 
(yugapat) ways of awakening, the former by purification of the 
tainted outflows or projections (ashrava) of the mind, and the 
latter by paravritti-an instantaneous “turning about” within the 
depths of consciousness whereby dualistic views are cast off. It 
is likened to a mirror immediately reflecting whatever forms and 
images appear before it.1 There is, too, a clear connection be- 
tween the idca of immediate awakening and the teaching of the 
Vajracchedika, or “Diamond Cutter Sutra,” on the fact that to 
attain awakening is not to attain anything. In other words, if 
nirvana is actually here and now so that to seek it is to lose it, a 
realization through progressive stages is hardly appropriate. One 
would have to see into it in the present moment, directly. 

Although its origins are probably later than those of Zen in 
China, there is also a tradition of this kind in Tantric Buddhism, 
and there is nothing to indicate that there was a reverse influence 
from Chinese Zen. Parallels to Zen sayings may be seen in a 
tenth-century Tantric work by Saraha: 


If it [the Truth] is already manifest, what's the use of meditation? 
And if it is hidden, one is just measuring darkness. (20) 


4 Lankavatara Sutra, II. 14, in Suzuki (3), pp. 49-51. According to tradi- 
tion this was the favorite sutra of Bodhidharma, the semi-legendary founder 
of Zen in China. Its connection with Zen is fully discussed in Suzuki (2), 


pp- 44-63. 


The Rise and Development of Zen 79 


Mantras and tantras, meditation and concentration, 

They are all a cause of self-deception. 

Do not defile in contemplation thought that is pure in its own nature, 
But abide in the bliss of yourself and cease those torments. (23) 
Whatever you see, that is it, 

In front, behind, in all the ten directions. 

Even today let your master make an end of delusion! (28) 

The nature of the sky is originally clear, 

But by gazing and gazing the sight becomes obscured. (34) 2 


Tibetan Buddhism likewise comprises a tradition of the Short 
Path, considered as a swift and steep ascent to nirvana for those 
who have the necessary courage, though a doctrine more sug- 
gestive of the Zen emphasis on immediacy and naturalness is 
found in the “Six Precepts” of Tilopa: 


No thought, no reflection, no analysis, 
No cultivation, no intention; 
Let it settle itself. 


Immediate release without any special contrivance or intention 
is also implied in the Tantric idea of sahaja, the “easy” or “nat- 
ural” state of the liberated sage. 

This is not the place to discuss the real meaning of immediate 
awakening and naturalness, but these instances are cited to show 
that the tradition of a direct path existed outside China, suggest- 


2 Saraha’s Treasury of Songs, translated by David Snellgrove in Conze (2), 
pp. 224-39. 
3 The original is: 

Mi-mno, mi-bsam, mi-dpyad-ching, 

Mi-bsgom, mi-sems, rang-babs-bzhag. 
The translation is based upon an elucidation of the passage given me by 
Mr. Alex Wayman of the University of California. Mi-mno is approximately 
equivalent to the Zen terms wu-hsin or wu-nien, “no-mind” or “no-thought.” 
Bsam is the equivalent of the Sanskrit cintana, i.e., discursive thinking shout 
what has been heard, and dpyad of mimamsa, or “philosophical analysis.” 
Bsgom is probably bhavana or the Chinese hsiu, “to cultivate,” “to prac- 
tice,” or “intense concentration.” Sems is cetana or szu, with the sense of in- 
tention or volition. Rang-babs-bzhag is literally “self-settle-establish,” and 
“self-settle” would seem to be an almost exact equivalent of the Taoist 
tzu-jan, “self-so,” “spontaneous,” or “natural.” 


80 BACKGROUND AND HISTOR: 


ing some original source in Indian Buddhism. An obvious reason 
for the lack of materials would be that a principle of this kind, 
so easily open to misinterpretation, might have been kept as a 
“secret doctrine,” discussed openly only in later times. Zen tradi- 
tion does indeed maintain that immediate awakening is not 
communicated by the sutras, but has been passed down directly 
from master to pupil. This does not necessarily imply anything 
so “esoteric” as an experience conveyed by telepathy, but some- 
thing much less sensational. Thus when Hindu pandits insist that 
wisdom is not to be gained from the scriptures but only from a 
teacher or guru, it means that the actual texts-such as the Yoga- 
sutra-contain only the headings of the doctrine, and that its full 
explanation requires someone who has learned the oral tradition. 
To this it should hardly be necessary to add that since the tradi- 
tion is primarily an experience, words can communicate it no 
more and no less than any other experience. 

However, it is not really necessary to suppose that there was 
ever a specific Dhyana School in India. The creation of Zen 
would seem to be sufficiently explained by the exposure of Tao- 
ists and Confucians to the main principles of Mahayana Bud- 
dhism. Therefore the appearance of trends very close to Zen 
can be seen almost as soon as the great Mahayana sutras be- 
came available in China-that is to say, with the work of the 
great Indian scholar-monk Kumarajiva. Kumarajiva was trans- 
lating the sutras in Ku-tsang and Ch’ang-an between 384 and 
413, at which time one of his outstanding students was the young 
monk Seng-chao (384-414), who had started out in life as a 
copyist of the Confucian and Taoist texts. 

Seng-chao had been converted to Buddhism as a result of read- 
ing the Vimalakirti Sutra—a text which has exercised considerable 
influence upon Zen. Although Seng-chao became a monk, this 
sutra is the story of a layman, Vimalakirti, who excelled all the 
Buddha’s disciples in the depth of his understanding. He had 
surpassed all the other disciples and Bodhisattvas by answering 


The Rise and Development of Zen 81 


a question as to the nature of the nondual reality with a “thun- 
derous silence”-an example frequently followed by Zen masters. 
Vimalakirti “thunderingly silent” is, too, a favorite theme of Zen 
artists. But the main importance of this sutra for China and for 
Zen was the point that perfect awakening was consistent with the 
affairs of everyday life, and that, indeed, the highest attainment 
was to “enter into awakening without exterminating the defile- 
ments [klesa].” 

There was an appeal here to both the Confucian and the 
Taoist mentality. The Confucian stress on the importance of 
family life would not easily sympathize with a rigorously monastic 
type of Buddhism. Though the Chinese Buddhist masters were 
normally monks, they had large numbers of advanced lay stu- 
dents, and Zen, in particular, has always attached great im- 
portance to the expression of Buddhism in formally secular 
terms~in arts of every type, in manual labor, and in appreciation 
of the natural universe. Confucian and Taoist alike would be 
especially agreeable to the idea of an awakening which did not 
involve the extermination of human passions, as klesa may also 
be translated. We have already noted the peculiar trust in human 
nature which both these philosophies professed. However, not 
exterminating the passions does not mean letting them flourish 
untamed. It means letting go of them rather than fighting them, 
neither repressing passion nor indulging it. For the Taoist is 
never violent, since he achieves his ends by noninterference 
(twu-wei), which is a kind of psychological judo. 

Seng-chao’s writings, as well as his commentary on the Vima- 
lakirti Sutra, are full of Taoist quotations and phrases, for he 
seemed to be following the example of less important, though 
earlier, monks such as Hui-yiian (334-416) and Tao-an (312~- 
385) in using “extension of the idea” (ko-i*) for explaining 
Buddhism through Taoist parallels. So much did this suggest an 
equivalence between the two traditions that by the end of the 
fifth century Liu Ch’iu could say: 


82 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 
From the K’un-lun mountains eastward the (Taoist) term “Great 
Oneness” is used. From Kashmir westward the (Buddhist) term 
sambodhi is used. Whether one looks longingly toward “non-being” 
(wu) or cultivates “emptiness” (sunyata), the principle involved 
is the same.* 


Two of Seng-chao’s doctrines would seem to have had some 
importance for the later development of Zen-his view of time 
and change, and his idea that “prajna is not knowledge.” The 
chapter on “The Immutability of Things” in his Book of Chao is so 
original and so startlingly similar to the section on time in the 
first volume of Dogen’s Shobogenzo, that the celebrated Japanese 
Zen philosopher can hardly have been unfamiliar with it. 


Past things are in the past and do not go there from the present, 
and present things are in the present, and do not go there from 
the past. . . . Rivers which compete with one another to inundate 
the land do not flow. The “wandering air” that blows about is not 
moving. The sun and moon, revolving in their orbits, do not tum 
around.5 


In the same way Dogen pointed out that firewood does not be- 
come ashes and life does not become death, just as the winter does 
not become the spring. Every moment of time is “self-contained 
and quiescent.” ¢ 

Seng-chao also discussed the seeming paradox that prajna is a 
kind of ignorance. Because the ultimate reality has no qualities 
and is not a thing, it cannot become an object of knowledge. 
Therefore prajna, direct insight, knows the truth by not knowing. 


Wisdom knows not, yet it illumines the deepest profundity. Spirit 
calculates not, yet it responds to the necessities of the given moment. 
Because it calculates not, spirit shines in lonely glory in what is 
beyond the world. Because it knows not, Wisdom illumines the 


* Quoted by Fung Yu-lan (1), vol. 2, p. 240, from Seng-yu, Ch’u San-tsang 
Chi-chi, 9. 

5 Liebenthal (1), p. 49. 

®The same idea was used even before Dogen by the Zen master Ma-tsu 
(d. 788): “So with former thoughts, later thoughts, and thoughts in be- 
tween: the thoughts follow one another without being linked together. Each 
one is absolutely tranquil.” Ku-tsun-hsii Yi-lu, 1. 4. 


The Rise and Development of Zen 83 


Mystery (hstian) beyond mundane affairs. Yet though Wisdom lies 
outside affairs, it never lacks them. Though Spirit lies beyond the 
world, it stays ever within it.” 


Here is one of the main links between Taoism and Zen, for the 
style and terminology of the Book of Chao is Taoist throughout 
though the subject matter is Buddhist. The sayings of the early 
Zen masters, such as Hui-neng, Shen-hui, and Huang-po, are 
full of these very ideas—that truly to know is not to know, that 
the awakened mind responds immediately, without calculation, 
and that there is no incompatibility between Buddhahood and 
the everyday life of the world. 

Even closer to the standpoint of Zen was Seng-chao’s fellow 
student Tao-sheng (360-434), the first clear and unequivocal 
exponent of the doctrine of instantaneous awakening. If nirvana 
is not to be found by grasping, there can be no question of ap- 
proaching it by stages, by the slow process of the accumulation 
of knowledge. It must be realized in a single flash of insight, 
which is tun wu, or, in Japanese, satori, the familiar Zen term 
for sudden awakening. Hsieh Ling-yiin ® in his discussion of Tao- 
sheng’s doctrine even suggests that instantaneous awakening is 
more appropriate to the Chinese mentality than to the Indian, 
and lends weight to Suzuki’s description of Zen as the Chinese 
“revolution” against Indian Buddhism. Tao-sheng’s doctrine, 
however unusual and startling, must have found considerable ac- 
ceptance. It is mentioned again, more than a century later, in a 
work by Hui-yiian (523-592), who also associates it with the 
master Hui-tan who lived until about 627. 

The importance of these early precursors of Zen is that they 
provide a clue to the historical beginnings of the movement if 
we cannot accept the traditional story that it arrived in China in 
520, with the Indian monk Bodhidharma. Modern scholars such 
7 Liebenthal (1), pp. 71-72. 

8.385433. His Discussion of Essentials (Pien Tsung Lun) is our principal 


source of information about Tao-sheng’s ideas. See Fung Yu-lan (1), vol. 2, 
pp. 274-84. 


84 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


as Fung Yu-lan and Pelliot have cast serious doubts upon the 
truth of this tradition. They suggest that the Bodhidharma story 
was a pious invention of later times, when the Zen School needed 
historical authority for its claim to be a direct transmission of 
experience from the Buddha himself, outside the sutras. For 
Bodhidharma is represented as the twenty-eighth of a some- 
what fanciful list of Indian Patriarchs, standing in a direct line 
of “apostolic succession” from Gautama.° 

At this stage of the inquiry it is hard to say whether the views 
of these scholars are to be taken seriously, or whether they are 
but another instance of an academic fashion for casting doubt 
upon the historicity of religious founders. The traditional story 
which the Zen School gives of its own origin is that Bodhidharma 
arrived in Canton from India around the year 520, and proceeded 
to the court of the Emperor Wu of Liang, an enthusiastic patron 
of Buddhism. However, Bodhidharma’s doctrine and his abrupt 
attitude did not appeal to the Emperor, so that he withdrew for 
some years to a monastery in the state of Wei, and spent his 
time “gazing at the wall” until at last he found a suitable dis- 
ciple in Hui-k’o, who subsequently became the Second Patriarch 
of Zen in China.’ 

There is, of course, nothing improbable in the arrival of a great 
Buddhist master from India at this period. Kumarajiva had ar- 
rived shortly before 400, Bodhiruci just after 500, and Para- 
martha was at the court of Liang about the same time as Bo- 
dhidharma. Is it really surprising that there should be no surviving 
record of his existence until little more than a hundred years 
after his time? These were not the days of newspapers and “Who's 
Whos,” and even in our own excessively documented times peo- 
ple with important contributions to our knowledge and culture 
® Hu Shih (1) and T’ang Yung-t’ing have suggested that Bodhidharma was 
in China at the earlier ‘ite oF 420 to 479. See also Fung Yu-lan (1), vol. 
2, pp. 386-90, Pelliot (1), and Dumoulin (2). 
1°The traditional sources are Tao-hsiian’s Sung-kao Seng-chuan (Taisho 


2061), composed between 645 and 667, and Tao-yiian’s Ching Te Ch'uan 
Teng Lu (Taisho 2076), written about 1004. 


The Rise and Development of Zen 85 


can remain unrecognized and unrecorded until years after their 
death. Here again, it seems that we may as well accept the story 
of Bodhidharma until there is some really overwhelming evi- 
dence against it, recognizing that the ideas of Seng-chao, Tao- 
sheng, and others could also have been tributaries to the stream 
of Zen. 

One of the reasons for suspecting the Bodhidharma story is 
that Zen is so Chinese in style that an Indian origin seems im- 
probable. Yet the very Taoistic Seng-chao was a pupil of Ku- 
marajiva, as was Tao-sheng, and the writings attributed to 
Bodhidharma and his successors until Hui-neng (638-713) show 
the clear transition from an Indian to a Chinese view of dhyana.» 

The absence of any record of a Dhyana School in Indian Bud- 
dhist literature, or of Bodhidharma in connection with it, is per- 
haps due to the fact that there was never any Dhyana or Zen 
School even in China until some two hundred years after 
Bodhidharma’s time. On the other hand, there would have been 
an almost universal practice of dhyana-that is, or ts’o-ch’an4 
(Japanese, za-zen) or sitting meditation-among Buddhist monks, 
and the special instructors who supervised this practice were 
called dhyana masters, no matter what their school or sect. There 
were likewise vinaya masters, or instructors in monastic dis- 
cipline, and dharma masters, or instructors in doctrine. Zen be- 
came a distinct school only as it promulgated a view of dhyana 
which differed sharply from the generally accepted practice.}? 

Zen tradition represents Bodhidharma as a fierce-looking fellow 
with a bushy beard and wide-open, penetrating eyes-in which, 
however, there is just the hint of a twinkle. A legend says that 
he once fell asleep in meditation and was so furious that he cut 


11 Works attributed to Bedhidharma will be found in Suzuki (1), vol. 1, 
pp. 165-70, and Senzaki and McCandless (1),-pp. 738-84. The style is al- 
ways Indian and lacks Taoist “flavor.” 

12 Hui-neng’s Tan Ching, for example, records several instances of the Sixth 
Patriarch’s interviews with dhyana masters who obviously did not belong 
to his own “sudden school” of dhyana. Furthermore, it was not until the 
time of Po-chang (720-814), or even later, that the Zen School had monas- 
teries of its own. See Dumoulin and Sasaki (1), p. 13. 


86 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


off his eyelids, and falling to the ground they arose as the first 
tea plant. Tea has thereafter supplied Zen monks with a protec- 
tion against sleep, and so clarifies and invigorates the mind that 
it has been said, “The taste of Zen [ch’an] and the taste of tea 
[ch’a] are the same.” Another legend holds that Bodhidharma 
sat so long in meditation that his legs fell off. Hence the delightful 
symbolism of those Japanese Daruma dolls which represent 
Bodhidharma as a legless roly-poly so weighted inside that he 
always stands up again when pushed over. A popular Japanese 
poem says of the Daruma doll: 


Jinsei nana korobi 
Ya oki. 

Such is life- 
Seven times down, 
Eight times up! 


Bodhidharma’s alleged interview with the Emperor Wu of 
Liang is typical of his abrupt and direct manner. For the Em- 
peror described all that he had done to promote the practice of 
Buddhism, and asked what merit he had gained thereby-taking 
the popular view that Buddhism is a gradual accumulation of 
merit through good deeds, leading to better and better circum- 
stances in future lives, and finally to nirvana. But Bodhidharma 
replied, “No merit whatever!” This so undermined the Emperor’s 
idea of Buddhism that he asked, “What, then, is the sacred doc- 
trine’s first principle?” Bodhidharma replied, “It’s just empty; 
there’s nothing sacred.” “Who, then, are you,” said the Emperor, 
“to stand before us?” “I don’t know.” +9 ¢ 

After this interview, so unsatisfactory from the Emperor's 
point of view, Bodhidharma retired to a monastery in Wei, where 
he is said to have spent nine years in a cave, “gazing at the wall” 
(pi-kuan!). Suzuki holds that this is not to be taken literally, and 
that the expression refers to Bodhidharma’s inner state, his 


13 Ch’uan Teng Lu, 3. 


The Rise and Development of Zen 87 


exclusion of all grasping thoughts from his mind.'* Thus Bodhi- 
dharma remained, until he was approached by the monk Shen- 
kuang, afterwards Hui-k’o (486-593, maybe! ), who was to be- 
come Bodhidharma’s successor as the Second Patriarch. 

Hui-k’o again and again asked Bodhidharma for instruction, 
but was always refused. Yet he continued to sit in meditation 
outside the cave, waiting patiently in the snow in the hope 
that Bodhidharma would at last relent. In desperation he finally 
cut off his left arm and presented it to Bodhidharma as a token 
of his agonized sincerity. At this Bodhidharma at last asked 
Hui-k’o what he wanted. 

“I have no peace of mind [hsin],” said Hui-k’o. “Please pacify 
my mind.” 

“Bring out your mind here before me,” replied Bodhidharma, 
“and I will pacify it!” 

“But when I seek my own mind,” said Hui-k’o, “I cannot find 
it.” 
“There!” snapped Bodhidharma, “I have pacified your 
mind!” 35 ¢ 

At this moment Hui-k’o had his awakening, his tun-wu or 
satori, so that this interchange purports to be the first instance 
of what became the characteristic Zen method of instruction— 
the wen-ta” (Japanese, mondo) or “question-and-answer,” some- 
times loosely called the “Zen story.” The greater part of Zen litera- 
ture consists of these anecdotes, many of them much more 
puzzling than this, and their aim is always to precipitate some 
type of sudden realization in the questioner’s mind, or to test the 
depth of his insight. For this reason, such anecdotes cannot be 
“expiained” without spoiling their effect. In some respects they 
are like jokes which do not produce their intended effect of 
laughter when the “punch line” requires further explanation. 
One must see the point immediately, or not at all. 


14 Suzuki (1), vol. 1, pp. 170-71. 
88 Wu-men kuan, 41. 


88 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


It should, furthermore, be understood that the main character 
of these anecdotes is only rarely symbolic, and then, usually, in 
a rather secondary way, as when the dialogue contains allusions 
which are obvious to both parties. But such commentators as 
Gernet (3) are, I feel, mistaken in supposing that the main point 
is the communication of some Buddhist principle by means of a 
symbol. The satori which so frequently follows these interchanges 
is by no means a mere comprehension of the answer to a riddle. 
For whatever the Zen master says or does is a direct and spon- 
taneous utterance of “suchness,” of his Buddha nature, and what 
he gives is no symbol but the very thing. Zen communication 
is always “direct pointing,” in line with the traditional four-phrase 
summary of Zen: 

Outside teaching; apart from tradition. 

Not founded on words and letters. 

Pointing directly to the human mind. 

Seeing into one’s nature and attaining Buddhahood.'*’ 

The successor to Hui-k’o is said to have been Seng-ts’an 
(d. 606), and the story of their initial interview is of the same 
form as between Hui-k’o and Bodhidharma, except that where 
Hui-k’o asked for “peace of mind,” Seng-ts'an asked to be 
“cleansed of faults.” To him there is attributed a celebrated poem 
called the Hsin-hsin Ming, the “Treatise on Faith in the Mind.” ?” 
If Seng-ts'an was indeed its author, this poem is the first clear 
and comprehensive statement of Zen. Its Taoist flavor is apparent 
in the opening lines, 

The perfect Tao is without difficulty, 
Save that it avoids picking and choosing. 


16 In modern Chinese the first two characters mean something like “worldly” 
or “outside the fold.” In the present context they are usually taken to mean 
that the truth of Zen cannot be expressed in any form of doctrine, or that 
a teacher can do no more than show how to get it for oneself. However, the 
marvelous ambiguity of Chinese might intentionally allow both meanings. 
Consider the predominantly “secular” form of Zen expression, and such say- 
ings as “Wash out your mouth every time you say, ‘Buddhal’” 

17 Translaticns will be found in Suzuki (1), vol. 1, p. 182, and a revision 
in Suzuki (6), p. 91. Another by Arthur Waley is in Conze (2) p. 295. 


The Rise and Development of Zen 89 
And again, 


Follow your nature and accord with the Tao; 

Saunter along and stop worrying. 

If your thoughts are tied you spoil what is genuine. ... 
Don’t be antagonistic to the world of the senses, 

For when you are not antagonistic to it, 

It turns out to be the same as complete Awakening. 

The wise person does not strive (wu-wei); 

The ignorant man ties himself up. . . . 

If you work on your mind with your mind, 

How can you avoid an immense confusion? 18 5 


Not only is the poem full of such Taoist terms as wu-wei and 
tzu-jan (spontaneity), but its whole attitude is that of letting 
one’s mind alone and trusting it to follow its own nature-in 
contrast to the more typically Indian attitude of bringing it under 
rigid control and shutting out the experience of the senses. 

The Fourth Patriarch, following Seng-ts’an, is believed to have 
been Tao-hsin (579-651). When he came to Seng-ts’an he asked, 
“What is the method of liberation?” 

“Who binds you?” replied Seng-ts’an. 

“No one binds me.” 

“Why then,” asked Seng-ts’an, “should you seek liberation?” *° * 
And this was Tao-hsin’s satori. The Ch’uan Teng Lu records a 
fascinating encounter between Tao-hsin and the sage Fa-yung, 
who lived in a lonely temple on Mount Niu-t’ou, and was so 
holy that the birds used to bring him offerings of flowers. As the 
two men were talking, a wild animal roared close by, and 
Tao-hsin jumped. Fa-yung commented, “I see it is still with you!” 
-referring, of course, to the instinctive “passion” (klesa) of 
fright. Shortly afterwards, while he was for a moment unob- 
served, Tao-hsin wrote the Chinese character for “Buddha” on 
the rock where Fa-yung was accustomed to sit. When Fa-yung 
18 The last two lines carry the same point as Hui-k’o’s interview with 


Bodhidharma. 
19 Ch’uan Teng Lu, 3. 


90 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


returned to sit down again, he saw the sacred Name and hesi- 
tated to sit. “I see,” said Tao-hsin, “it is still with you!” At this 
remark Fa-yung was fully awakened . . . and the birds never 
brought any more flowers. 

The Fifth Patriarch-and here we begin to enter a more reliable 
chapter of history-was Hung-jan (601-675). At his first meeting 
with Hung-jan the Patriarch asked: 

“What is your name [hsing]?” 

“I have a nature [hsing],” replied Hung-jan punning, “but it’s 
no usual nature.” 

“What is this name?” inquired the Patriarch, missing the pun. 

“It’s Buddha nature.” 

“You have no name, then?” 

“That’s because it’s an empty nature.” ° 

Hung-jan was apparently the first of the Patriarchs to have any 
large following, for it is said that he presided over a group of 
some five hundred monks in a monastery on the Yellow Plum 
Mountain (Wang-mei Shan) at the eastern end of modern 
Hupeh. He is, however, much overshadowed by his immediate 
successor, Hui-neng (637-713), whose life and teaching mark 
the definitive beginning of a truly Chinese Zen-of Zen as it 
flourished during what was later called “the epoch of Zen 
activity,” the latter two hundred years of the Tang dynasty, 
from about 700 to 906. 

One must not overlook Hui-neng’s contemporaries, for he 
lived at a time which was most creative for Chinese Buddhism 
as a whole. The great translator and traveler Hsiian-tsang had 
returned from India in 645, and was expounding the vijnapti- 
matra (“representation-only”) doctrines of the Yogacara in 
Ch’ang-an. His former student Fa-tsang (643-712) was develop- 
ing the important school of the Hua-yen (Japanese, Kegon) 
based on the Avatamsaka Sutra, and which later provided Zen 
with a formal philosophy. Nor must we forget that not so long 
before these two men, Chih-k’ai (538-597) had written his re- 


20 Ch’uan Teng Lu, 8. 


The Rise and Development of Zen 91 


markable treatise on the Mahayana Method of Cessation and 
Contemplation," containing the fundamental teaching of the 
Tien-t’ai School, which is in many ways close to Zen. Much of 
Chih-k’ai’s treatise foreshadows in both content and terminology 
the doctrines of Hui-neng and some of his immediate successors. 

Hui-neng is said to have had his first awakening when, almost 
as a boy, he happened to overhear someone reading the Vajrac- 
chedika. He set out almost at once for Hung-jan’s monastery at 
Wang-mei to have his understanding confirmed and to receive 
further instruction. We should note (for future reference) that 
his original satori occurred spontaneously, without the benefit of 
a master, and that his biography represents him as an illiterate 
peasant from the neighborhood of Canton. Apparently Hung-jan 
immediately recognized the depth of his insight, but fearing 
that his humble origins might make him unacceptable in a com- 
munity of scholarly monks, the Patriarch put him to work in the 
kitchen compound. 

Some time later, the Patriarch announced that he was looking 
for a successor to whom he might transmit his office, together 
with the robe and begging bow] (said to have been handed down 
from the Buddha) which were its insignia. This honor was to 
be conferred upon the person who submitted the best poem, 
expressing his understanding of Buddhism. The chief monk of 
the community was then a certain Shen-hsiu, and all the others 
naturally assumed that the office would go to him and so made 
no attempt to compete. 

Shen-hsiu, however, was in doubt as to his own understanding, 
and decided to submit his poem anonymously, claiming author- 
ship only if the Patriarch approved of it. During the night, then, 
he posted the following lines in the corridor near the Patriarch’s 
quarters: 


The body is the Bodhi Tree; 
The mind like a bright mirror standing. 


21 Ta-ch’eng Chih-kuan Fa-men, Taisho 1924. 


92 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


Take care to wipe it all the time, 
And allow no dust to cling. 


The following morning, the Patriarch read the poem and ordered 
incense to be burned before it, saying that all who put it into 
practice would be enabled to realize their true nature. But when 
Shen-hsiu came to him in private and claimed authorship, the 
Patriarch declared that his understanding was still far from 
perfect. 

On the following day, another poem appeared beside the 
first: 


There never was a Bodhi Tree, 

Nor bright mirror standing. 
Fundamentally, not one thing exists, 
So where is the dust to cling? ™ 


The Patriarch knew that only Hui-neng could have written this, 
but to avoid jealousy he rubbed out the poem with his shoe, and 
summoned Hui-neng to his room secretly, by night. Here he 
conferred the Patriarchate, the robe, and the bow] upon him, 
and told him to flee into the mountains until the hurt feelings 
of the other monks had subsided and the time was ripe for him 
to begin his public teaching.” 

A comparison of the two poems shows at once the distinctive 
flavor of Hui-neng’s Zen. Shen-hsiu’s poem reflects what was 
apparently the general and popular view of dhyana practice in 
Chinese Buddhism. It was obviously understood as the discipline 
of sitting meditation (ts’o-ch’an), in which the mind was “puri- 
fied” by an intense concentration which would cause all thoughts 
and attachments to cease. Taken rather literally, many Buddhist 
and Taoist texts would substantiate this view-that the highest 


22 T’an-ching, 1. The full title of the work which records the life and teach- 
ing of Hui-neng is the Platform-Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, or Liu-tsu 
T’an-ching, Taisho 2008. For translations, see Bibliography under Wong 
Mou-lam and Rousselle. 


The Rise and Development of Zen 93 


state of consciousness is a consciousness empty of all contents, 
all ideas, feelings, and even sensations. Today in India this is a 
very prevalent notion of samadhi. But our own experience with 
Christianity should make this type of literalism, even in high 
circles, rather familiar. 

Hui-neng’s position was that a man with an empty conscious- 
ness was no better than “a block of wood or a lump of stone.” 
He insisted that the whole idea of purifying the mind was ir- 
relevant and confusing, because “our own nature is funda- 
mentally clear and pure.” In other words, there is no analogy 
between consciousness or mind and a mirror that can be wiped. 
The true mind is “no-mind” (wu-hsin), which is to say that it is 
not to be regarded as an object of thought or action, as if it were 
a thing to be grasped and controlled. The attempt to work on 
one’s own mind is a vicious circle. To try to purify it is to be 
contaminated with purity. Obviously this is the Taoist philosophy 
of naturalness, according to which a person is not genuinely 
free, detached, or pure when his state is the result of an artificial 
discipline. He is just imitating purity, just “faking” clear aware- 
ness. Hence the unpleasant self-righteousness of those who are 
deliberately and methodically religious. 

Hui-neng’s teaching is that instead of trying to purify or 
empty the mind, one must simply let go of the mind-because 
the mind is nothing to be grasped. Letting go of the mind is also 
equivalent to letting go of the series of thoughts and impressions 
(nien) which come and go “in” the mind, neither repressing 
them, holding them, nor interfering with them. 


Thoughts come and go of themselves, for through the use of wisdom 
there is no blockage. This is the samadhi of prajna, and natural 
liberation. Such is the practice of “no-thought” [wu-nien]. But if 
you do not think of anything at all, and immediately command 
thoughts to cease, this is to be tied in a knot by a method, and is 
called an obtuse view. (2) * 


Of the usual view of meditation practice he said: 


94 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


To concentrate on the mind and to contemplate it until it is still 
is a disease and not dhyana. To restrain the body by sitting up for 
a long time-of what benefit is this towards the Dharma? (8) ° 


And again: 


If you start concentrating the mind on stillness, you will merely 
produce an unreal stillness. . . . What does the word “meditation” 
[ts’o-ch’an] mean? In this school it means no barriers, no obstacles; 
it is beyond all objective situations whether good or bad. The word 
“sitting” [ts’0] means not to stir up thoughts in the mind. (5) » 


In counteracting the false dhyana of mere empty-mindedness, 
Hui-neng compares the Great Void to space, and calls it great, 
not just because it is empty, but because it contains the sun, 
moon, and stars. True dhyana is to realize that one’s own nature 
is like space, and that thoughts and sensations come and go in 
this “original mind” like birds through the sky, leaving no trace. 
Awakening, in his school, is “sudden” because it is for quick- 
witted rather than slow-witted people. The latter must of neces- 
sity understand gradually, or more exactly, after a long time, 
since the Sixth Patriarch’s doctrine does not admit of stages or 
growth. To be awakened at all is to be awakened completely, 
for, having no parts or divisions, the Buddha nature is not realized 
bit by bit. 

His final instructions to his disciples contain an interesting 
clue to the later development of the mondo or “question-answer” 
method of teaching: 


If, in questioning you, someone asks about being, answer with non- 
being. If he asks about non-being, answer with being. If he asks 
about the ordinary man, answer in terms of the sage. If he asks 
about the sage, answer in terms of the ordinary man. By this method 
of opposites mutually related there arises an understanding of the 
Middle Way. For every question that you are asked, respond in 
terms of its opposite. (10) ? 


Hui-neng died in 718, and with his death the institution of 
the Patriarchate ceased, for the genealogical tree of Zen put forth 
branches. Hui-neng’s tradition passed to five disciples: Huai-jang 


The Rise and Development of Zen 95 


(d. 775), Chiing-yiian (d. 740), Shen-hui (668--770), Hsiian-chiieh 
(665-713), and Hui-chung (677-744).?* The spiritual descend- 
ants of Huai-jang and Hsing-ssu live on today as the two prin- 
cipal schools of Zen in Japan, the Rinzai and the Soto. In the 
two centuries following the death of Hui-neng the proliferation 
of lines of descent and schools of Zen is quite complex, and we 
need do no more than consider some of the more influential in- 
dividuals. 

The writings and records of Hui-neng’s successors continue to 
be concerned with naturalness. On the principle that “the true 
mind is no-mind,” and that “our true nature is no (special) 
nature,” it is likewise stressed that the true practice of Zen is no 


23 A state of total confusion prevails among writers on Zen as to the naming 
of the great T’ang masters. For example, Shen-hui’s full name is Ho-tse 
Shen-hui, of which the Japanese pronunciation is Kataku Jinne. Shen-hui 
is his monastic name, and Ho-tse designates his locality. Japanese writers 
usually refer to him as Jinne, using the personal monastic name. On the 
other hand, Hsiian-chiieh is Yung-chia Hsiian-chiieh, in Japanese Yoka 
Genkaku. But the Japanese writers usually employ his locality name, Yokal 
On the whole, Suzuki uses locality names and Fung Yu-lan monastic names. 
Suzuki sometimes gives the Japanese form, and sometimes the Chinese, but 
uses a somewhat different way of romanizing the Chinese than Fung (or 
rather Bodde, the translator). Lin-chi I-hsiian (Rinzai Gigen) appears in 
Suzuki mostly as Rinzai and sometimes as Lin-chi, but in Fung he is Yi- 
hsiian! Dumoulin and Sasaki make some attempt at consistency by gine 
only the Japanese forms, but then it is impossible at first sight to distinguis 
Chinese from Japanese individuals. Thus anyone who studies Zen from 
other than the original sources is confronted with a situation which makes 
historical clarity extremely difficult. Suzuki has been so widely read that 
most Western students of Zen are familiar with his usage, however in- 
consistent, and I do not want to confuse them further by such an attempt at 
consistency as calling Hui-neng by his locality name, Ta-chien. All I can 
offer is an index giving all the names. To make matters worse, there is 
also much confusion with respect to dates. For Shen-hui, Fung gives 686— 
760, Gernet 668-760, and Dumoulin and Sasaki 668-770. 

24 This period is treated in detail in Dumoulin and Sasaki (1). Demiéville 
(2) has translated a Tun-huang ms. (Pelliot 4646) concerning a debate 
held at Lhasa c. 792-794 between a master of the Sudden Ch’an School 
and a group of Indian Buddhist scholars. The Ch’an master is identified 
only by the name “Mahayana” and there is apparently nothing to link him 
with the tradition descending from Hui-neng. His doctrine seems to be 
somewhat more quietistic than that of the Sixth Patriarch. The fact that the 
Indian scholars were astonished and repelled by his teaching suggests its 
purely Chinese origin. 


96 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


practice, that is, the seeming paradox of being a Buddha without 
intending to be a Buddha. According to Shen-hui: 


If one has this knowledge, it is contemplation [samadhi] without 
contemplating, wisdom [prajna]) without wisdom, practice without 
practicing. (4. 193) 

All cultivation of concentration is wrong-minded from the start. 
For how, by cultivating concentration, could one obtain concentra- 
tion? (1. 117) 

If we speak of working with the mind, does this working consist 
in activity or inactivity of the mind? If it is inactivity, we should 
be no different from vulgar fools. But if you say that it is activity, 
it is then in the realm of grasping, and we are bound up by the 
passions [klesa]. What way, then, should we have of gaining deliver- 
ance? The sravakas cultivate emptiness, dwell in emptiness, and 
are bound by it. They cultivate concentration, dwell in concentra- 
tion, and are bound by it. They cultivate tranquillity, dwell in 
tranquillity, and are bound by it. . . . If working with the mind 
is to discipline one’s mind, how could this be called deliverance? 


(1. 118) 75 


In the same vein Hsiian-chiieh begins his celebrated poem, the 
Song of Realizing the Tao (Cheng-tao Ke): 


See you not that easygoing Man of Tao, who has abandoned 
learning and does not strive [wu-wei]? 

He neither avoids false thoughts nor seeks the true, 

For ignorance is in reality the Buddha nature, 

And this illusory, changeful, empty body is the Dharma body.?°* 


The following story is told of Huai-jang, initiating into Zen his 
great successor Ma-tsu (d. 788), who was at the time practicing 
sitting meditation at the monastery of Ch’uan-fa. 

“Your reverence,” asked Huai-jang, “what is the objective of 
sitting in meditation?” 

“The objective,” answered Ma-tsu, “is to become a Buddha.” 
28 Shen-hui Ho-chang I-chi. The Chinese text has been edited by Hu Shih, 
Shanghai, 1930. 

28 Le., the Dharmakaya, for which see above, p. 71. Full translations of the 


Cheng-tao Ke (Japanese, Shodoka) will be found in Suzuki (6) and Senzaki 
and McCandless (1). 


The Rise and Development of Zen 97 


Thereupon Huai-jang picked up a floor-tile and began to pol- 
ish it on a rock. 

“What are you doing, master?” asked Ma-tsu. 

“I am polishing it for a mirror,” said Huai-jang. 

“How could polishing a tile make a mirror?” 

“How could sitting in meditation make a Buddha?” 7" * 

Ma-tsu was the first Zen master celebrated for “strange words 
and extraordinary behavior,” and is described as one who walked 
like a bull and glared like a tiger. When a monk asked him, 
“How do you get into harmony with the Tao?” Ma-tsu replied, 
“I am already out of harmony with the Tao!” He was the first 
to answer questions about Buddhism by hitting the questioner, 
or by giving a loud shout-“Ho!” ** Sometimes, however, he was 
more discursive, and one of his lectures takes up the problem of 
discipline thus: 


The Tao has nothing to do with discipline. If you say that it is at- 
tained by discipline, when the discipline is perfected it can again 
be lost (or, finishing the discipline turns out to be losing the Tao). 
. . . If you say that there is no discipline, this is to be the same 
as ordinary people.?® ¥ 


Hsing-ssu’s disciple Shih-t’ou (700-790), in the line of Soto 
Zen, was even more forthright: 


My teaching which has come down from the ancient Buddhas is 
not dependent on meditation (dhyana) or on diligent application 
of any kind. When you attain the insight as attained by the Buddha, 
you realize that mind is Buddha and Buddha is mind, that mind, 
Buddha, sentient beings, bodhi and klesa are of one and the same 
substance while they vary in names.*° 


His interesting name “Stone-head” is attributed to the fact that 
he lived on top of a large rock near the monastery of Heng- 
chou. 


27 Ch’uan Teng Lu, 5. 

28 Ku-tsun-hsii Yii-lu, 1. 6. 
29 Ibid., 1. 4. 

30 In Suzuki (6), p. 123. 


98 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


With Ma-tsu’s disciple Nan-ch’iian (748-834) and his successor 
Chao-chou (778-897), the teaching of Zen became peculiarly 
lively and disturbing. The Wu-men kuan (14) tells how 
Nan-chiiian interrupted a dispute among his monks as to the 
ownership of a cat by threatening to cleave the animal with 
his spade if none of the monks could say a “good word”-that is, 
give an immediate expression of his Zen. There was dead silence, 
so the master cut the cat in two. Later in the day Nan-ch’iian 
recounted the incident to Chao-chou, who at once put his shoes 
on his head and left the room. “If you had been here,” said 
Nan-ch’iian, “the cat would have been saved!” 

Chao-chou is said to have had his awakening after the fol- 
lowing incident with Nan-ch’iian: 

Chao-chou asked, “What is the Tao?” 

The master replied, “Your ordinary [i.e., natural] mind is the 
Tao.” 

“How can one return into accord with it?” 

“By intending to accord you immediately deviate.” ° 

“But without intention, how can one know the Tao?” 

“The Tao,” said the master, “belongs neither to knowing nor 
not knowing. Knowing is false understanding; not knowing is 
blind ignorance. If you really understand the Tao beyond doubt, 
it’s like the empty sky. Why drag in right and wrong?” * 

When Chao-chou was asked whether a dog has Buddha nature 
-which is certainly the usual Mahayana doctrine-he gave the 
one word “No!” (Wu,” Japanese, Mu).3? When a monk asked 
him for instruction he merely inquired whether he had eaten 
his gruel, and then added, “Go wash your bowl!” ** When asked 
about the spirit which remains-when the body has decomposed, 
he remarked, “This morning it’s windy again.” °* 

Ma-tsu had another notable disciple in Po-chang (720-814), 


81 Wu-men kuan, 19. 

32 Ibid., 1. 

33 Ibid., 7. 

34Chao-chou Yii-lu, in Ku-tsun-hsii Yii-lu, 3. 13. 


The Rise and Development of Zen 99 


who is said to have organized the first purely Zen community 
of monks and to have laid down its regulations on the principle 
that “a day of no working is a day of no eating.” Since his time 
a strong emphasis on manual work and some degree of self- 
support has been characteristic of Zen communities. It might 
be remarked here that these are not exactly monasteries in the 
Western sense. They are rather training schools, from which one 
is free to depart at any time without censure. Some members 
remain monks for their whole lives; others become secular priests 
in charge of small temples; still others may return into lay life.** 
To Po-chang is attributed the famous definition of Zen, “When 
hungry, eat; when tired, sleep.” He is said to have had his satori 
when Ma-tsu shouted at him and left him deaf for three days, 
and to have been in the habit of pointing out the Zen life to his 
disciples with the saying, “Don’t cling; don’t seek.” For when 
asked about seeking for the Buddha nature he answered, “It’s 
much like riding an ox in search of the ox.” 

Po-chang’s student Huang-po (d. 850) is also of considerable 
importance in this period. Not only was he the teacher of the 
great Lin-chi, but he was also the author of the Ch’uan Hsin Fa 
Yao, or “Treatise on the Essentials of the Doctrine of Mind.” 
The content of this work is essentially the same body of doctrine 
as is found in Hui-neng, Shen-hui, and Ma-tsu, but it contains 
some passages of remarkable clarity as well as some frank and 
careful answers to questions at the end. 


By their very seeking for it [the Buddha nature] they produce the 
contrary effect of losing it, for that is using the Buddha to seek for 
the Buddha, and using mind to grasp mind. Even though they do 
their utmost for a full kalpa, they will not be able to attain to 
it. (1) 

If those who study the Tao do not awake to this mind substance, 


35 The somewhat misleading word “monk” seems to be the inevitable trans- 
lation of seng,* though yun shui,y “cloud and water,” is a common and re- 
vealingly picturesque term for the Zen student, who “drifts like a cloud and 
flows like water.” But I am at a loss to find a concise English expression for 
this term. 


100 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


they will create a mind over and above mind, seek the Buddha 
outside themselves and remain attached to forms, practices and 
performances-—all of which is harmful and not the way to supreme 


knowledge. (3) *¢ 


Much of it is devoted to a clarification of what is meant by the 
Void, and by the terms “no-mind” (wu-hsin) and “no-thought” 
(wu-nien ), all of which are carefully distinguished from literal 
blankness or nothingness. The use of Taoist language and ideas 
is found throughout the text: 


Fearing that none of you would understand, they [the Buddhas] 
gave it the name Tao, but you must not base any concept upon 
that name. So it is said that “when the fish is caught the trap is 
forgotten.” (From Chuang-tzu.) When body and mind achieve 
spontaneity, the Tao is reached and universal mind can be under- 
stood. (29) . . . In former times, men’s minds were sharp. Upon 
hearing a single sentence, they abandoned study and so came to 
be called “the sages who, abandoning learning, rest in spontaneity.” 
In these days, people only seek to stuff themselves with knowledge 
and deductions, placing great reliance on written explanations and 
calling all this the practice. (30) % 


It appears, however, that Huang-po’s personal instruction of 
his disciples was not always so explanatory. Lin-chi (Japanese, 
Rinzai, d. 867) could never get a word out of him. Every time 
he attempted to ask a question Huang-po struck him, until in 
desperation he left the monastery and sought the advice of an- 
other master, Ta-yii, who scolded him for being so ungrateful 
for Huang-po’s “grandmotherly kindness.” This awakened Lin-chi, 
who again presented himself before Huang-po. This time, how- 
ever, it was Lin-chi who did the striking, saying, “There is not 
much in Huang-po’s Buddhism after alll!” * 

The record of Lin-chi’s teaching, the Lin-chi Lu (Japanese, 
Rinzai Roku), shows a character of immense vitality and original- 
38 In Chu Ch’an (1), pp. 16 and 18. Another partial translation appears in 
Suzuki (6), pp. 182-40. 


87 In Chu Ch’an (1), pp. 42-43. 
38 Ch’uan Teng Lu, 12. 


The Rise and Development of Zen 101 


ity, lecturing his students in informal and often somewhat “racy” 
language. It is as if Lin-chi were using the whole strength of his 
personality to force the student into immediate awakening. Again 
and again he berates them for not having enough faith in them- 
selves, for letting their minds “gallop around” in search of some- 
thing which they have never lost, and which is “right before 
you at this very moment.” Awakening for Lin-chi seems prima- 
rily a matter of “nerve’-the courage to “let go” without further 
delay in the unwavering faith that one’s natural, spontaneous 
functioning is the Buddha mind. His approach to conceptual 
Buddhism, to the students’ obsession with stages to be reached 
and goals to be attained, is ruthlessly iconoclastic. 


Why do I talk here? Only because you followers of the Tao go 
galloping around in search of the mind, and are unable to stop it. 
On the other hand, the ancients acted in a leisurely way, appropriate 
to circumstances (as they arose). O you followers of the Tao- 
when you get my point of view you will sit in judgment on top 
of the . . . Buddhas’ heads. Those who have completed the ten 
stages will seem like underlings, and those who have arrived at 
Supreme Awakening will seem as if they had cangues around their 
necks. The Arhans and Pratyeka-buddhas are like a dirty privy. 
Bodhi and nirvana are like hitching-pcsts for a donkey.®® 


On the importance of the “natural” or “unaffected” (wu-shih *) 
life he is especially emphatic: 


There is no place in Buddhism for using effort. Just be ordinary 
and nothing special. Relieve your bowels, pass water, put on your 
clothes, and eat your food. When you're tired, go and lie down. 
Ignorant people may laugh at me, but the wise will understand. 
. . . As you go from place to place, if you regard each one as 
your own home, they will all be genuine, for when circumstances 
come you must not try to change them. Thus your usual habits of 
feeling, which make karma for the Five Hells, will of themselves 
become the Great Ocean of Liberation.‘ 


And on creating karma through seeking liberation- 


89 Lin-chi Lu in Ku-tsun-hsii Yd-lu, 1. 4, pp. 5-6. 
40 [bid., p. 7. 


102 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


Outside the mind there is no Dharma, and inside also there is 
nothing to be grasped. What is it that you seek? You say on all 
sides that the Tao is to be practiced and put to the proof. Don’t 
be mistaken! If there is anyone who can practice it, this is entirely 
karma making for birth-and-death. You talk about being perfectly 
disciplined in your six senses and in the ten thousand ways of con- 
duct, but as I see it all this is creating karma. To seek the Buddha 
and to seek the Dharma is precisely making karma for the hells.‘ ° 


In Ma-tsu, Nan-ch’iian, Chao-chou, Huang-po, and Lin-chi we 
can see the “flavor” of Zen at its best. Taoist and Buddhist as it is 
in its original inspiration, it is also something more. It is so earthy, 
so matter-of-fact, and so direct. The difficulty of translating the 
records of these masters is that their style of Chinese is neither 
classical nor modern, but rather the colloquial speech of the 
Tang dynasty. Its “naturalness” is less refined, less obviously 
beautiful than that of the Taoist sages and poets; it is almost 
rough and common. I say “almost” because the expression is not 
really correct. We are at a loss for parallels from other cultures 
for comparison, and the Western student can best catch its flavor 
through observing the works of art which it was subsequently to 
inspire. The best image might be a garden consisting of no more 
than an expanse of raked sand, as a ground for several unhewn 
rocks overgrown with lichens and moss, such as one may see 
today in the Zen temples of Kyoto. The media are the simplest 
imaginable; the effect is as if man had hardly touched it, as if it 
had been transported unchanged from the seashore; but in 
practice only the most sensitive and experienced artist can 
achieve it. This sounds, of course, as though “Zen flavor” were a 
studied and affected primitivism. Sometimes it is. But the genuine 
Zen flavor is when a man is almost miraculously natural without 
intending to be so. His Zen life is not to make himself but to 
grow that way. 

Thus it should be obvious that the “naturalness” of these Tang 
masters is not to be taken just literally, as if Zen were merely to 


41 Ibid, p. 1L 


The Rise and Development of Zen 108 


glory in being a completely ordinary, vulgar fellow who scatters 
ideals to the wind and behaves as he pleases-for this would in 
itself be an affectation. The “naturalness” of Zen flourishes only 
when one has lost affectedness and self-consciousness of every 
description. But a spirit of this kind comes and goes like the wind, 
and is the most impossible thing to institutionalize and preserve. 

Yet in the late T’ang dynasty the genius and vitality of Zen 
was such that it was coming to be the dominant form of Bud- 
dhism in China, though its relation to other schools was often very 
close. Tsung-mi (779-841) was simultaneously a Zen master and 
the Fifth Patriarch of the Hua-yen School, representing the 
philosophy of the Avatamsaka Sutra. This extremely subtle and 
mature form of Mahayana philosophy was employed by T’ung- 
shan (807-869) in developing the doctrine of the Five Ranks 
(wu-wei>?), concerning the fivefold relationship of the absolute 
(cheng“) and the relative (p’ien®), and was related by his 
student Ts’ao-shan (840-901) to the philosophy of the I Ching, 
the Book of Changes. Fa-yen (885-958) and Fen-yang (947- 
1024) were also influential masters who made a deep study of the 
Hua-yen, and to this day it constitutes as it were the intellectual 
aspect of Zen. On the other hand, such masters as Te-chao 
(891-972) and Yen-shou (904-975) maintained close relations 
with the Tien-t’ai and Pure Land Schools. 

In 845 there was a brief but vigorous persecution of Buddhism 
by the Taoist Emperor Wu-tsung. Temples and monasteries were 
destroyed, their lands confiscated, and the monks compelled to 
return to lay life. Fortunately, his enthusiasm for Taoist alchemy 
soon involved him in experiments with the “Elixir of Immortality,” 
and from partaking of this concoction he shortly died. Zen had 
survived the persecution better than any other school, and now 
entered into a long era of imperial and popular favor. Hundreds 
of monks thronged its wealthy monastic institutions, and the 
fortunes of the school so prospered and its numbers so increased 
that the preservation of its spirit became a very serious problem. 

Popularity almost invariably leads to a deterioration of quality, 


104 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


and as Zen became less of an informal spiritual movement and 
more of a settled institution, it underwent a curious change of 
character. It became necessary to “standardize” its methods and 
to find means for the masters to handle students in large numbers. 
There were also the special problems which arise for monastic 
communities when their membership increases, their traditions 
harden, and their novices tend more and more to be mere boys 
without natural vocation, sent for training by their pious families. 
The effect of this last factor upon the development of institu- 
tional Zen can hardly be underestimated. For the Zen com- 
munity became less an association of mature men with spiritual 
interests, and more of an ecclesiastical boarding school for ado- 
lescent boys. 

Under such circumstances the problem of discipline became 
paramount. The Zen masters were forced to concern themselves 
not only with the way of liberation from convention, but also 
with the instilling of convention, of ordinary manners and morals, 
in raw youths. The mature Western student who discovers an 
interest in Zen as a philosophy or as a way of liberation must be 
careful to keep this in mind, for otherwise he may be unpleasantly 
startled by monastic Zen as it exists today in Japan. He will find 
that Zen is a discipline enforced with the big stick. He will find 
that, although it is still an effective way of liberation at its 
“upper end,” its main preoccupation is with a disciplinary reg- 
imen which “trains character” in the same way as the old- 
fashioned British public school or the Jesuit novitiate. But it does 
the job remarkably well. The “Zen type” is an extremely fine 
type-as types go-self-reliant, humorous, clean and orderly to a 
fault, energetic though unhurried, and “hard as nails” without 
lack of keen aesthetic sensibility. The general impression of these 
men is that they have the same sort of balance as the Daruma 
doll: they are not rigid, but no one can knock them down. 

Still another crucial problem arises when a spiritual institution 
comes into prosperity and power-the very human problem of 
competition for office and of who has the right to be a master. 


The Rise and Development of Zen 105 


Concern for this problem is reflected in the writing of the Ch’uan 
Teng Lu, or “Record of the Transmission of the Lamp,” by Tao- 
yiian in about 1004. For one of the main objects of this work was 
to establish a proper “apostolic succession” for the Zen tradition, 
so that no one could claim authority unless his satori had been 
approved by someone who had been approved . . . right back 
to the time of the Buddha himself. 

Nothing, however, is more difficult than establishing proper 
qualifications in the imponderable realm of spiritual insight. 
Where the candidates are few the problem is not so grave, but 
where one master is responsible for some hundreds of students 
the process of teaching and testing requires standardization. Zen 
solved this problem with remarkable ingenuity, employing a 
means which not only provided a test of competence but-what 
was much more-a means of transmitting the Zen experience 
itself with a minimum of falsification. 

This extraordinary invention was the system of the kung-an 
(Japanese, koan) or “Zen problem.” Literally, this term means a 
“public document” or “case” in the sense of a decision creating 
a legal precedent. Thus the koan system involves “passing” a 
series of tests based on the mondo or anecdotes of the old mas- 
ters. One of the beginning koans is Chao-chou’s answer “Wu” 
or “No” to the question as to whether a dog has Buddha nature. 
The student is expected to show that he has experienced the 
meaning of the koan by a specific and usually nonverbal demon- 
stration which he has to discover intuitively. 

The period of prosperity which came with the tenth and 
eleventh centuries was attended by a sense of “loss of spirit,” 
which in turn gave rise to much study of the great T'ang masters. 
Their anecdotes were subsequently collected in such anthologies 
as the Pi-yen Lu (1125) and the Wu-men kuan (1229). The use 
of these anecdotes for the koan method was originated by 
Yiian-wu (1063-1135) and his disciple Ta-hui (1089-1163), in 


42iFor a fuller description see below, p. 159. In its Japanese form Koan, the 
syllabies are pronounced separately—Ko-an, 


106 BACEGROUND AND HISTORY 


the tenth or eleventh generation of descent from Lin-chi. How- 
ever, something which already began to resemble it was em- 
ployed by Huang-lung (1002-1069) in order to cope with his 
particularly large following. He devised three test-questions 
known as “Huang-lung’s Three Barriers’ 


Question: Everybody has a place of birth. Where is your place 
of birth? 

Answer: Early this moming I ate white rice gruel. Now I’m 
hungry again. 

Question: How is my hand like the Buddha’s hand? 

Answer: Playing the lute under the moon. 


Question: How is my foot like a donkey’s foot? 
Answer: When the white heron stands in the snow it has a differ- 
ent color.*? 


No doubt the answers given were the original replies to the 
questions, but later the problem becomes both the question and 
its answer, for the student is expected to see into the relation- 
ship between the two, which, to say the least, is none too obvious. 
For the moment, it is enough to say that every koan has a “point” 
which is some aspect of Zen experience, that its point is often 
concealed by being made very much more apparent than one 
would expect, and that koans are concerned not only with the 
primary awakening to the Void but also with its subsequent 
expression in life and thought. 

The koan system was developed in the Lin-chi (Rinzai) School 
of Zen, but not without opposition. The Soto School felt that it 
was much too artificial. Whereas the koan advocates used this 
technique as a means for encouraging that overwhelming “feel- 
ing of doubt” (i ching’) which they felt to be essential as a 
prerequisite for satori, the Soto School argued that it lent itself 
too easily to that very seeking for satori which thrusts it away, or 
-what is worse-induces an artificial satori. Adherents of the 
Rinzai School sometimes say that the intensity of the satori is 


43 Jen-t’len Yen-mu, 2. 


The Rise and Development of Zen 107 


proportionate to the intensity of the feeling of doubt, of blind 
seeking, which precedes it, but for Soto this suggests that such a 
satori has a dualistic character, and is thus no more than an 
artificial emotional reaction. Thus the Soto view was that proper 
dhyana lay in motiveless action (wu-wei), in “sitting just to sit,” 
or “walking just to walk.” The two schools therefore came to be 
known respectively as k’an-hua Zen (observing the anecdote Zen) 
and mo-chao Zen (silently illumined Zen). 

The Rinzai School of Zen was introduced into Japan in 1191 by 
the Japanese T’ien-t’ai monk Eisai (1141-1215), who established 
monasteries at Kyoto and Kamakura under imperial patronage. 
The Soto School was introduced in 1227 by the extraordinary 
genius Dogen (1200-1253), who established the great monastery 
of Eiheiji, refusing, however, to accept imperial favors. It should 
be noted that Zen arrived in Japan shortly after the beginning 
of the Kamakura Era, when the military dictator Yoritomo and 
his samurai followers had seized power from the hands of the 
then somewhat decadent nobility. This historical coincidence 
provided the military class, the samurai, with a type of Buddhism 
which appealed to them strongly because of its practical and 
earthy qualities and because of the directness and simplicity of 
its approach, Thus there arose that peculiar way of life called 
bushido, the Tao of the warrior, which is essentially the applica- 
tion of Zen to the arts of war. The association of the peace-loving 
doctrine of the Buddha with the military arts has always been a 
puzzle to Buddhists of other schools. It seems to involve the 
complete divorce of awakening from morality. But one must face 
the fact that, in its essence, the Buddhist experience is a libera- 
tion from conventions of every kind, including the moral conven- 
tions. On the other hand, Buddhism is not a revolt against con- 
vention, and in societies where the military caste is an integral 
part of the conventional structure and the warrior’s role an ac- 
cepted necessity Buddhism will make it possible for him to fulfill 
that role as a Buddhist. The medieval cult of chivalry should be 
no less of a puzzle to the peace-loving Christian. 


108 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


The contribution of Zen to Japanese culture has by no means 
been confined to bushido. It has entered into almust every 
aspect of the people’s life-their architecture, poetry, painting, 
gardening, their athletics, crafts, and trades; it has penetrated 
the everyday language and thought of the most ordinary folk. 
For by the genius of such Zen monks as Dogen, Hakuin, and 
Bankei, by such pocts as Ryokan and Basho, and by such a 
painter as Sesshu, Zen has been made extraordinarily accessible 
to the common mind. 

Dogen, in particular, made an incalculable contribution to his 
native land. His immense work, the Shobogenzo (“Treasury of 
the Eye of the True Doctrine”), was written in the vernacular 
and covered every aspect of Buddhism from its formal discipline 
to its profoundest insights. His doctrine of time, change, and 
relativity is explained with the aid of the most provoking poetic 
images, and it is only regrettable that no one has yet had the time 
and talent to translate this work into English. Hakuin (1685- 
1768) reconstituted the koan system, and is said to have trained 
no less than eighty successors in Zen. Bankei (1622-1693) found 
a way of presenting Zen with such ease and simplicity that it 
seemed almost too good to be true. He spoke to large audiences 
of farmers and country folk, but no one “important” seerns to have 
dared to follow him.** 

Meanwhile, Zen continued to prosper in China until well into 
the Ming dynasty (1368-1643), when the divisions between the 
various schools of Buddhism began to fade, and the popularity 
of the Pure Land School with its “easy way” of invoking the 
Name of Amitabha began to be fused with koan practice and at 
last to absorb it. A few Zen communities seem to have sur- 
vived to the present day, but, so far as I have been able to study 


44 Because my purpose is only to give enough of the history of Zen to serve 
as a background for its doctrine and practice, I am not entering into any 
full discussion of its history in Japan. The work of Dogen, Hakuin, Bankei, 
and others wil} be discussed in another context. 


The Rise and Development of Zen 109 


them, their emphasis inclines either to Soto or to the more 
“occultist” preoccupations of Tibetan Buddhism. In either case, 
their view of Zen seems to be involved with a somewhat complex 
and questionable doctrine of man’s psychic anatomy, which 
would appear to derive from Taoist alchemical ideas.** 

The history of Chinese Zen raises one problem of great fascina- 
tion. Both Rinzai and Soto Zen as we find them in Japanese 
monasteries today put enormous emphasis on za-zen or sitting 
meditation, a practice which they follow for many hours of the 
day-attaching great importance to the correctness of posture and 
the way of breathing which it involves. To practice Zen is, to all 
intents and purposes, to practice za-zen, to which the Rinzai 
School adds sanzen, the periodic visits to the master (roshi) for 
presenting one’s view of the koan. However, the Shen-hui Ho- 
chang I-chi records the following conversation between Shen-hui 
and a certain Ch’eng: 


The Master asked Dhyana Master Ch’eng: “What method must be 
practiced to see into one’s own nature?” 

“It is first of all necessary to apply oneself to the practice of 
sitting cross-legged in samadhi. Once samadhi is obtained, one must, 
by means of samadhi, awaken prajna in oneself. By prajna one is 
able to see into one’s own nature.” 

(Shen-hui: ) “When one practices samadhi, isn’t this a deliberate 
activity of the mind?” 

(Ch’eng:) “Yes.” 

(Shen-hui:) “Then this deliberate activity of the mind is an 
activity of restricted consciousness, and how can it bring seeing 
into one’s own nature?” 

(Ch’eng:) “To see into one’s own nature, it is necessary to prac- 
tice samadhi. How could one sce it otherwise?” 

(Shen-hui:) “All practice of samadhi is fundamentally a wrong 
view. How, by practicing samadhi, could one attain samadhi?” 
(1.111) 


48 An example of this fusion may be seen in the T’ai I Chin Hua Tsung 
Chih, a treatise of the Ming or perhaps Ch’ing dynasty, for which see Wil- 
helm (1). 


110 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


We have already mentioned the incident between Ma-tsu and 
Huai-jang, in which the latter compared sitting in meditation to 
polishing a tile for a mirror. On another occasion Huai-jang said: 


To train yourself in sitting meditation [za-zen] is to train yourself 
to be a sitting Buddha. If you train yourself in za-zen, (you should 
know that) Zen is neither sitting nor lying. If you train yourself 
to be a sitting Buddha, (you should know that) the Buddha is 
not a fixed form. Since the Dharma has no (fixed) abode, it is not 
a matter of making choices. If you (make yourself) a sitting Buddha 
this is precisely killing the Buddha. If you adhere to the sitting 
position, you will] not attain the principle (of Zen) .*¢ 99 


This seems to be the consistent doctrine of all the T'ang masters 
from Hui-neng to Lin-chi. Nowhere in their teachings have I 
been able to find any instruction in or recommendation of the 
type of za-zen which is today the principal occupation of Zen 
monks.*7 On the contrary, the practice is discussed time after 
time in the apparently negative fashion of the two quotations 
just cited. 

It could be assumed that za-zen was so much the normal rule 
of the Zen monk’s life that our sources do not bother to discuss it, 
and that their teachings are designed solely for advanced 
students who have so mastered za-zen that the time has come to 
go beyond it. This, however, does not agree too well with the 
references to the enormous clerical and lay audiences attending 
some of the discourses, since it would be somewhat fantastic to 
suppose that China was swarming with accomplished yogis. The 
discourses frequently begin by saying, in a rather brief and off- 
hand fashion, that these teachings are for those who are well 
46 Ku-tsun-hsii Yii-lu, 1. 1, p. 2. 

47 It is true that a text known as the T’so-chan I, or “Directions for Za-zen,” 
is incorporated in the Po-chang Ching-kuei-the regulations for the Zen 
community attributed to Po-chang (720-814)-and that the regulations 
themselves prescribe times for meditation. However, we can find no edition 
of this work prior to 1265 (Suzuki), and it may even be as late as 1338 


(Dumoulin). The existing version shows the influence of the Shingon sect, 
which is akin to Tibetan Lamaism and came to China during the eighth 


century. 


Bodhidharma. By Hakuin Zenji (1683-1768). 
Yamamoto Collection. Photo courtesy of Oak- 
land Art Museum. 


Bodhidharma and Hur-k’e. By Sesshu (1420-1506). 


- 


Haboku Landscape. By Sesshu (1420-1506). Tokyo Museum. 


The Rise and Development of Zen 111 


trained in the Buddhist virtues. But this could mean no more 
than that they are for mature people who have mastered the 
ordinary social and moral conventions, and are therefore not in 
danger of using Buddhism as a pretext for rebellion against the 
common decencies. 

Alternatively, it could be assumed that the type of za-zen 
under criticism is za-zen practiced for a purpose, to “get” Bud- 
dhahood, instead of “sitting just to sit.” This would concur with 
the Soto objection to the Rinzai School with its method of culti- 
vating the state of “great doubt” by means of the koan. While the 
Soto is not quite fair to the Rinzai in this respect, this would 
certainly be a plausible interpretation of the early masters’ 
doctrine. However, there are several references to the idea that 
prolonged sitting is not much better than being dead. There is, 
of course, a proper place for sitting—along with standing, walking, 
and lying-but to imagine that sitting contains some special vir- 
tue is “attachment to form.” Thus in the T’an-ching Hui-neng 
says: 


A living man who sits and does not lie down; 
A dead man who lies down and does not sit! 
After all these are just dirty skeletons. (8) ™* 


Even in Japanese Zen one occasionally encounters a Zen 
practice which lays no special emphasis upon za-zen, but rather 
stresses the use of one’s ordinary work as the means of medita- 
tion. This was certainly true of Bankei,** and this principle under- 
lies the common use of such arts as “tea ceremony,” flute playing, 
brush drawing, archery, fencing, and ju-jutsu as ways of practic- 
ing Zen. Perhaps, then, the exaggeration of za-zen in later times 
is part and parcel of the conversion of the Zen monastery into a 
boys’ training school. To have them sit still for hours on end 
under the watchful eyes of monitors with sticks is certainly a 
sure method of keeping them out of mischief. 


48 See Suzuki (10), pp. 176-80. 


112 BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 


Yet however much za-zen may have been exaggerated in the 
Far East, a certain amount of “sitting just to sit” might well be 
the best thing in the world for the jittery minds and agitated 
bodies of Europeans and Americans-provided they do not use 
it as a method for turning themselves into Buddhas. 


PART TWO 


PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


One 


“EMPTY AND MARVELOUS” 


The opening words of the oldest Zen poem say that 


The perfect Way [Tao] is without difficulty, 
Save that it avoids picking and choosing. 
Only when you stop liking and disliking 
Will all be clearly understood. 

A split hair’s difference, 

And heaven and earth are set apart! 

If you want to get the plain truth, 

Be not concerned with right and wrong. 
The conflict between right and wrong 

Is the sickness of the mind. 


The point is not to make an effort to silence the feelings and 
cultivate bland indifference. It is to see through the universal 
illusion that what is pleasant or good may be wrested from what 
is painful or evil. It was a first principle in Taoism that 


When everyone recognizes beauty as beautiful, 
there is already ugliness; 

When everyone recognizes goodness as good, 
there is already evil. 

“To be” and “not to be” arise mutually; 

Difficult and easy are mutually realized; 

Long and short are mutually contrasted; 

High and low are mutually posited; .. . 

Before and after are in mutual sequence? 


To see this is to see that good without evil is like up without 
down, and that to make an ideal of pursuing the good is like try- 
1 Seng-ts’an, Hsin-hsin Ming. 
2 Tao Te Ching, 2. 

115 


116 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


ing to get rid of the left by turning constantly to the right. One is 
therefore compelled to go round in circles.* 

The logic of this is so simple that one is tempted to think it 
over-simple. The temptation is all the stronger because it upsets 
the fondest illusion of the human mind, which is that in the 
course of time everything may be made better and better. For 
it is the general opinion that were this not possible the life of 
man would lack all meaning and incentive. The only alternative 
to a life of constant progress is felt to be a mere existence, static 
and dead, so joyless and inane that one might as well commit 
suicide. The very notion of this “only alternative” shows how 
firmly the mind is bound in a dualistic pattern, how hard it is 
to think in any other terms than good or bad, or a muddy mixture 
of the two. 

Yet Zen is a liberation from this pattern, and its apparently 
dismal starting point is to understand the absurdity of choosing, 
of the whole feeling that life may be significantly improved by a 
constant selection of the “good.” One must start by “getting the 
feel” of relativity, and by knowing that life is not a situation from 
which there is anything to be grasped or gained-as if it were 
something which one approaches from outside, like a pie or a 
barrel of beer. To succeed is always to fail—in the sense that the 
more one succeeds in anything, the greater is the need to go on 
succeeding. To eat is to survive to be hungry. 

The illusion of significant improvement arises in moments of 
contrast, as when one turns from the left to the right on a hard 
bed. The position is “better” so long as the contrast remains, but 
before long the second position begins to feel like the first. So one 
acquires a more comfortable bed and, for a while, sleeps in peace. 
But the solution of the problem leaves a strange vacuum in one’s 
consciousness, a vacuum soon filled by the sensation of another 
intolerable contrast, hitherto unnoticed, and just as urgent, just 
as frustrating as the problem of the hard bed. The vacuum arises 


* Believe it or not, there is actually a politician in San Francisco who so 
detests the political Left Wing that he will not make a left turn with his car. 


“Empty and Marvelous” 117 


because the sensation of comfort can be maintained only in rela- 
tion to the sensation of discomfort, just as an image is visible to 
the eye only by reason of a contrasting background. The good 
and the evil, the pleasant and the painful are so inseparable, so 
identical in their difference-like the two sides of a coin-that 


Fair is foul, and foul is fair, 
or, in the words of a poem in the Zenrin Kushu: * 


To receive trouble is to receive good fortune; 
To receive agreement is to receive opposition.» 


Another puts it more vividly: 


At dusk the cock announces dawn; 
At midnight, the bright sun.¢ 


Zen does not, for this reason, take the attitude that it is so 
futile to eat when hungry that one may as well starve, nor is it so 
inhuman as to say that when we itch we should not scratch. 
Disillusionment with the pursuit of the good does not involve the 
evil of stagnation as its necessary alternative, for the human sit- 
uation is like that of “fleas on a hot griddle.” None of the alterna- 
tives offer a solution, for the flea who falls must jump, and the 
flea who jumps must fall. Choosing is absurd because there is no 
choice. 

To the dualistic mode of thought it will therefore seem that the 
standpoint of Zen is that of fatalism as opposed to free choice. 
When Mu-chou was asked, “We dress and eat every day, and 
how do we escape from having to put on clothes and eat food?” 
he answered, “We dress; we eat.” “I don’t understand,” said the 


‘The Zenrin Kushu is an anthology of some five thousand two-line poems, 
compiled by Toyo Eicho (1429-1504). Its purpose was to provide Zen 
students with a source-book of verses from which to select couplets express- 
ing the theme of a newly solved koan. Many masters require such a verse 
as soon as the proper answer to the koan has been given. The couplets have 
been drawn from a vast variety of Chinese sources—Buddhist, Taoist, classi- 
cal literature, popular songs, etc. 


118 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


monk. “If you don’t understand, put on your clothes and eat your 
food.” ** On being asked how to escape from the “heat,” another 
master directed the questioner to the place where it is neither 
hot nor cold. When asked to explain himself he replied, “In 
summer we sweat; in winter we shiver.” Or, as a poem puts it: 


When cold, we gather round the hearth before the blazing fire; 
When hot, we sit on the bank of the mountain stream in the bamboo 
grove.$ ¢ 


And from this point of view one can 


See the sun in the midst of the rain; 
Scoop clear water from the heart of the fire. 


But the viewpoint is not fatalistic. It is not simply submission 
to the inevitability of sweating when it is hot, shivering when it is 
cold, eating when hungry, and sleeping when tired. Submission 
to fate implies someone who submits, someone who is the help- 
less puppet of circumstances, and for Zen there is no such person. 
The duality of subject and object, of the knower and the known, 
is seen to be just as relative, as mutual, as inseparable as every 
other. We do not sweat because it is hot; the sweating is the heat. 
It is just as true to say that the sun is light because of the eyes as 
to say that the eyes see light because of the sun. The viewpoint is 
unfamiliar because it is our settled convention to think that heat 
comes first and then, by causality, the body sweats. To put it the 
other way round is startling, like saying “cheese and bread” in- 
stead of “bread and cheese.” Thus the Zenrin Kushu says: 


Fire does not wait for the sun to be hot, 
Nor the wind for the moon, to be cool. 


This shocking and seemingly illogical reversal of common sense 
may perhaps be clarified by the favorite Zen image of “the moon 
in the water.” The phenomenon moon-in-the-water is likened to 


*Mu-chou Lu, in Ku-tsun-hsii Yii-lu, 2. 6. 
6 Zenrin Ruishu, 2. 


“Empty and Marvelous” 119 


human experience. The water is the subject, and the moon the 
object. When there is no water, there is no moon-in-the-water, 
and likewise when there is no moon. But when the moon rises 
the water does not wait to receive its image, and when even the 
tiniest drop of water is poured out the moon does not wait to 
cast its reflection. For the moon does not intend to cast its re- 
flection, and the water does not receive its image on purpose. The 
event is caused as much by the water as by the moon, and as the 
water manifests the brightness of the moon, the moon manifests 
the clarity of the water. Another poem in the Zenrin Kushu says: 


Trees show the bodily form of the wind; 
Waves give vital energy to the moon9 


To put it less poetically-human experience is determined as 
much by the nature of the mind and the structure of its senses as 
by the external objects whose presence the mind reveals. Men feel 
themselves to be victims or puppets of their experience because 
they separate “themselves” from their minds, thinking that the 
nature of the mind-body is something involuntarily thrust upon 
“them.” They think that they did not ask to be born, did not ask 
to be “given” a sensitive organism to be frustrated by alternating 
pleasure and pain. But Zen asks us to find out “who” it is that “has” 
this mind, and “who” it was that did not ask to be born before 
father and mother conceived us. Thence it appears that the entire 
sense of subjective isolation, of being the one who was “given” 
a mind and to whom experience happens, is an illusion of bad 
semantics-the hypnotic suggestion of repeated wrong thinking. 
For there is no “myself” apart from the mind-body which gives 
structure to my experience. It is likewise ridiculous to talk of 
this mind-body as something which was passively and involun- 
tarily “given” a certain structure. It is that structure, and before 
the structure arose there was no mind-body. 

Our problem is that the power of thought enables us to con- 
struct symbols of things apart from the things themselves. This 
includes the ability to make a symbol, an idea of ourselves apart 


120 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


from ourselves. Because the idea is so much more comprehensible 
than the reality, the symbol so much more stable than the fact, 
we learn to identify ourselves with our idea of ourselves. Hence 
the subjective feeling of a “self” which “has” a mind, of an in- 
wardly isolated subject to whom experiences involuntarily hap- 
pen. With its characteristic emphasis on the concrete, Zen points 
out that our precious “self” is just an idea, useful and legitimate 
enough if seen for what it is, but disastrous if identified with our 
real nature. The unnatural awkwardness of a certain type of self- 
consciousness comes into being when we are aware of conflict or 
contrast between the idea of ourselves, on the one hand, and the 
immediate, concrete feeling of ourselves, on the other. 

When we are no longer identified with the idea of ourselves, 
the entire relationship between subject and object, knower and 
known, undergoes a sudden and revolutionary change. It be- 
comes a real relationship, a mutuality in which the subject cre- 
ates the object just as much as the object creates the subject. 
The knower no longer feels himself to be independent of the 
known; the experiencer no longer feels himself to stand apart 
from the experience. Consequently the whole notion of getting 
something “out” of life, of seeking something “from” experience, 
becomes absurd. To put it in another way, it becomes vividly 
clear that in concrete fact I have no other self than the totality 
of things of which I am aware. This is the Hua-yen (Kegon) 
doctrine of the net of jewels, of shih shih wu ai (Japanese, ji ji 
mu ge), in which every jewel contains the reflection of all the 
others. 

The sense of subjective isolation is also based on a failure to 
see the relativity of voluntary and involuntary events. This rela- 
tivity is easily felt by watching one’s breath, for by a slight change 
of viewpoint it is as easy to feel that “I breathe” as that “It 
breathes me.” We feel that our actions are voluntary when they 
follow a decision, and involuntary when they happen without 
decision. But if decision itself were voluntary, every decision 
would have to be preceded by a decision to decide-an infinite 


“Empty and Marvelous” 121 


regression which fortunately does not occur. Oddly enough, if we 
had to decide to decide, we would not be free to decide. We are 
free to decide because decision “happens.” We just decide with- 
out having the faintest understanding of how we do it. In fact, it 
is neither voluntary nor involuntary. To “get the feel” of this 
relativity is to find another extraordinary transformation of our 
experience as a whole, which may be described in either of two 
ways. I feel that I am deciding everything that happens, or, I feel 
that everything, including my decisions, is just happening spon- 
taneously. For a decision-the freest of my actions—just happens 
like hiccups inside me or like a bird singing outside me. 

Such a way of seeing things is vividly described by a modern 
Zen master, the late Sokei-an Sasaki: 


One day I wiped out all the notions from my mind. I gave up all 
desire. I discarded all the words with which I thought and stayed 
in quietude. I felt a little queer—as if I were being carried into 
something, or as if I were touching some power unknown to me 

. and Ztt! I entered. I lost the boundary of my physical body. 
I had my skin, of course, but I felt I was standing in the center 
of the cosmos. I spoke, but my words had lost their meaning. I saw 
people coming towards me, but all were the same man. All were 
myself! I had never known this world. I had believed that I was 
created, but now I must change my opinion: I was never created; 
I was the cosmos; no individual Mr. Sasaki existed.” 


It would seem, then, that to get rid of the subjective distinc- 
tion between “ime” and “my experience’-through seeing that 
my idea of myself is not myself-is to discover the actual rela- 
tionship between myself and the “outside” world. The individual, 
on the one hand, and the world, on the other, are simply the 
abstract limits or terms of a concrete reality which is “between” 
them, as the concrete coin is “between” the abstract, Euclidean 
surfaces of its two sides. Similarly, the reality of all “inseparable 
opposites”—life and death, good and evil, pleasure and pain, gain 
and loss—is that “between” for which we have no words. 


7 “The Transcendental World,” Zen Notes, vol. 1, no. 5. First Zen Institute 
of America. New York, 1954 


122 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


Man’s identification with his idea of himself gives him a 
specious and precarious sense of permanence. For this idea is 
relatively fixed, being based upon carefully selected memories of 
his past, memories which have a preserved and fixed character. 
Social convention encourages the fixity of the idea because the 
very usefulness of symbols depends upon their stability. Conven- 
tion therefore encourages him to associate his idea of himself 
with equally abstract and symbolic roles and stereotypes, since 
these will help him to form an idea of himself which will be 
definite and intelligible. But to the degree that he identifies him- 
self with the fixed idea, he becomes aware of “life” as something 
which flows past him-faster and faster as he grows older, as his 
idea becomes more rigid, more bolstered with memories. The 
more he attempts to clutch the world, the more he feels it as a 
Process in motion. 

On one occasion Ma-tsu and Po-chang were out for a walk, 
when they saw some wild geese flying past. 

“What are they?” asked Ma-tsu. 

“They're wild geese,” said Po-chang. 

“Where are they going?” demanded Ma-tsu. 

Po-chang replied, “They’ve already flown away.” 

Suddenly Ma-tsu grabbed Po-chang by the nose and twisted 
it so that he cried out in pain. 

“How,” shouted Ma-tsu, “could they ever have flown away?” 

This was the moment of Po-chang’s awakening.® 

The relativity of time and motion is one of the principal themes 
of Dogen’s Shobogenzo, where he writes: 


If we watch the shore while we are sailing in a boat, we feel that 
the shore is moving. But if we look nearer to the boat itself, we 
know then that it is the boat which moves. When we regard the 
universe in confusion of body and mind, we often get the mistaken 
belief that our mind is constant. But if we actually practice (Zen) 
and come back to ourselves, we see that this was wrong. 

When firewood becomes ashes, it never returns to being firewood. 
But we should not take the view that what is latterly ashes was 

8 Pi-yen Chi. 


“Empty and Marvelous” 123 


formerly firewood. What we should understand is that, according 
to the doctrine of Buddhism, firewood stays at the position of fire- 
wood. . . . There are former and later stages, but these stages 
are clearly cut. 

It is the same with life and death. Thus we say in Buddhism 
that the Un-born is also the Un-dying. Life is a position of time. 
Death is a position of time. They are like winter and spring, and 
in Buddhism we do not consider that winter becomes spring, or 
that spring becomes summer.® 


Dogen is here trying to express the strange sense of timeless 
moments which arises when one is no longer trying to resist the 
flow of events, the peculiar stillness and self-sufficiency of the 
succeeding instants when the mind is, as it were, going along 
with them and not trying to arrest them. A similar view is ex- 
pressed thus by Ma-tsu: 


A sutra says, “It is only a group of elements which come together 
to make this body.” When it arises, only these elements arise. When 
it ceases, only these elements cease. But when these elements arise, 
do not say, “I am arising,” and when they cease, do not say, “I 
am ceasing.” So, too, with our former thoughts, later thoughts, and 
intervening thoughts (or, experiences): the thoughts follow one 
another without being linked together. Each one is absolutely 
tranquil.t¢ * 


Buddhism has frequently compared the course of time to the 
apparent motion of a wave, wherein the actual water only moves 
up and down, creating the illusion of a “piece” of water moving 
over the surface. It is a similar illusion that there is a constant 
“self? moving through successive experiences, constituting a link 
between them in*such a way that the youth becomes the man 
who becomes the graybeard who becomes the corpse. 
Connected, then, with the pursuit of the good is the pursuit of 
the future, the illusion whereby we are unable to be happy with- 
out a “promising future” for the symbolic self. Progress towards 
® Shobogenzo, fasc. 1. For this translation I am indebted to my colleague 


Professor Sabro Hasegawa. 
10 Ku-tsun-hsii Yii-lu, 1. 2. 4. 


124 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


the good is therefore measured in terms of the prolongation of 
human life, forgetting that nothing is more relative than our 
sense of the length of time. A Zen poem says: 


The morning glory which blooms for an hour 
Differs not at heart from the giant pine, 
Which lives for a thousand years. 


Subjectively, a gnat doubtless feels that its span of a few days is 
a reasonably long lifetime. A tortoise, with its span of several 
hundred years, would feel subjectively the same as the gnat. Not 
so long ago the life expectancy of the average man was about 
forty-five years. Today it is from sixty-five to seventy years, but 
subjectively the years are faster, and death, when it comes, is 
always all too soon. As Dogen said: 


The flowers depart when we hate to lose them; 
The weeds arrive while we hate to watch them grow. 


This is perfectly natural, perfectly human, and no pulling and 
stretching of time will make it otherwise. 

On the contrary, the measuring of worth and success in terms 
of time, and the insistent demand for assurances of a promising 
future, make it impossible to live freely both in the present and 
in the “promising” future when it arrives. For there is never 
anything but the present, and if one cannot live there, one can- 
not live anywhere. The Shobogenzo says: 


When a fish swims, he swims on and on, and there is no end to the 
water. When a bird flies, he flies on and on, and there is no end 
to the sky. From the most ancient times there was never a fish who 
swam out of the water, nor a bird who flew out of the sky. Yet when 
the fish needs just a little water, he uses just a little; and when 
he needs lots, he uses lots. Thus the tips of their heads are always 
at the outer edge (of their space). If ever a bird flies beyond that 
edge, he dies, and so also with the fish. From the water the fish 
makes his life, and from the sky, the bird. But this life is made by 
the bird and the fish. At the same time, the bird and the fish are 
made by life. Thus there are the fish, the water, and life, and all 
three create each other. 


“Empty and Marvelous” 125 


Yet if there were a bird who first wanted to examine the size of 
the sky, or a fish who first wanted to examine the extent of the 
water—and then try to fly or to swim, they will wever find their own 
ways in the sky or water."! 


This is not a philosophy of not looking where one is going; it is a 
philosophy of not making where one is going so much more im- 
portant than where one is that there will be no point in going. 

The life of Zen begins, therefore, in a disillusion with the 
pursuit of goals which do not really exist-the good without the 
bad, the gratification of a self which is no more than an idea, and 
the morrow which never comes. For all these things are a decep- 
tion of symbols pretending to be realities, and to seek after them 
is like walking straight into a wall upon which some painter has, 
by the convention of perspective, suggested an open passage. In 
short, Zen begins at the point where there is nothing further to 
seek, nothing to be gained. Zen is most emphatically not to be re- 
garded as a system of self-improvement, or a way of becoming 
a Buddha. In the words of Lin-chi, “If a man seeks the Buddha, 
that man loses the Buddha.” 

For all ideas of self-improvement and of becoming or getting 
something in the future relate solely to our abstract image of 
ourselves. To follow them is to give ever more reality to that 
image. On the other hand, our true, nonconceptual self is 
already the Buddha, and needs no improvement. In the course 
of time it may grow, but one does not blame an egg for not be- 
ing a chicken; still less does one criticize a pig for having a 
shorter neck than a giraffe. A Zenrin poem says: 


In the landscape of spring there is neither high nor low; 
The flowering branches grow naturally, some long, some short. 


When Ts’ui-wei was asked about the meaning of Buddhism, he 
answered: “Wait until there is no one around, and I will tell you.” 
Some time later the monk approached him again, saying: “There 
is nobody here now. Please answer me.” Ts’ui-wei led him out 


11 Shobogenzo, fasc. 1. Read to the author by Sabro Hasegawa. 


126 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


into the garden and went over to the bamboo grove, saying 
nothing. Still the monk did not understand, so at last Ts’ui-wei 
said: “Here is a tall bamboo; there is a short one!” ?? Or, as an- 
other Zenrin verse puts it: 


A long thing is the long Body of Buddha; 
A short thing is the short Body of BuddhaJ 


What is therefore to be gained from Zen is called wu-shih 
(Japanese, buji) or “nothing special,” for as the Buddha says in 
the Vajracchedika:; 


I obtained not the least thing from unexcelled, complete awakening, 
and for this very reason it is called “unexcelled, complete awaken- 
ing.” (22) 
The expression wu-shih also has the sense of the perfectly natural 
and unaffected, in which there is no “fuss” or “business.” The 
attainment of satori is often suggested by the old Chinese poem: 


Mount Lu in misty rain; the River Che at high tide. 

When I had not been there, no rest from the pain of longing! 
I went there and returned. . . . It was nothing special: 
Mount Lu in misty rain; the River Che at high tide. 


According to the famous saying of Ch’ing-yiian: 


Before I had studied Zen for thirty years, I saw mountains as moun- 
tains, and waters as waters. When I arrived at a more intimate 
knowledge, I came to the point where I saw that mountains are 
not mountains, and waters are not waters. But now that I have 
got its very substance I am at rest. For it’s just that I see mountains 
once again as mountains, and waters once again as waters.1? * 


The difficulty of Zen is, of course, to shift one’s attention from 
the abstract to the concrete, from the symbolic self to one’s true 
nature. So long as we merely talk about it, so long as we turn over 
ideas in our minds about “symbol” and “reality,” or keep re- 
peating, “I am not my idea of myself,” this is still mere abstrac- 


12 Ch’uan Teng Lu, 15. 
13 Ch’uan Teng Lu, 22, 


“Empty and Marvelous” 127 


tion. Zen created the method (upaya) of “direct pointing” in 
order to escape from this vicious circle, in order to thrust the 
real immediately to our notice. When reading a difficult book 
ft is of no help to think, “I should concentrate,” for one thinks 
nbout concentration instead of what the book has to say. Likewise, 
in studying or practicing Zen it is of no help to think about Zen. 
To remain caught up in ideas and words about Zen is, as the old 
masters say, to “stink of Zen.” 

For this reason the masters talk about Zen as little as possible, 
and throw its concrete reality straight at us. This reality is the 
“suchness” (tathata) of our natural, nonverbal world. If we see 
this just as it is, there is nothing good, nothing bad, nothing in- 
herently long or short, nothing subjective and nothing objective. 
There is no symbolic self to be forgotten, and no need for any 
idea of a concrete reality to be remembered. 

A monk asked Chao-chou, “For what reason did the First 
Patriarch come from the West?” (This is a formal question, 
asking for the central point of Bodhidharma’s teaching, i.e., of 
Zen itself. ) 

Chao-chou answered: “The cypress tree in the yard.” 

“Aren't you trying,” said the monk, “to demonstrate it by means 
of an objective reality?” 

“I am not!” retorted the master. 

“For what reason, then, did the First Patriarch come from the 
West?” 

“The cypress tree in the yard!” * 

Notice how Chao-chou whips the monk out of his conceptuali- 
zation about the answer. When T’ung-shan was asked, “What is 
the Buddha?” he answered, “Three pounds of flax!” Upon this 
Yiian-wu comments: 


Various answers have been given by different masters to the ques- 
tion, “What is the Buddha?” . . . None, however, can excel T’ung- 
shan’s “three pounds (chin) of flax” as regards its irrationality 
which cuts off all passage of speculation. Some comment that 


14 Chao-chou Lu in Ku-tsun-hsii Yii-lu, 3. 13. 


128 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


T’ung-shan was weighing flax at the moment, hence the answer. 
. . . Still others think that as the questioner was not conscious 9f 
the fact that he himself was the Buddha, T’ung-shan answered him 
in this indirect way. Such are all like corpses, for they are utterly 
unable to comprehend the living truth. There are still others who 
take the “three pounds of flax” as the Buddha. What wild and 
fantastic remarks they make! + 


The masters are resolute in cutting short all theorizing and 
speculation about these answers. “Direct pointing” entirely fails 
in its intention if it requires or stimulates any conceptual 
comment. 

Fa-yen asked the monk Hsiian-tzu why he had never asked him 
any questions about Zen. The monk explained that he had al- 
ready attained his understanding from another master. Pressed 
by Fa-yen for an explanation, the monk said that when he had 
asked his teacher, “What is the Buddha?” he had received the 
answer, “Ping-ting T’ung-tzu comes for fire!” 

“A good answer!” said Fa-yen. “But I’m sure you don’t under- 
stand it.” 

“Ping-ting,” explained the monk, “is the god of fire. For him to 
hie seeking for fire is like myself, seeking the Buddha. I’m the 
Buddha already, and no asking is needed.” 

“Just as I thought!” laughed Fa-yen. “You didn’t get it.” 

The monk was so offended that he left the monastery, but 
later repented of himself and returned, humbly requesting in- 
struction. 

“You ask me,” said Fa-yen. 

“What is the Buddha?” inquired the monk. 

“Ping-ting T’ung-tzu comes for fire!” ** 

The point of this mondo is perhaps best indicated by two 
poems submitted by the Pure Land Buddhist Ippen Shonin to the 
Zen master Hoto, translated by Suzuki from the Sayings of Ippen. 
Ippen was one of those who studied Zen to find a rapprochement 


18 Pi-yen Chi, 12, in Suzuki (1), vol. 2, pp. 71-72. 
16 Ch'uan Teng Lu, 25. 


“Empty and Marvelous” 129 


between Zen and the Pure Land School, with its practice of re- 
peating the Name of Amitabha. In Japanese, the formula is 
“Namu Amida Butsu!” Ippen first presented this verse: 


When the Name is uttered, 
Neither the Buddha nor the self 
There is: 

Na-mu-a-mi-da-bu-tsu— 

The voice alone is heard. 


Hoto, however, felt that this did not quite express the point, but 
gave his approval when Ippen submitted a second verse: 


When the Name is uttered, 
Neither the Buddha nor the self 
There is: 

Na-mu-a-mi-da-bu-tsu, 
Na-mu-a-mi-da-bu-tsu! +7 


Po-chang had so many students that he had to open a second 
monastery. To find a suitable person as its master, he called his 
monks together and set a pitcher before them, saying: 

“Without calling it a pitcher, tell me what it is.” 

The head monk said, “You couldn't call it a piece of wood.” 

At this the monastery cook kicked the pitcher over and walked 
away. The cook was put in charge of the new monastery.** One 
of Nan-ch’iian’s lectures is worth quoting here: 


During the period (kalpa) before the world was manifested there 
were no names. The moment the Buddha arrives in the world there 
are names, and so we clutch hold of forms. In the great Tao there 
is absolutely nothing secular or sacred. If there are names, every- 
thing is classified in limits and bounds. Therefore the old man 
West of the River (i.e., Ma-tsu) said: “It is not mind; it is not 
Buddha; it is not a thing.” +9! 


This, of course, reflects the doctrine of the Tao Te Ching that 


17 Suzuki (1), vol. 2, p. 263. 

2® Wu-men kuan, 40. However, as Wu-men comments, he fell right into 
Po-chang’s trap, because he exchanged an easy job for a difficult onel 

as Nan-ch’itan Yii-lu in Ku-tsun-hsiit Yii-lu, 3. 12. 


180 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


The nameless is the origin of heaven and earth; 
Naming is the mother of the ten thousand things. (1) 


But Lao-tzu’s “nameless” and Nan-ch’iian’s “kalpa of the void” 
before the manifestation of the world are not prior to the conven- 
tional world of things in time. They are the “suchness” of the 
world just as it is now, and to which the Zen masters are 
directly pointing. Po-chang’s cook was living wide awake in that 
world, and answered the master’s problem in its concrete and 
nameless terms. 

A monk asked Ts’ui-wei, “For what reason did the First 
Patriarch come from the West?” 

Ts'ui-wei answered, “Pass me that chin-rest.” 

As soon as the monk passed it, Ts’ui-wei hit him with it.2° 

Another master was having tea with two of his students when 
he suddenly tossed his fan to one of them, saying, “What’s this?” 
The student opened it and fanned himself. “Not bad,” was his 
comment. “Now you,” he went on, passing it to the other student, 
who at once closed the fan and scratched his neck with it. This 
done, he opened it again, placed a piece of cake on it, and 
offered it to the master. This was considered even better, for 
when there are no names the world is no longer “classified in 
limits and bounds.” 

There is, no doubt, some parallel between these demonstrations 
and the viewpoint of Korzybskian semantics. There is the same 
stress on the importance of avoiding confusion between words 
and signs, on the one hand, and the infinitely variable “un- 
speakable” world, on the other. Class demonstrations of semantic 
principles often resemble types of mondo. Professor Irving Lee, 
of Northwestern University, used to hold up a matchbox before 
his class, asking “What’s this?” The students would usually drop 
squarely into the trap and say, “A matchbox!” At this Professor 
Lee would say, “No, no! It’s this—” throwing the matchbox at the 
class, and adding, “Matchbox is a noise. Is this a noise?” 

However, it would seem that Korzybski still thought of the 


20 Pi-yen Lu, 20. The chin-rest is the ch’an-pan, a board for supporting the 
chin during long meditation. 


“Empty and Marvelous” 131 


“unspeakable” world as a multiplicity of infinitely differentiated 
events. For Zen, the world of “suchness” is neither one nor many, 
neither uniform nor differentiated. A Zen master might hold up 
his hand-to someone insisting that there are real differences in 
the world-and say, “Without saying a word, point to the differ- 
ence between my fingers.” At once it is clear that “sameness” and 
“difference” are abstractions. The same would have to be said of 
all categorizations of the concrete world-even “concrete” itself 
-for such terms as “physical,” “material,” “objective,” “real,” and 
“existential” are extremely abstract symbols. Indeed, the more 
one tries to define them, the more meaningless they turn out to be. 

The world of “suchness” is void and empty because it teases 
the mind out of thought, dumfounding the chatter of definition 
so that there is nothing left to be said. Yet it is obvious that we 
are not confronted with literal nothingness. It is true that, when 
pressed, every attempt to catch hold of our world leaves us 
empty-handed. Furthermore, when we try to be sure at least 
of ourselves, the knowing, catching subjects, we disappear. We 
cannot find any self apart from the mind, and we cannot find 
any mind apart from those very experiences which the mind- 
now vanished-was trying to grasp. In R. H. Blyth’s arresting 
metaphor, when we were just about to swat the fly, the fly flew 
up and sat on the swatter. In terms of immediate perception, 
when we look for things there is nothing but mind, and when 
we look for mind there is nothing but things. For a moment we 
are paralyzed, because it seems that we have no basis for action, 
no ground under foot from which to take a jump. But this is the 
way it always was, and in the next moment we find ourselves 
as free to act, speak, and think as ever, yet in a strange and 
miraculous new world from which “self” and “other,” “mind” and 
“things” have vanished. In the words of Te-shan: 


Only when you have no thing in your mind and no mind in things 
are you vacant and spiritual, empty and marvelous.?? ™ 


71 Lien-teng Hui-yao, 22. This is Ruth Sasaki’s elegant translation in 
Dumoulin and Sasaki (1), p. 48, where she points out that in this context 
“spiritual” connotes a state beyond expression in words. 


182 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


The marvel can only be described as the peculiar sensation of 
freedom in action which arises when the world is no longer 
felt to be some sort of obstacle standing over against one. This 
is not freedom in the crude sense of “kicking over the traces” 
and behaving in wild caprice. It is the discovery of freedom in 
the most ordinary tasks, for when the sense of subjective isola- 
tion vanishes, the world is no longer felt as an intractable ob- 
ject. 

Yiin-men once said, “Our school lets you go any way you like. 
It kills and it brings to life-either way.” 

A monk then asked, “How does it kill?” 

The master replied, “Winter goes and spring comes.” 

“How,” asked the monk, “is it when winter goes and spring 
comes?” 

The master said, “Shouldering a staff you wander this way and 
that, East or West, South or North, knocking at the wild stumps 
as you please.” ??* 

The passing of the seasons is not passively suffered, but “hap- 
pens” as freely as one wanders in the fields, knocking at old 
stumps with a stick. In the context of Christianity this might be 
interpreted as feeling that one has become omnipotent, that one 
is God, directing everything that happens. However, it must be 
remembered that in Taoist and Buddhist thought there is no 
conception of a God who deliberately and consciously governs 
the universe. Lao-tzu said of the Tao: 


To its accomplishments it lays no claim. 

It loves and nourishes all things, 

but does not lord it over them. (34) 

The Tao, without doing anything (wu-wei), 
leaves nothing undone. (37) 


To use the imagery of a Tibetan poem, every action, every event 
comes of itself from the Void “as from the surface of a clear lake 
there leaps suddenly a fish.” When this is seen to be as true of 


22 Yiin-men Kuang-lu, in Ku-tsun-hsii Yii-lu, 4. 16. 


“Empty and Marvelous” 133 
the deliberate and the routine as of the surprising and the un- 
foreseen, one can agree with the Zen poet P’ang-yun: 

Miraculous power and marvelous activity- 
Drawing water and hewing wood! *3° 
23 Ch'uan Teng Lu, 8. 


Two 


“SITTING QuIETLY, Doinc NoTHING’ 


In both life and art the cultures of the Far East appreciate noth- 
ing more highly than spontaneity or naturalness (tzu-jan). This 
is the unmistakable tone of sincerity marking the action which 
is not studied and contrived. For a man rings like a cracked 
bell when he thinks and acts with a split mind-one part standing 
aside to interfere with the other, to control, to condemn, or to 
admire. But the mind, or the true nature, of man cannot actually 
be split. According to a Zenrin poem, it is 


Like a sword that cuts, but cannot cut itself; 
Like an eye that sees, but cannot see itself. 


The illusion of the split comes from the mind’s attempt to be 
both itself and its idea of itself, from a fatal confusion of fact 
with symbol. To make an end of the illusion, the mind must 
stop trying to act upon itself, upon its stream of experiences, 
from the standpoint of the idea of itself which we call the ego. 
This is expressed in another Zenrin poem as 


Sitting quietly, doing nothing, 
Spring comes, and the grass grows by itself.® 


This “by itself” is the mind’s and the world’s natural way of 
action, as when the eyes see by themselves, and the ears hear 
by themselves, and the mouth opens by itself without having to 
be forced apart by the fingers. As the Zenrin says again: 


The blue mountains are of themselves blue mountains; 
The white clouds are of themselves white clouds.¢ 


In its stress upon naturalness, Zen is obviously the inheritor of 
Taoism, and its view of spontaneous action as “marvelous activity” 
134 


“Sitting Quietly, Doing Nothing” 185 
(miao-yung*) is precisely what the Taoists meant by the word 
te-“virtue” with an overtone of magical power. But neither in 
Taoism nor in Zen does it have anything to do with magic in 
the merely sensational sense of performing superhuman “mir- 
acles.” The “magical” or “marvelous” quality of spontaneous ac- 
tion is, on the contrary, that it is perfectly human, and yet shows 
no sign of being contrived. 

Such a quality is peculiarly subtle (another meaning of miao), 
and extremely hard to put into words. The story is told of a Zen 
monk who wept upon hearing of the death of a close relative. 
When one of his fellow students objected that it was most un- 
seemly for a monk to show such personal attachment he replied, 
“Don’t be stupid! I’m weeping because I want to weep.” The 
great Hakuin was deeply disturbed in his early study of Zen 
when he came across the story of the master Yen-t’ou, who was 
said to have screamed at the top of his voice when murdered by 
a robber.’ Yet this doubt was dissolved at the moment of his 
satori, and in Zen circles his own death is felt to have been es- 
pecially admirable for its display of human emotion. On the 
other hand, the abbot Kwaisen and his monks allowed themselves 
to be burned alive by the soldiers of Oda Nobunaga, sitting 
calmly in the posture of meditation. Such contradictory “natural- 
hess” seems most mysterious, but perhaps the clue lies in the 
saying of Yiin-men: “In walking, just walk. In sitting, just sit. 
Above all, don’t wobble.” For the essential quality of naturalness 
is the sincerity of the undivided mind which does not dither be- 
tween alternatives. So when Yen-t’ou screamed, it was such a 
scream that it was heard for miles around. 

But it would be quite wrong to suppose that this natural sin- 
cerity comes about by observing such a platitude as “Whatso- 
ever thy hand findeth to do, do it with all thy might.” When 
Yen-t’ou screamed, he was not screaming in order to be natural, 
nor did he first make up his mind to scream and then implement 
the decision with the full energy of his will. There is a total con- 


1 Ch'uan Teng Lu, 26. 


1386 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


tradiction in planned naturalness and intentional sincerity. This 
is to overlay, not to discover, the “original mind.” Thus to try 
to be natural is an affectation. To try not to try to be natural is 
also an affectation. As a Zenrin poem says: 


You cannot get it by taking thought; 
You cannot seek it by not taking thought. 


But this absurdly complex and frustrating predicament arises 
from a simple and elementary mistake in the use of the mind. 
When this is understood, there is no paradox and no difficulty. 
Obviously, the mistake arises in the attempt to split the mind 
against itself, but to understand this clearly we have to enter 
more deeply into the “cybernetics” of the mind, the basic pattern 
of its self-correcting action. 

It is, of course, part of the very genius of the human mind 
that it can, as it were, stand aside from life and reflect upon it, 
that it can be aware of its own existence, and that it can criticize 
its own processes. For the mind has something resembling a 
“feed-back” system. This is a term used in communications engi- 
neering for one of the basic principles of “automation,” of 
enabling machines to control themselves. Feed-back enables a 
machine to be informed of the effects of its own action in such 
a way as to be able to correct its action. Perhaps the most familiar 
example is the electrical thermostat which regulates the heating 
of a house. By setting an upper and a lower limit of desired tem- 
perature, a thermometer is so connected that it will switch the 
furnace on when the lower limit is reached, and off when the 
upper limit is reached. The temperature of the house is thus kept 
within the desired limits. The thermostat provides the furnace 
with a kind of sensitive organ-an extremely rudimentary analogy 
of human self-consciousness.? 


21 do not wish to press the analogy between the human mind and servo- 
mechanisms to the point of saying that the mind-bocly is “nothing but” 
an extremely complicated hechanleal automaton. I only want to go so 
far as to show that feed-back involves some problems which are similar 
to the problems of self-consciousness and self-control in man. Otherwise, 


“Sitting Quietly, Doing Nothing” 137 

The proper adjustment of a feed-back system is always a com- 
plex mechanical problem. For the original machine, say, the fur- 
nace, is adjusted by the feed-back system, but this system in turn 
needs adjustment. Therefore to make a mechanical system more 
and more automatic will require the use of a series of feed-back 
systems-a second to correct the first, a third to correct the second, 
and so on. But there are obvious limits to such a series, for be- 
yond a certain point the mechanism will be “frustrated” by its 
own complexity. For example, it might take so long for the in- 
formation to pass through the series of control systems that it 
would arrive at the original machine too late to be useful. Simi- 
larly, when human beings think too carefully and minutely about 
an action to be taken, they cannot make up their minds in time 
to act. In other words, one cannot correct one’s means of self- 
correction indefinitely. There must soon be a source of informa- 
tion at the end of the line which is the final authority. Failure to 
trust its authority will make it impossible to act, and the system 
will be paralyzed. 

The system can be paralyzed in yet another way. Every feed- 
back system needs a margin of “lag” or error. If we try to make 
a thermostat absolutely accurate-that is, if we bring the upper 
and lower limits of temperature very close together in an at- 
tempt to hold the temperature at a constant 70 degrees-the 
whole system will break down. For to the extent that the upper 
and lower limits coincide, the signals for switching off and 
switching on will coincide! If 70 degrees is both the lower and 
upper limit the “go” sign will also be the “stop” sign; “yes” will 
imply “no” and “no” will imply “yes.” Whereupon the mechanism 
will start “trembling,” going on and off, on and off, until it 
shakes itself to pieces. The system is too sensitive and shows 
symptoms which are startlingly like human anxiety. For when a 
mechanism and organism seem to me to be different in principle—that is, 
in their actual functioning—since the one is made and the other grown. The 
fact that one can translate some organic processes into mechanical terms 


no more implies that organism is mechanism than the translation of com- 
merce into arithmetical terms implies that commerce is arithmetic. 


138 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


human being is so self-conscious, so self-controlled that he can- 
not let go of himself, he dithers or wobbles between opposites. 
This is precisely what is meant in Zen by going round and round 
on “the wheel of birth-and-death,” for the Buddhist samsara is 
the prototype of all vicious circles.* 

Now human life consists primarily and originally in action-in 
living in the concrete world of “suchness.” But we have the power 
to control action by reflection, that is, by thinking, by comparing 
the actual world with memories or “reflections.” Memories are 
organized in terms of more or less abstract images—words, signs, 
simplified shapes, and other symbols which can be reviewed very 
rapidly one after another. From such memories, reflections, and 
symbols the mind constructs its idea of itself. This corresponds 
to the thermostat-the source of information about its own past 
action by which the system corrects itself. The mind-body must, 
of course, trust that information in order to act, for paralysis 
will soon result from trying to remember whether we have re- 
membered everything accurately. 

But to keep up the supply of information in the memory, the 
mind-body must continue to act “on its own.” It must not cling 
too closely to its own record. There must be a “lag” or distance 
between the source of information and the source of action. This 
does not mean that the source of action must hesitate before it 
accepts the information. It means that it must not identify itself 
with the source of information. We saw that when the furnace 
responds too closely to the thermostat, it cannot go ahead without 
also trying to stop, or stop without also trying to go ahead. This 
is just what happens to the human being, to the mind, when 
the desire for certainty and security prompts identification be- 
tween the mind and its own image of itself. It cannot let go of 
itself. It feels that it should not do what it is doing, and that it 
should do what it is not doing. It feels that it should not be what 


3 See the fascinating discussion of analogies between mechanical and logical 
contradictions and the psychoneuroses by Gregory Bateson in Reusch and 
Bateson, Communication: the Social Matrix of Psychiatry, esp. Chap. 8. 
(Norton; New York, 1950.) , 


“Sitting Quietly, Doing Nothing” 139 
it is, and be what it isn’t. Furthermore, the effort to remain al- 
ways “good” or “happy” is like trying to hold the thermostat to 
a constant 70 degrees by making the lower limit the same as 
the upper. 

The identification of the mind with its own image is, there- 
fore, paralyzing because the image is fixed-it is past and finished. 
But it is a fixed image of oneself in motion! To cling to it is thus 
to be in constant contradiction and conflict. Hence Yiin-men’s 
saying, “In walking, just walk. In sitting, just sit. Above all, 
don’t wobble.” In other words, the mind cannot act without 
giving up the impossible attempt to control itself beyond a 
certain point. It must let go of itself both in the sense of trusting 
its own memory and reflection, and in the sense of acting spon- 
taneously, on its own into the unknown. 

This is why Zen often seems to take the side of action as 
against reflection, and why it describes itself as “no-mind” 
(wu-hsin) or “no-thought” (wu-nien), and why the masters 
demonstrate Zen by giving instantaneous and unpremeditated 
answers to questions. When Yiin-men was asked for the ultimate 
secret of Buddhism, he replied, “Dumpling!” In the words of 
the Japanese master Takuan: 


When a monk asks, “What is the Buddha?” the master may raise 
his fist; when he is asked, “What is the ultimate idea of Buddhism?” 
he may exclaim even before the questioner finishes his sentence, 
“A blossoming branch of the plum,” or “The cypress-tree in the 
court-yard.” The point is that the answering mind does not “stop” 
anywhere, but responds straightway without giving any thought to 
the felicity of an answer.* 


This is allowing the mind to act on its own. 

But reflection is also action, and Yiin-men might also have 
said, “In acting, just act. In thinking, just think. Above all, don’t 
wobble.” In other words, if one is going to reflect, just reflect-but 
do not reflect about reflecting. Yet Zen would agree that reflec- 
tion about reflection is also action-provided that in doing it we 
* In Suzuki (7), p. 80. 


140 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


do just that, and do not tend to drift off into the infinite regres- 
sion of trying always to stand above or outside the level upon 
which we are acting. Thus Zen is also a liberation from the dual- 
ism of thought and action, for it thinks as it acts-with the same 
quality of abandon, commitment, or faith. The attitude of 
wu-hsin is by no means an anti-intellectualist exclusion of think- 
ing. Wu-hsin is action on any level whatsoever, physical or 
psychic, without trying at the same moment to observe and 
check the action from outside. This attempt to act and think 
about the action simultaneously is precisely the identification 
of the mind with its idea of itself. It involves the same contradic- 
tion as the statement which states something about itself—“This 
statement is false.” 

The same is true of the relationship between feeling and action. 
For feeling blocks action, and blocks itself as a form of action, 
when it gets caught in this same tendency to observe or feel 
itself indefinitely-as when, in the midst of enjoying myself, I 
examine myself to see if I am getting the utmost out of the 
occasion. Not content with tasting the food, I am also trying to 
taste my tongue. Not content with feeling happy, I want to 
feel myself feeling happy-so as to be sure not to miss anything. 

Whether trusting our memories or trusting the mind to act on 
its own, it comes to the same thing: ultimately we must act and 
think, live and die, from a source beyond all “our” knowledge 
and control. But this source is ourselves, and when we see that, 
it no longer stands over against us as a threatening object. No 
amount of care and hesitancy, no amount of introspection and 
searching of our motives, can make any ultimate difference to 
the fact that the mind is 


Like an eye that sees, but cannot see itself. 


In the end, the only alternative to a shuddering paralysis is to 
leap into action regardless of the consequences. Action in this 
spirit may be right or wrong with respect to conventional stand- 
ards. But our decisions upon the conventional level must be 


“Situng Quietly, Doing Nothing” 141 
supported by the conviction that whatever we do, and whatever 
“happens” to us, is ultimately “right.” In other words, we must 
enter into it without “second thought,” without the arricre-pensée 
of regret, hesitancy, doubt, or self-recrimination. Thus when 
Yiin-men was asked, “What is the Tao?” he answered simply, 
“Walk on! (ch’ii’).” 

But to act “without second thought,” without double-minded- 
ness, is by no means a mere precept for our imitation. For we 
cannot realize this kind of action until it is clear beyond any 
shadow of doubt that it is actually impossible to do anything 
else. In the words of Huang-po: 


Men are afraid to forget their own minds, fearing to fall through 
the void with nothing on to which they can cling. They do not 
know that the void is not really the void but the real realm of the 
Dharma. . . . It cannot be looked for or sought, comprehended by 
wisdom or knowledge, explained in words, contacted materially 
(i.e., objectively) or reached by meritorious achievement. (14) 5 


Now this impossibility of “grasping the mind with the mind” 
is, when realized, the non-action (wu-wei), the “sitting quietly, 
doing nothing” whereby “spring comes, and the grass grows by 
itself.” There is no necessity for the mind to try to let go of it- 
self, or to try not to try. This introduces further artificialities. 
Yet, as a matter of psychological strategy, there is no need for 
trying to avoid artificialities. In the doctrine of the Japanese mas- 
ter Bankei (1622-1693) the mind which cannot grasp itself is 
called the “Unborn” (fusho*’), the mind which does not arise 
or appear in the realm of symbolic knowledge. 


A layman asked, “I appreciate very much your instruction about 
the Unborn, but by force of habit second thoughts [nien] keep 
tending to arise, and being confused by them it is difficult to be in 
perfect accord with the Unborm. How am I to trust in it entirely?” 
Bankei said, “If you make an attempt to stop the second thoughts 
which arise, then the mind which does the stopping and the mind 
which is stopped become divided, and there is no occasion for 


5 In Chu Ch’an (1), p. 29. 


142 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


peace of mind. So it is best for you simply to believe that origt- 
nally there is no (possibility of control by) second thoughts. Yet 
because of karmic affinity, through what you see and what you 
hear these thoughts arise and vanish temporarily, but are without 
substance.” (2) 

“Brushing off thoughts which arise is just like washing off blood 
with blood. We remain impure because of being washed with 
blood, even when the blood that was first there has gone—and if we 
continue in this way the impurity never departs. This is from 
ignorance of the mind’s unbom, unvanishing, and unconfused na- 
ture. If we take second thought for an effective reality, we keep 
going on ard on around the wheel of birth-and-death. You should 
realize that such thought is just a temporary mental construction, 
and not try to hold or to reject it. Let it alone just as it occurs and 
just as it ceases. It is like an image reflected in a mirror. The mirror 
is clear and reflects anything which comes before it, and yet no 
image sticks in the mirror. The Buddha mind (i.e., the real, unborn 
mind) is ten thousand times more clear than a mirror, and more 
inexpressibly marvelous. In its light all such thoughts vanish with- 
out trace. If you put your faith in this way of understanding, how- 
ever strongly such thoughts may arise, they do no harm.” (4) § 


This is also the doctrine of Huang-po, who says again: 


If it is held that there is something to be realized or attained apart 
from mind, and, thereupon, mind is used to seek it, (that implies) 
failure to understand that mind and the object of its search are one. 
Mind cannot be used to seek something from mind for, even after 
the passage of millions of kalpas, the day of success would never 
come. (10) 7 


One must not forget the social context of Zen. It is primarily 
a way of liberation for those who have mastered the disciplines 
of social convention, of the conditioning of the individual by the 
group. Zen is a medicine for, the ill effects of this conditioning, 
for the mental paralysis and anxiety which come from excessive 
self-consciousness. It must be seen against the background of 
6 Bankei’s Daiho Shogen Kokushi Hogo. Japanese text edited by Furata and 
Suzuki. (Tokyo, 1943.) Translation read to the author by Professor 


Hasegawa. 
‘In Chu Ch’an (1), p. 24. 


“Sitting Quietly, Doing Nothing” 143 
societies regulated by the principles of Confucianism, with their 
heavy stress on propriety and punctilious ritual. In Japan, too, it 
must be seen in relation to the rigid schooling required in the 
training of the samurai caste, and the emotional strain to which 
the samurai were exposed in times of constant warfare. As a 
medicine for these conditions, it does not seek to overthrow the 
conventions themselves, but, on the contrary, takes them for 
granted-as is easily seen in such manifestations of Zen as the 
cha-no-yu or “tea ceremony” of Japan. Therefore Zen might be 
a very dangerous medicine in a social context where convention 
is weak, or, at the other extreme, where there is a spirit of open 
revolt against convention ready to exploit Zen for destructive 
purposes. 

With this in mind, we can observe the freedom and natural- 
ness of Zen without loss of perspective. Social conditioning fosters 
the identification of the mind with a fixed idea of itself as the 
means -of self-control, and as a result man thinks of himself as 
“T’-the ego. Thereupon the mental center of gravity shifts from 
the spontaneous or original mind to the ego image. Once this 
has happened, the very center of our psychic life is identified 
with the self-controlling mechanism. It then becomes almost 
impossible to see how “I” can let go of “myself,” for I am pre- 
cisely my habitual effort to hold on to myself. I find myself 
totally incapable of any mental action which is not intentional, 
affected, and insincere. Therefore anything I do to give myself 
up, to let go, will be a disguised form of the habitual effort to 
hold on. I cannot be intentionally unintentional or purposely 
spontaneous. As soon as it becomes important for me to be 
spontaneous, the intention to be so is strengthened; I cannot get 
rid of it, and yet it is the one thing that stands in the way of 
its own fulfillment. It is as if someone had given me some 
medicine with the warning that it will not work if I think of a 
monkey while taking it. 

While I am remembering to forget the monkey, I am in a 
“double-bind” situation where “to do” is “not to do,” and vice 


144 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 

versa. “Yes” implies “no,” and “go” implies “stop.” At this point 
Zen comes to me and asks, “If you cannot help remembering 
the monkey, are you doing it on purpose?” In other words, do 
I have an intention for being intentional, a purpose for being 
purposive? Suddenly I realize that my very intending is spon- 
taneous, or that my controlling self-the ego—arises from my un- 
controlled or natural self. At this moment all the machinations 
of the ego come to nought; it is annihilated in its own trap. I 
see that it is actually impossible not to be spontaneous. For what 
I cannot help doing I am doing spontaneously, but if I am at 
the same time trying to control it, I interpret it as a compulsion. 
As a Zen master said, “Nothing is left to you at this moment but 
to have a good laugh.” 

In this moment the whole quality of consciousness is changed, 
and I feel myself in a new world in which, however, it is obvious 
that I have always been living. As soon as I recognize that my 
voluntary and purposeful action happens spontaneously “by 
itself,” just like breathing, hearing, and feeling, I am no longer 
caught in the contradiction of trying to be spontaneous. There 
is no real contradiction, since “trying” is “spontaneity.” Seeing 
this, the compulsive, blocked, and “tied-up” feeling vanishes. It 
is just as if I had been absorbed in a tug-of-war between my two 
hands, and had forgotten that both were mine. No block to 
spontaneity remains when the trying is seen to be needless. As 
we saw, the discovery that both the voluntary and involuntary 
aspects of the mind are alike spontaneous makes an immediate 
end of the fixed dualism between the mind and the world, the 
knower and the known. The new world in which I find myself 
has an extraordinary transparency or freedom from _ barriers, 
making it seem that I have somehow become the empty space 
in which everything is happening. 

Here, then, is the point of the oft-repeated assertion that “all 
beings are in nirvana from the very beginning,” that “all dualism 
is falsely imagined,” that “the ordinary mind is the Tao” and 


“Sitting Quietly, Doing Nothing” 145 
that there is therefore no meaning in trying to get into accord 
with it. In the words of the Cheng-tao Ke: 


Like the empty sky it has no boundaries, 

Yet it is right in this place, ever profound and clear. 
When you seek to know it, you cannot see it. 

You cannot take hold of it, 

But you cannot lose it. 

In not being able to get it, you get it. 

When you are silent, it speaks; 

When you spcak, it is silent. 

The great gate is wide open to bestow alms, 

And no crowd is blocking the way. (34)* 


It was through seeing this that, in the moment of his satori, 
Hakuin cried out, “How wondrous! How wondrous! There is no 
birth-and-death from which one has to escape, nor is there any 
supreme knowledge after which one has to strive!” ® Or in the 
words of Hsiang-yen: 


At one stroke I forgot all my knowledge! 
There’s no use for artificial discipline, 
For, move as I will, I manifest the ancient Way.* 


Paradoxically, nothing is more artificial than the notion of 
artificiality. Try as one may, it is as impossible to go against the 
spontaneous Tao as to live in some other time than now, or some 
other place than here. When a monk asked Bankei what he 
thought of disciplining oneself to attain satori, the master said, 
“Satori stands in contrast to confusion. Since each person is the 
substance of Buddha, (in reality) there is not one point of con- 
fusion. What, then, is one going to achieve by satori?” '° 

Seeing, then, that there is no possibility of departing from the 
Tao, one is like Hsiian-chiieh’s “easygoing” man who 
8 Orategama, in Suzuki (1), vol. 1, p. 239. 


® Wu-teng Hui-yiian, 9. 
10 Bankei Kokushi Seppo. Read to the author by Professor Hasegawa. 


146 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


Neither avoids false thoughts nor seeks the true, 
For ignorance is in reality the Buddha nature, 
And this illusory, changeful, empty body is the Dharmakaya.4 


One stops trying to be spontaneous by seeing that it is unneces- 
sary to try, and then and there it can happen. The Zen masters 
often bring out this state by the device of evading a question and 
then, as the questioner turns to go, calling him suddenly by name. 
As he naturally replies, “Yes?” the master exclaims, “There it isl” 

To the Western reader it may seem that all this is a kind of 
pantheism, an attempt to wipe out conflicts by asserting that 
“everything is God.” But from the standpoint of Zen this is a 
long way short of true naturalness since it involves the use of 
the artificial concept—“everything is God” or “everything is the 
Tao.” Zen annihilates this concept by showing that it is as un- 
necessary as every other. One does not realize the spontaneous 
life by depending on the repetition of thoughts or affirmations. 
One realizes it by seeing that no such devices are necessary. Zen 
describes all means and methods for realizing the Tao as “legs 
on a snake”-utterly irrelevant attachments. 

To the logician it will of course seem that the point at which 
we have arrived is pure nonsense-as, in a way, it is. From the 
Buddhist point of view, reality itself has no meaning since it is 
not a sign, pointing to something beyond itself. To arrive at 
reality~at “suchness”~is to go beyond karma, beyond consequen- 
tial action, and to enter a life which is completely aimless. Yet 
to Zen and Taoism alike this is the very life of the universe, 
which is complete at every moment and does not need to justify 
itself by aiming at something beyond. In the words of a Zenrin 
poem: 


If you don’t believe, just look at September, look at October! 

The yellow leaves falling, falling, to fill both mountain and river 
To see this is to be like the two friends of whom another Zenrin 
poem says: 

11 Cheng-tao Ke, 1. 


“Sitting Quietly, Doing Nothing” 147 
Meeting, they laugh and laugh- 
The forest grove, the many fallen leaves! * 


To the Taoist mentality, the aimless, empty life does not suggest 
anything depressing. On the contrary, it suggests the freedom of 
clouds and mountain streams, wandering nowhere, of flowers in 
impenetrable canyons, beautiful for no one to see, and of the 
ocean surf forever washing the sand, to no end. 

Furthermore, the Zen experience is more of a conclusion than 
a premise. It is never to be used as the first step in a line of 
ethical or metaphysical reasoning, since conclusions draw to it 
rather than from it. Like the Beatific Vision of Christianity, it is 
a “which than which there is no whicher’-the true end of man- 
not a thing to be used for some other end. Philosophers do not 
easily recognize that there is a point where thinking-like boiling 
an egg-must come to a stop. To try to formulate the Zen ex- 
perience as a proposition—“everything is the Tao’-and then to 
analyze it and draw conclusions from it is to miss it completely. 
Like the Crucifixion, it is “to the Jews [the moralists] a stum- 
blingblock and to the Greeks [the logicians] foolishness.” To say 
that “everything is the Tao” almost gets the point, but just at the 
moment of getting it, the words crumble into nonsense. For we 
are here at a limit at which words break down because they 
always imply a meaning beyond themselves—and here there is no 
meaning beyond. 

Zen does not make the mistake of using the experience “all 
things are of one Suchness” as the premise for an ethic of uni- 
versal brotherhood. On the contrary, Yiian-wu says: 

If you are a real man, you may by all means drive off with the 

farmer’s ox, or grab the food from a starving man.12? 

This is only to say that Zen lies beyond the ethical standpoint, 
whose sanctions must be found, not in reality itself, but in the 
mutual agreement of human beings. When we attempt to uni- 
versalize or absolutize it, the ethical standpoint makes it im- 


12 Comment on Pi-yen Lu, 3. 


148 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


possible to exist, for we cannot live for a day without destroying 
the life of some other creature. 

If Zen is regarded as having the same function as a religion in 
the West, we shall naturally want to find some logical connection 
between its central experience and the improvement of human 
relations. But this is actually putting the cart before the horse. 
The point is rather that some such experience or way of life as 
this is the object of improved human relations. In the culture of 
the Far East the problems of human relations are the sphere of 
Confucianism rather than Zen, but since the Sung dynasty (959- 
1278) Zen has consistently fostered Confucianism and was the 
main source of the introduction of its principles into Japan. It 
saw their importance for creating the type of cultural matrix in 
which Zen could flourish without coming into conflict with social 
order, because the Confucian ethic is admittedly human and 
relative, not divine and absolute. 

Although profoundly “inconsequential,” the Zen experience 
has consequences in the sense that it may be applied in any 
direction, to any conceivable human activity, and that wherever 
it is so applied it lends an unmistakable quality to the work. The 
characteristic notes of the spontaneous life are mo chih ch’u™ 
or “going ahead without hesitation,” wu-wei, which may here 
be understood as purposelessness, and wu-shih, lack of affecta- 
tion or simplicity. 

While the Zen experience does not imply any specific course 
of action, since it has no purpose, no motivation, it turns un- 
hesitatingly to anything that presents itself to be done. Mo 
chih chu is the mind functioning without blocks, without “wob- 
bling” between alternatives, and much of Zen training consists in 
confronting the student with: dilemmas which he is expected to 
handle without stopping to deliberate and “choose.” The response 
to the situation must follow with the immediacy of sound issuing 
from the hands when they are clapped, or sparks from a flint 
when struck. The student unaccustomed to this type of response 
will at first be confused, but as he gains faith in his “original” 


“Sitting Quietly, Doing Nothing” 149 
or spontaneous mind he will not only respond with ease, but the 
responses themselves will acquire a startling appropriateness. 
This is something like the professional comedian’s gift of un- 
prepared wit which is equal to any situation. 

The master may begin a conversation with the student by 
asking a series of very ordinary questions about trivial matters, 
to which the student responds with perfect spontaneity. But 
suddenly he will say, “When the bath-water flows down the 
drain, does it turn clockwise or counter-clockwise?” As the stu- 
dent stops at the unexpectedness of the question, and perhaps 
tries to remember which way it goes, the master shouts, “Don’t 
think! Act! This way—” and whirls his hand in the air. Or, perhaps 
less helpfully, he may say, “So far you’ve answered my questions 
quite naturally and easily, but where’s your difficulty now?” 

The student, likewise, is free to challenge the master, and one 
can imagine that in the days when Zen training was less formal 
the members of Zen communities must have had enormous fun 
laying traps for each other. To some extent this type of relation- 
ship still exists, despite the great solemnity of the sanzen inter- 
view in which the koan is given and answered. The late Kozuki 
Roshi was entertaining two American monks at tea when he 
casually asked, “And what do you gentlemen know about Zen?” 
One of the monks flung his closed fan straight at the master’s 
face. All in the same instant the master inclined his head slightly 
to one side, the fan shot straight through the paper shoji behind 
him, and he burst into a ripple of laughter. 

Suzuki has translated a long letter from the Zen master Takuan 
on the relationship of Zen to the art of fencing, and this is cer- 
tainly the best literary source of what Zen means by mo chih 
ch’u, by “going straight ahead without stopping.” ** Both Takuan 
and Bankei stressed the fact that the “original” or “unborn” mind 
is constantly working miracles even in the most ordinary person. 
Even though a tree has innumerable leaves, the mind takes them 


13 Suzuki (7), pp. 73-87. Excerpts from this letter also appear in 
Suzuki (1), vol. 3, pp. 318-19, 


150 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


in all at once without being “stopped” by any one of them. Ex- 
plaining this to a visiting monk, Bankei said, “To prove that 
your mind is the Buddha mind, notice how all that I say here 
goes into you without missing a single thing, even though I don’t 
try to push it into you.”’* When heckled by an aggressive 
Nichiren monk who kept insisting that he couldn’t understand a 
word, Bankei asked him to come closer. The monk stepped for- 
ward. “Closer still,” said Bankei. The monk came forward again. 
“How well,” said Bankei, “you understand me!” ** In other words, 
our natural organism performs the most marvelously complex 
activities without the least hesitation or deliberation. Conscious 
thought is itself founded upon. its whole system of spontaneous 
functioning, for which reason there is really no alternative to 
trusting oneself completely to its working. Oneself is its work- 
ing. 

Zen is not merely a cult of impulsive action. The point of mo 
chih ch’u is not to eliminate reflective thought but to eliminate 
“blocking” in both action and thought, so that the response of 
the mind is always like a ball in a mountain stream—“one thought 
after another without hesitation.” There is something similar to 
this in the psychoanalytic practice of free association, employed 
as a technique to get rid of obstacles to the free flow of thought 
from the “unconscious.” For there is a tendency to confuse 
“blocking”-a purely obstructive mechanism-with thinking out an 
answer, but the difference between the two is easily noticed in 
such a purely “thinking out” process as adding a column of 
figures. Many people find that at certain combinations of num- 
bers, such as 8 and 5 or 7 and 6, a feeling of resistance comes up 
which halts the process. Because it is always annoying and dis- 
concerting, one tends also to block at blocking, so that the state 
turns into the kind of wobbling dither characteristic of the 
snarled feed-back system. The simplest cure is to feel free to 
block, so that one does not block at blocking. When one feels 


14 Bankei Kokushi Seppo. Read to the author by Professor Hasegawa. 
18 Tn Suzuki (10), p. 123. 


“Sitting Quietly, Doing Nothing” 151 
free to block, the blocking automatically eliminates itself. It is 
like riding a bicycle. When one starts falling to the left, one 
does not resist the fall (i.e., the block) by turning to the right. 
One turns the wheel to the left-and the balance is restored. The 
principle here is, of course, the same as getting out of the con- 
tradiction of “trying to be spontaneous” through accepting the 
“trying” as “spontaneous,” through not resisting the block. 

“Blocking” is perhaps the best translation of the Zen term 
nien" as it occurs in the phrase wu-nien, “no-thought” or, better, 
“no second thought.” Takuan points out that this is the real 
meaning of “attachment” in Buddhism, as when it is said that a 
Buddha is free from worldly attachments. It does not mean that 
he is a “stone Buddha” with no feelings, no emotions, and no 
sensations of hunger or pain. It means that he does not block at 
anything. Thus it is typical of Zen that its style of action has the 
strongest feeling of commitment, of “follow-through.” It enters 
into everything wholeheartedly and freely without having to 
keep an eye on itself. It does not confuse spirituality with think- 
ing about God while one is peeling potatoes. Zen spirituality is 
just to peel the potatoes. In the words of Lin-chi: 


When it’s time to get dressed, put on your clothes. When you must 
walk, then walk. When you must sit, then sit. Don’t have a single 
thought in your mind about seeking for Buddhahood. . . . You 
talk about being perfectly disciplined in your six senses and in all 
your actions, but in my view all this is making karma. To seek the 
Buddha (nature) and to seek the Dharma is at once to make karma 
which leads to the hells. To seek (to be) Bodhisattvas is also mak- 
ing karma, and likewise studying the sutras and commentaries. 
Buddhas and Patriarchs are people without such artificialities. . . . 
It is said everywhere that there is a Tao which must be cultivated 
and a Dharma which must be realized. What Dharma do you say 
must be realized, and what Tao cultivated? What do you lack in 
the way you are functioning right now? What will you add to where 


you are? 39° 
As another Zenrin poem says: 


16 Lin-chi Lu in Ku-tsun-hsii Yii-lu, 1. 4. 6, 11-12, 12. 


152 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


There’s nothing equal to wearing clothes and eating food. 
Outside this there are neither Buddhas nor Patriarchs.® 


This is the quality of twu-shih, of naturalness without any 
contrivances or means for being natural, such as thoughts of 
Zen, of the Tao, or of the Buddha. One does not exclude such 
thoughts; they simply fall away when seen to be unnecessary. 
“He does not linger where the Buddha is, and where there is no 
Buddha he passes right on.” *” 

For as the Zenrin says again: 


To be conscious of the original mind, the original nature- 
Just this is the great disease of Zen! @ 


As “the fish swims in the water but is unmindful of the water, the 
bird flies in the wind but knows not of the wind,” so the true life 
of Zen has no need to “raise waves when no wind is blowing,” to 
drag in religion or spirituality as something over and above life 
itself. This is why the sage Fa-yung received no more offerings 
of flowers from the birds after he had had his interview with the 
Fourth Patriarch, for his holiness no longer “stood out like a sore 
thumb.” Of such a man the Zenrin says: 


Entering the forest he moves not the grass; 
Entering the water he makes not a ripple.” 


No one notices him because he does not notice himself. 

It is often said that to be clinging to oneself is like having a 
thorn in the skin, and that Buddhism is a second thorn to extract 
the first. When it is out, both thorns are thrown away. But in the 
moment when Buddhism, when philosophy or religion, becomes 
another way of clinging to oneself through seeking a spiritual 
security, the two thorns become one~and how is it to be taken 
out? This, as Bankei said, is “wiping off blood with blood.” 
Therefore in Zen there is neither self nor Buddha to which one 
can cling, no good to gain and no evil to be avoided, no thoughts 


41 Shih Niu Tu, 8. 


“Sitting Quietly, Doing Nothing” 153 
to be eradicated and no mind to be purified, no body to perish 


and no soul to be saved. At one blow this entire framework of 
abstractions is shattered to fragments. As the Zenrin says: 


To save life it must be destroyed. 
When utterly destroyed, one dwells for the first time in peace.‘ 


One word settles heaven and earth; 
One sword levels the whole world.‘ 


Of this “one sword” Lin-chi said: 


If a man cultivates the Tao, the Tao will not work—on all sides evil 

conditions will head up competitively. But when the sword of wis- 

dom [prajna] comes out there’s not one thing left.1* + 

The “sword of prajna” which cuts away abstraction is that 
“direct pointing” whereby Zen avoids the entanglements of 
religiosity and goes straight to the heart. Thus when the Gov- 
ernor of Lang asked Yao-shan, “What is the Tao?” the master 
pointed upwards to the sky and downwards to a water jug be- 
side him. Asked for an explanation, he replied: “A cloud in the 
sky and water in the jug.” 


18 In Ku-tsun-hsti Yii-lu, 1. 4. 13. 


Three 


ZA-ZEN AND THE KOAN 


There is a saying in Zen that “original realization is marvelous 
practice” (Japanese, honsho myoshu*). The meaning is that no 
distinction is to be made between the realization of awakening 
(satori) and the cultivation of Zen in meditation and action. 
Whereas it might be supposed that the practice of Zen is a means 
to the end of awakening, this is not so. For the practice of Zen 
is not the true practice so long as it has an end in view, and when 
it has no end in view it is awakening-the aimless, self-sufficient 
life of the “eternal now.” To practice with an end in view is to 
have one eye on the practice and the other on the end, which is 
lack of concentration, lack of sincerity. To put it in another way: 
one does not practice Zen to become a Buddha; one practices it 
because one is a Buddha from the beginning-and this “original 
realization” is the starting point of the Zen life. Original realiza- 
tion is the “body” (¢’i’) and the marvelous practice the “use” 
(yung °), and the two correspond respectively to prajna, wisdom, 
and karuna, the compassionate activity of the awakened Bodhi- 
sattva in the world of birth-and-death. 

In the two preceding chapters we discussed the original real- 
ization. In this and the one that follows we turn to the practice 
or activity which flows from it-firstly, to the life of meditation 
and, secondly, to the life of everyday work and recreation. 

We have seen that-whatever may have been the practice of 
the T’ang masters-the modern Zen communities, both Soto and 
Rinzai, attach the highest importance to meditation or “sitting 
Zen” (za-zen). It may seem both strange and unreasonable that 
strong and intelligent men should simply sit still for hours on 
end. The Western mentality feels that such things are not only 
unnatural but a great waste of valuable time, however useful as 

154 


Za-zen and the Koan 155 


a discipline for inculcating patience and fortitude. Although the 
West has its own contemplative tradition in the Catholic Church, 
the life of “sitting and looking” has lost its appeal, for no religion 
is valued which does not “improve the world,” and it is hard to 
see how the world can be improved by keeping still. Yet it should 
be obvious that action without wisdom, without clear aware- 
ness of the world as it really is, can never improve anything. 
Furthermore, as muddy water is best cleared by leaving it alone, 
it could be argued that those who sit quietly and do nothing are 
making one of the best possible contributions to a world in 
turmoil. 

There is, indeed, nothing unnatural in long periods of quiet 
sitting. Cats do it; even dogs and other more nervous animals do 
it. So-called primitive peoples do it-American Indians, and 
peasants of almost all nations. The art is most difficult for those 
who have developed the sensitive intellect to such a point that 
they cannot help making predictions about the future, and so 
must be kept in a constant whirl of activity to forestall them. 
But it would seem that to be incapable of sitting and watching 
with the mind completely at rest is to be incapable of experi- 
encing the world in which we live to the full. For one does not 
know the world simply in thinking about it and doing about it. 
One must first experience it more directly, and prolong the ex- 
perience without jumping to conclusions. 

The relevance of za-zen to Zen is obvious when it is remem- 
bered that Zen is seeing reality directly, in its “suchness.” To see 
the world as it is concretely, undivided by categories and ab- 
stractions, one must certainly look at it with a mind which is not 
thinking-which is to say, forming symbols—about it. Za-zen is 
not, therefore, sitting with a blank mind which excludes all the 
impressions of the inner and outer senses. It is not “concentra- 
tion” in the usual sense of restricting the attention to a single 
sense object, such as a point of light or the tip of one’s nose. It 
is simply a quiet awareness, without comment, of whatever 
happens to be here and now. This awareness is attended by the 


156 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


most vivid sensation of “nondifference” between oneself and the 
external world, between the mind and its contents-the various 
sounds, sights, and other impressions of the surrounding environ- 
ment. Naturally, this sensation does not arise by trying to ac- 
quire it; it just comes by itself when one is sitting and watching 
without any purpose in mind-even the purpose of getting rid of 
purpose. 

In the sodo or zendo, monks’ hall or meditation hall, of a Zen 
community there is, of course, nothing particularly distracting in 
the external surroundings. There is a long room with wide plat- 
forms down either side where the monks both sleep and meditate. 
The platforms are covered with tatami, thick floor-mats of straw, 
and the monks sit in two rows facing one another across the room. 
The silence which prevails is deepened rather than broken by 
occasional sounds that float up from a near-by village, by the 
intermittent ringing of soft-toned bells from other parts of the 
monastery, and by the chatter of birds in the trees. Other than 
this therc is only the feel of the cold, clear mountain air and the 
“woody” smell of a special kind of incense. 

Much importance is attached to the physical posture of za-zen. 
The monks sit on firmly padded cushions with legs crossed and 
feet soles-upward upon the thighs. The hands rest upon the lap, 
the left over the right, with palms upward and thumbs touching 
one another. The body is held erect, though not stiffy, and the 
eyes are left open so that their gaze falls upon the floor a few feet 
ahead. The breathing is regulated so as to be slow without strain, 
with the stress upon the out-breath, and its impulse from the 
belly rather than the chest. This has the effect of shifting the 
body’s center of gravity to the abdomen so that the whole posture 
has a sense of firmness, of being part of the ground upon which 
one is sitting. The slow, easy breathing from the belly works 
upon the consciousness like bellows, and gives it a still, bright 
clarity. The beginner is advised to accustom himself to the still- 
ness by doing nothing more than counting his breaths from one 
to ten, over and over again, until the sensation of sitting without 
comment becomes effortless and natural. 


Za-zen and the Koan 157 


While the monks are thus seated, two attendants walk slowly 
back and forth along the floor between the platforms, each carry- 
ing a keisaku or “warning” stick, round at one end and flattened 
at the other-a symbol of the Bodhisattva Manjusri’s sword of 
prajna. As soon as they see a monk going to sleep, or sitting in 
an incorrect posture, they stop before him, bow ceremoniously, 
and beat him on the shoulders. It is said that this is not “punish- 
ment” but an “invigorating massage” to take the stiffness out of 
the shoulder muscles and bring the mind back to a state of alert- 
ness. However, monks with whom I have discussed this practice 
seem to have the same wryly humorous attitude about it which 
one associates with the usual corporal disciplines of boys’ board- 
ing schools. Furthermore, the sodo regulations say, “At the time 
of morning service, the dozing ones are to be severely dealt with 
the keisaku.” * 

At intervals, the sitting posture is interrupted, and the monks 
fall into ranks for a swift march around the fioor between the 
platforms to keep themselves from sluggishness. The periods of 
za-zen are also interrupted for work in the monastery grounds, 
cleaning the premises, services in the main shrine or “Buddha 
hall,” and other duties—as well as for meals and short hours of 
sleep. At certain times of year za-zen is kept up almost con- 
tinuously from 3:30 a.m. until 10 p.m., and these long periods 
are called sesshin, or “collecting the mind.” Every aspect of the 
monks’ lives is conducted according to a precise, though not 
ostentatious, ritual which gives the atmosphere of the sodo a 
slightly military air. The rituals are signaled and accompanied by 
about a dozen different kinds of bells, clappers, and wooden 
gongs, struck in various rhythms to announce the times for za- 
zen, meals, services, lectures, or sanzen interviews with the 
master. 


1In Suzuki (5), p. 99. The regulations also say, “When submitting to the 
keisaku, courteously fold your Bands and bow; do not permit any egoistic 
thoughts to assert themselves and cherish anger.” The point seems to be 
that the keisaku has two uses—one for shoulder massage and another, how- 
ever politely worded, for punishment. It is of interest that Bankei abolished 
this practice in his own community, on the ground that a man is no less a 
Buddha when asleep than when awake. 


158 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


The ritualistic or ceremonious style is so characteristic of Zen 
that it may need some explanation in a culture which has come 
to associate it with affectation or superstition. In Buddhism the 
four principal activities of man—walking, standing, sitting, and 
lying-are called the four “dignities,” since they are the postures 
assumed by the Buddha nature in its human (nirmanakaya) 
body. The ritualistic style of conducting one’s everyday activities 
is therefore a celebration of the fact that “the ordinary man is a 
Buddha,” and is, furthermore, a style that comes almost naturally 
to a person who is doing everything with total presence of mind. 
Thus if in something so simple and trivial as lighting a cigarette 
one is fully aware, seeing the flame, the curling smoke, and the 
regulation of the breath as the most important things in the 
universe, it will seem to an observer that the action has a ritual- 
istic style. 

This attitude of “acting as a Buddha” is particularly stressed in 
the Soto School, where both za-zen and the round of daily ac- 
tivities are not at all seen as means to an end but as the actual 
realization of Buddhahood. As Dogen says in the Shobogenzo: 


Without looking forward to tomorrow every moment, you must 
think only of this day and this hour. Because tomorrow is difficult 
and unfixed and difficult to know, you must think of following the 
Buddhist way while you live today. . . . You must concentrate on 
Zen practice without wasting time, thinking that there is only this 
day and this hour. After that it becomes truly easy. You must forget 
about the good and bad of your nature, the strength or weakness 
of your power.? 


In za-zen there must be no thought either of aiming at satori or 
of avoiding birth-and-death, no striving for anything in future 
time. 
If life comes, this is life. If death comes, this is death. There is no 
reason for your being under their control. Don’t put any hope in 


them. This life and death are the life of the Buddha. If you try to 
throw them away in denial, you lose the life of the Buddha.* 


t Zuimonki chapter. In Masunaga (1), p. 42. 
' Shoji chapter. Ibid., p. 44. 


Za-zen and the Koan 159 


The “three worlds” of past, present, and future are not, as is 
commonly supposed, stretched out to inaccessible distances. 


The so-called past is the top of the heart; the present is the top of 
the fist; and the future is the back of the brain.‘ 


All time is here in this body, which is the body of Buddha. The 
past exists in its memory and the future in its anticipation, and 
both of these are now, for when the world is inspected directly 
and clearly past and future times are nowhere to be found. 

This is also the teaching of Bankei: 


You are primarily Buddhas; you are not going to be Buddhas for 
the first time. There is not an iota of a thing to be called error in 
your inborn mind. . . . If you have the least desire to be better 
than you actually are, if you hurry up to the slightest degree in 
search of something, you are already going against the Unborn.5 


Such a view of Zen practice is therefore somewhat difficult to 
reconcile with the discipline which now prevails in the Rinzai 
School, and which consists in “passing” a graduated series of ap- 
proximately fifty koan problems. Many of the Rinzai masters are 
most emphatic about the necessity of arousing a most intense 
spirit of seeking—a compelling sense of “doubt” whereby it be- 
comes almost impossible to forget the koan one is trying to 
solve. Naturally, this leads to a good deal of comparison between 
the degrees of attainment of various individuals, and a very 
definite and formal recognition is attached to final “graduation” 
from the process. 

Since the formal details of the koan discipline are one of the 
few actual secrets remaining in the Buddhist world, it is difficult 
to appraise it fairly if one has not undergone the training. On the 
other hand, if one has undergone it one is obliged not to talk 
about it-save in vague generalities. The Rinzai School has always 
forbidden the publication of formally acceptable answers to the 
various koan because the whole point of the discipline is to dis- 


* Kenbutsu chapter. Ibid., p. 45. 
®In Suzuki (10), pp. 177-78. 


160 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


cover them for oneself, by intuition. To know the answers with- 
out having so discovered them would be like studying the map 
without taking the journey. Lacking the actual shock of rec- 
ognition, the bare answers seem flat and disappointing, and 
obviously no competent master would be deceived by anyone who 
gave them without genuine feeling. 

There is no reason, however, why the process should actually 
involve all the silliness about “grades of attainment,” about who 
has “passed” and who has not, or about who is or is not a “gen- 
uine” Buddha by these formal standards, All well-established 
religious institutions are beset by this kind of nonsense, and they 
generally boil down to a kind of aestheticism, an excessive pas- 
sion for the cultivation of a special “style” whose refinements 
distinguish the sheep from the goats. By such standards the 
liturgical aesthete can distinguish Roman from Anglican Catholic 
priests, confusing the mannerisms of traditional atmosphere with 
the supernatural marks of true or false participation in the 
apostolic succession. Sometimes, however, the cultivation of a 
traditional style may be rather admirable, as when a school of 
craftsmen or artists hands down from generation to generation 
certain trade secrets or technical refinements whereby objects of 
peculiar beauty are manufactured. Even so, this very easily be- 
comes a rather affected and self-conscious discipline, and at that 
moment all its “Zen” is lost. 

The koan system as it exists today is largely the work of Hakuin 
(1685-1768), a formidable and immensely versatile master, who 
gave it a systematic organization so that the complete course of 
Zen study in the Rinzai School is divided into six stages. There 
are, first, five groups of koan ¢: 

1. Hosshin, or Dharmakaya koan, whereby one “enters into the 
frontier gate of Zen.” 

2. Kikan, or “cunning barrier” koan, having to do with the 
active expression of the state realized in the first group. 

3. Gonsen, or “investigation of words” koan, presumably hav- 
ing to do with the expression of Zen understanding in speech. 


Za-zen and the Koan 161 


4, Nanto, or “hard to penetrate” koan. 

5. Goi, or “Five Ranks” koan, based on the five relationships 
of “lord” and “servant” or of “principle” (li) and “thing-event” 
(shih), wherein Zen is related to the Hua-yen or Avatamsaka 
philosophy. 

The sixth stage is a study of the Buddhist precepts and the 
regulations of the monk’s life (vinaya) in the light of Zen under- 
standing.® 

Normally, this course of training takes about thirty years. By 
no means all Zen monks complete the whole training. This is re- 
quired only of those who are to receive their master’s inka or 
“seal of approval” so that they themselves may become masters 
(roshi), thoroughly versed in all the “skillful means” (upaya) 
for teaching Zen to others. Like so many other things of this 
kind, the system is as good as one makes it, and its graduates are 
both tall Buddhas and short Buddhas. It should not be assumed 
that a person who has passed a koan, or even many koan, is 
necessarily a “transformed” human being whose character and 
way of life are radically different from what they were before. 
Nor should it be assumed that satori is a single, sudden leap 
from the common consciousness to “complete, unexcelled awaken- 
ing” (anuttara samyak sambodhi). Satori really designates the 
sudden and intuitive way of seeing into anything, whether it be 
remembering a forgotten name or seeing into the deepest prin- 
ciples of Buddhism. One seeks and seeks, but cannot find. One 
then gives up, and the answer comes by itself. Thus there may 
be many occasions of satori in the course of training, great satori 
and little satori, and the solution of many of the koan depends 
upon nothing more sensational than a kind of “knack” for under- 
standing the Zen style of handling Buddhist principles. 

Western ideas of Buddhist attainments arc all too often dis- 
torted by the “mysterious East” approach, and by the sensational 
fantasies so widely circulated in theosophical writings during the 


® This outline is based on information given in a conference at the American 
Academy of Asian Studies by Ruth Sasaki. 


162 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


decades just before and after the turn of the century. Such 
fantasies were based not upon a first-hand study of Buddhism but 
on literal readings of mythological passages in the sutras, where 
the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas are embellished with innumerable 
miraculous and superhuman attributes. Thus there must be no 
confusion between Zen masters and theosophical “mahatmas’— 
the glamorous “Masters of Wisdom” who live in the mountain 
fastnesses of Tibet and practice the arts of occultism. Zen masters 
are quite human. They get sick and die; they know joy and sor- 
row; they have bad tempers or other little “weaknesses” of 
character just like anyone else, and they are not above falling in 
love and entering into a fully human relationship with the op- 
posite sex. The perfection of Zen is to be perfectly and simply 
human. The difference of the adept in Zen from the ordinary 
run of men is that the latter are, in one way or another, at odds 
with their own humanity, and are attempting to be angels or 
demons.’ A doka poem by Ikkyu says: 


We eat, excrete, sleep, and get up; 
This is our world. 

All we have to do after that- 

Is to die® 


Koan training involves typically Asian concepts of the relation 
between master and pupil which are quite unlike ours. For in 
Asian cultures this is a peculiarly sacred relationship in which 
the master is held to become responsible for the karma of the 


7 One can hardly exaggerate the importance of the great Buddhist symbol 
of the bhavachakra, the Wheel Becoming. The angels and demons occupy the 
highest and lowest positions, the positions of perfect happiness and perfect 
frustration. These positions lie on the opposite sides of a circle because they 
lead to each other. They represent not so much literal beings as our own 
ideals and terrors, since the Wheel is actually a map of the human mind. 
The human position lies in the middle, i.e., at the left of the Wheel, and it 
is only from this position that one may become a Buddha. Human birth is 
herchte redorded, as unusually fortunate, but this is not to be confused with 
the physical event, for one is not actually “born into the human world” until 
one has fully accepted one’s humanity. 

® Translated by R. H. Blyth in “Ikkyu’s Doka,” The Young East, vol. 2, no. 7. 
(Tokyo, 1953. ) 


Za-zen and the Koan 163 


pupil. The pupil, in turn, is expected to accord absolute obedience 
and authority to the master, and to hold him in almost higher 
respect than his own father-and in Asian countries this is saying 
a great deal. To a young Zen monk the roshi therefore stands as 
a symbol of the utmost patriarchal authority, and he usually 
plays the role to perfection-being normally a man advanced in 
years, fierce and “tigerish” in aspect, and, when formally robed 
and seated for the sanzen interview, a person of supreme presence 
and dignity. In this role he constitutes a living symbol of every- 
thing that makes one afraid of being spontaneous, everything 
that prompts the most painful and awkward self-consciousness. 
He assumes this role as an upaya, a skillful device, for chal- 
lenging the student to find enough “nerve” to be perfectly nat- 
ural in the presence of this formidable archetype. If he can do 
this, he is a free man whom no one on earth can embarrass. It 
must be borne in mind, too, that in Japanese culture the adolescent 
and the youth are peculiarly susceptible to ridicule, which is 
freely used as a means of conforming the young to social con- 
vention. 

To the normal Asian concept of the master-pupil relationship, 
Zen adds something of its own in the sense that it leaves the 
formation of the relationship entirely to the initiative of the 
pupil. The basic position of Zen is that it has nothing to say, 
nothing to teach. The truth of Buddhism is so self-evident, so 
obvious that it is, if anything, concealed by explaining it. There- 
fore the master does not “help” the student in any way, since 
helping would actually be hindering. On the contrary, he goes 
out of his way to put obstacles and barriers in the student’s path. 
Thus Wu-men’s comments on the various koan in the Wu-men 
kuan are intentionally misleading, the koan as a whole are called 
“wisteria vines” or “entanglements,” and particular groups “cun- 
ning barriers” (kikan) and “hard to penetrate” (nanto). This is 
like encouraging the growth of a hedge by pruning, for obviously 
the basic intention is to help, but the Zen student does not really 
know Zen unless he finds it out for himself. The Chinese proverb 


164 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


“What comes in through the gate is not family treasure” is un- 
derstood in Zen to mean that what someone else tells you is not 
your own knowledge. Satori, as Wu-men explained, comes only 
after one has exhausted one’s thinking, only when one is con- 
vinced that the mind cannot grasp itself. In the words of an- 


other of Ikkyu’s doka: 


A mind to search elsewhere 

For the Buddha, 

Is foolishness 

In the very centre of foolishness. 


For 


My self of long ago, 

In nature non-existent; 
Nowhere to go when dead, 
Nothing at all.® 


The preliminary hosshin type of koan begins, therefore, to 
obstruct the student by sending him off in the direction exactly 
opposite to that in which he should look. Only it does it rather 
cleverly, so as to conceal the stratagem. Everyone knows that 
the Buddha nature is “within” oneself and is not to be sought 
outside, so that no student would be fooled by being told to seek 
it by going to India or by reading a certain sutra. On the con- 
trary, he is told to look for it in himself! Worse still, he is en- 
couraged to seek it with the whole energy of his being, never 
giving up his quest by day or night, whether actually in za-zen 
or whether working or eating. He is encouraged, in fact, to make 
a total fool of himself, to whirl round and round like a dog trying 
to catch up with its own tail. 

Thus normal first koan are Hui-neng’s “Original Face,” Chao- 
chou’s “Wu,” or Hakuin’s “One Hand.” At the first sanzen inter- 
view, the roshi instructs the reluctantly accepted student to dis- 
cover his “original face” or “aspect,” that is, his basic nature, as it 


®R. H. Blyth, ibid., vol. 3, no. 9, p. 14, and vol. 2, no. 2, p. 7. 


Za-zen and the Koan 165 


was before his father and mother conceived him. He is told to 
return when he has discovered it, and to give some proof of dis- 
covery. In the meantime he is under no circumstance to discuss 
the problem with others or to seek their help. Joining the other 
monks in the sodo, the jikijitsu or “head monk” will probably 
instruct him in the rudiments of za-zen, showing him how to sit, 
and perhaps encouraging him to return to the roshi for sanzen 
as soon as possible, and to lose no opportunity for getting the 
proper view of his koan. Pondering the problem of his “original 
face,” he therefore tries and tries to imagine what he was be- 
fore he was born, or, for that matter, what he now is at the very 
center of his being, what is the basic reality of his existence apart 
from his extension in time and space. 

He soon discovers that the roshi has no patience whatever with 
philosophical or other wordy answers. For the roshi wants to be 
“shown.” He wants something concrete, some solid proof. The 
student therefore begins to produce such “specimens of reality” 
as lumps of rock, leaves and branches, shouts, gestures of the 
hands-anything and everything he can imagine. But all is reso- 
lutely rejected until the student, unable to imagine anything 
more, is brought to his wits’ end—at which point he is of course 
beginning to get on the right track. He “knows that he doesn’t 
know.” 

When the beginning koan is Chao-chou’s “Wu,” the student is 
asked to find out why Chao-chou answered “Wu” or “None” to 
the question, “Does a dog have the Buddha nature?” The roshi 
asks to be shown this “nothing.” A Chinese proverb says that “A 
single hand does not make a clap,” * and therefore Hakuin asked, 
“What is the sound of one hand?” Can you hear what is not mak- 
ing a noise? Can you get any sound out of this one object which 
has nothing to hit? Can you get any “knowledge” of your own 
real nature? What an idiotic question! 

By such means the student is at last brought to a point of 
feeling completely stupid—as if he were encased in a huge block 
of ice, unable to move or think. He just knows nothing; the whole 


166 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


world, including himself, is an enormous mass of pure doubt. 
Everything he hears, touches, or sees is as incomprehensible as 
“nothing” or “the sound of one hand.” At sanzen he is perfectly 
dumb. He walks or sits all day in a “vivid daze,” conscious of 
everything going on around him, responding mechanically to 
circumstances, but totally baffled by everything. 

After some time in this state there comes a moment when the 
block of ice suddenly collapses, when this vast lump of unintel- 
ligibility comes instantly alive. The problem of who or what it is 
becomes transparently absurd—a question which, from the be- 
ginning, meant nothing whatever. There is no one left to ask 
himself the question or to answer it. Yet at the same time this 
transparent meaninglessness can laugh and talk, eat and drink, 
run up and down, look at the earth and sky, and all this without 
any sense of there being a problem, a sort of psychological knot, 
in the midst of it. There is no knot because the “mind seeking to 
know the mind” or the “self seeking to control the self” has been 
defeated out of existence and exposed for the abstraction which 
it always was. And when that tense knot vanishes there is no 
more sensation of a hard core of selfhood standing over against 
the rest of the world. In this state, the roshi needs only a single 
look at the student to know that he is now ready to begin his Zen 
training in earnest. 

It is not quite the paradox which it seems to say that Zen train- 
ing can begin only when it has been finished. For this is simply 
the basic Mahayana principle that prajna leads to karuna, that 
awakening is not truly attained unless it also implies the life of 
the Bodhisattva, the manifestation of the “marvelous use” of the 
Void for the benefit of all sentient beings. 

At this point the roshi begins to present the student with koan 
which ask for impossible feats of action or judgment, such as: 

“Take the four divisions of Tokyo out of your sleeve.” 

“Stop that ship on the distant ocean.” 

“Stop the booming of the distant bell.” 


Za-zen and the Koan 167 


“A girl is crossing the street. Is she the younger or the older 
sister?” 

Such koan are rather more obviously “tricky” than the basic 
introductory problems, and show the student that what are 
dilemmas for thought present no barriers to action. A paper 
handkerchief easily becomes the four divisions of Tokyo, and 
the student solves the problem of the younger or older sister by 
mincing across the room like a girl. For in her absolute “such- 
ness” the girl is just that; she is only relatively “sister,” “older,” 
or “younger.” One can perhaps understand why a man who had 
practiced za-zen for eight years told R. H. Blyth that “Zen is 
just a trick of words,” for on the principle of extracting a thorn 
with a thorn Zen is extricating people from the tangle in which 
they find themselves from confusing words and ideas with 
reality. 

The continued practice of za-zen now provides the student 
with a clear, unobstructed mind into which he can toss the koan 
like a pebble into a pool and simply watch to see what his mind 
does with it. As he concludes each koan, the roshi usually re- 
quires that he present a verse from the Zenrin Kushu which ex- 
presses the point of the koan just solved. Other books are also 
used, and the late Sokei-an Sasaki, working in the United States, 
found that an admirable manual for this purpose was Alice in 
Wonderland! As the work goes on, crucial koan alternate with 
subsidiary koan which explore the implications of the former, 
and give the student a thorough working acquaintance with 
every theme in the Buddhist view of the universe, presenting 
the whole body of understanding in such a way that he knows it 
in his bones and nerves. By such means he learns to respond 
with it instantly and unwaveringly in the situations of everyday 
life. 

The final group of koan are concerned with the “Five Ranks” 
(go-i)-a schematic view of the relations between relative knowl- 


edge and absolute knowledge, thing-events (shih) and under- 


168 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


lying principle (li). The originator of the scheme was T’ung- 
shan (807-869), but it arises from the contacts of Zen with the 
Hua-yen (Japanese, Kegon) School, and the doctrine of the 
Five Ranks is closely related to that of the fourfold Dharma- 
dhatu.?° The Ranks are often represented in terms of the relative 
positions of lord and servant or host and guest, standing re- 
spectively for the underlying principle and the thing-events. 
Thus we have: 

1. The lord looks down at the servant. 

2. The servant looks up at the lord. 

3. The lord. 

4, The servant. 

5. The lord and the servant converse together. 
Suffice it to say that the first four correspond to the four Dhar- 
madhatu of the Hua-yen School, though the relationship is some- 
what complex, and the fifth to “naturalness.” In other words, one 
may regard the universe, the Dharmadnatu, from a number of 
equally valid points of view-as many, as one, as both one and 
many, and as neither one nor many. But the final position of Zen 
is that it does not take any special viewpoint, and yet is free to 
take every viewpoint according to the circumstances. In the 
words of Lin-chi: 


Sometimes I take away the man (i.e., the subject) but do not take 
away the circumstances (i.e., the object). Sometimes I take away 
the circumstances but do not take away the man. Sometimes I take 
away both the man and the circumstances. Sometimes I take away 
neither the man nor the circumstances. / 


And sometimes, he might have added, I just do nothing special 
(wu-shih ) 2? 

Koan training comes to its conclusion in the stage of perfect 
naturalness of freedom in both the absolute and the relative 


10 For details, see above, pp. 160f. 

1 In Ku-tsun-hsié Yii-lu, 1. 4, pp. 3-4. 

12 A detailed but extremely confusing account of the Five Ranks will be found 
in Dumoulin and Sasaki (1), pp. 25-29. 


Za-zen and the Koan 169 


worlds, but because this freedom is not opposed to the conven- 
tional order, but is rather a freedom which “upholds the world” 
(lokasamgraha), the final phase of study is the relationship of 
Zen to the rules of social and monastic life. As Yun-men once 
asked, “In such a wide world, why answer the bell and put on 
ceremonial robes?” 1? Another master’s answer in quite a dif- 
ferent context applies well here-“If there is any reason for it you 
may cut off my head!” For the moral act is significantly moral 
only when it is free, without the compulsion of a reason or neces- 
sity. This is also the deepest meaning of the Christian doctrine 
of free will, for to act “in union with God” is to act, not from the 
constraint of fear or pride, nor from hope of reward, but with the 
baseless love of the “unmoved mover.” 

To say that the koan system has certain dangers or drawbacks 
is only to say that anything can be misused. It is a highly 
sophisticated and even institutionalized technique, and there- 
fore lends itself to affectation and artificiality. But so does any 
technique, even when so untechnical as Bankei’s method of no 
method. This, too, can become a fetish. Yet it is important to be 
mindful of the points at which the drawbacks are most likely to 
arise, and it would seem that in koan training there are two. 

The first is to insist that the koan is the “only way” to a gen- 
uine realization of Zen. Of course, one may beg the question by 
saying that Zen, over and above the experience of awakening, is 
precisely the style of handling Buddhism which the koan em- 
body. But in this case the Soto School is not Zen, and no Zen 
is to be found anywhere in the world outside the particular tradi- 
tion of the Rinzai branch. So defined, Zen has no universality 
and becomes as exotic and culturally conditioned as No drama 
or the practice of Chinese calligraphy. From the standpoint of 
the West, such Zen will appeal only to fanciers of “Nipponery,” 
to romanticists who like to play at being Japanese. Not that there 
is anything inherently “bad” in such romanticism, for there are 
no such things as “pure” cultures, and the borrowing of other 


13 Wu-men kuan, 16. 


170 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


people’s styles always adds to the variety and spice of life. But 
Zen is so much more than a cultural refinement. 

The second, and more serious, drawback can arise from the 
opposition of satori to the intense “feeling of doubt” which some 
koan exponents so deliberately encourage. For this is to foster a 
dualistic satori. To say that the depth of the satori is proportional 
to the intensity of seeking and striving which precede it is to 
confuse satori with its purely emotional adjuncts. In other words, 
if one wants to feel exhilaratingly light-footed, it is always pos- 
sible to go around for some time with lead in one’s shoes—and 
then take them off. The sense of relief will certainly be propor- 
tional to the length of time such shoes have been wom, and to 
the weight of the lead. This is equivalent to the old trick of 
religious revivalists who give their followers a tremendous emo- 
tional uplift by first implanting an acute sense of sin, and then 
relieving it through faith in Jesus. But such “uplifts” do not last, 
and it was of such a satori that Yiin-feng said, “That monk who 
has any satori goes right into hell like a flying arrow.” ™* 

Awakening almost necessarily involves a sense of relief be- 
cause it brings to an end the habitual psychological cramp of 
trying to grasp the mind with the mind, which in turn generates 
the ego with all its conflicts and defenses. In time, the sense of 
relief wears off—-but not the awakening, unless one has confused 
it with the sense of relief and has attempted to exploit it by in- 
dulging in ecstasy. Awakening is thus only incidentally pleasant 
or ecstatic, only at first an experience of intense emotional re- 
lease. But in itself it is just the ending of an artificial and absurd 
use of the mind. Above and beyond that it is wu-shih-nothing 
special-since the ultimate content of awakening is never a par- 
ticular object of knowledge or experience. The Buddhist doctrine 
of the “Four Invisibles” is that the Void (sunya) is to a Buddha 
as water to a fish, air to a man, and the nature of things to the 
deluded-beyond conception. 


14 Ku-tsun-hsii Yii-lu, 41. 


Za-zen and the Koan 171 


It should be obvious that what we are, most substantially and 
fundamentally, will never be a distinct object of knowledge. 
Whatever we can know-life and death, light and darkness, solid 
and empty-will be the relative aspects of something as incon- 
ceivable as the color of space. Awakening is not to know what this 
reality is. As a Zenrin poem says: 


As butterflies come to the newly planted flowers, 
Bodhidharma says, “I know not.” 9 


Awakening is to know what reality is not. It is to cease identify- 
ing oneself with any object of knowledge whatsoever. Just as 
every assertion about the basic substance or energy of reality 
must be meaningless, any assertion as to what “I am” at the very 
roots of my being must also be the height of folly. Delusion is 
the false metaphysical premise at the root of common sense; it is 
the average man’s unconscious ontology and epistemology, his 
tacit assumption that he is a “something.” The assumption that “I 
am nothing” would, of course, be equally wrong since something 
and nothing, being and non-being, are related concepts, and be- 
long equally to the “known.” 

One method of muscular relaxation is to begin by increasing 
tension in the muscles so as to have a clear feeling of what not 
to do.1* In this sense there is some point in using the initial koan 
as a means of intensifying the mind’s absurd effort to grasp itself. 
But to identify satori with the consequent feeling of relief, with 
the sense of relaxation, is quite misleading, for the satori is the 
letting go and not the fecling of it. The conscious aspect of the 
Zen life is not, therefore, satori-not the “original mind’-but 
everything one is left free to do and to see and feel when the 
cramp in the mind has been released. 

From this standpoint Bankei’s simple trust in the “Unborn 
mind” and even Shinran’s view of Nembutsu are also entrances 
to satori. To “let go” it is not always necessary to wear out the 


15 See Edmund Jacobson, Progressive Relaxation. (Chicago, 1938.) 


172 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


attempt to grasp until it becomes intolerable. As against this 
violent way there is also a judo-a “gentle way,” the way of seeing 
that the mind, the basic reality, remains spontaneous and un- 
grasped whether one tries to grasp it or not. One’s own doing or 
not doing drop away by sheer irrelevance. To think that one 
must grasp or not grasp, let go or not let go, is only to foster the 
illusion that the ego is real, and that its machinations are an 
effective obstacle to the Tao. Beside the spontaneous functioning 
of the “Unborn mind” these efforts or non-efforts are strictly null. 
In the more imagistic language of Shinran, one has only to hear 
of the “saving vow” of Amitabha and to say his Name, the Nem- 
butsu, even just once without concern as to whether one has faith 
or not, or as to whether one is desireless or not. All such concern 
is the pride of the ego. In the words of the Shin-shu mystic Kichi- 
bei: 


When all! the idea of self-power based upon moral values and dis- 
ciplinary measures is purged, there is nothing left in you that will 
declare itself to be the hearer, and just because of this you do not 
miss anything you hear.’$ 


So long as one thinks about listening, one cannot hear clearly, 
and so long as one thinks about trying or not trying to let go of 
oneself, one cannot let go. Yet whether one thinks about listening 
or not, the ears are hearing just the same, and nothing can stop 
the sound from reaching them. 

The advantage of the koan method is perhaps that, for general 
purposes, the other way is too subtle, and too easily subject to 
misinterpretation—especially by monks who might all too readily 
use it as an excuse for loafing around the monastery while living 
off the donations of the devout laity. This is almost certainly why 
the emphasis of the T’ang masters on “not-seeking” gave way to 
the more energetic use of the koan as a means of exhausting the 
strength of the egoistic will. Bankei’s Zen without method or 
means offers no basis for a school or institution, since the monks 


16 In Suzuki (10), p. 130. 


Za-zen and the Koan 173 


may just as well go their way and take up farming or fishing. As 
a result no external sign of Zen is left; there is no longer any 
finger pointing at the moon of Truth—and this is necessary for 
the Bodhisattva’s task of delivering all beings, even though it 
tuns the risk of mistaking the finger for the moon. 


Four 


ZEN IN THE ARTS 


Happily, it is possible for us not only to hear about Zen but also 
to see it. Since “one showing is worth a hundred sayings,” the 
expression of Zen in the arts gives us one of the most direct ways 
of understanding it. This is the more so because the art forms 
which Zen has created are not symbolic in the same way as other 
types of Buddhist art, or as is “religious” art as a whole. The 
favorite subjects of Zen artists, whether painters or poets, are 
what we should call natural, concrete, and secular things. Even 
when they turn to the Buddha, or to the Patriarchs and masters 
of Zen, they depict them in a peculiarly down-to-earth and hu- 
man way. Furthermore, the arts of Zen are not merely or pri- 
marily representational. Even in painting, the work of art is 
considered not only as representing nature but as being itself a 
work of nature. For the very technique involves the art of artless- 
ness, or what Sabro Hasegawa has called the “controlled acci- 
dent,” so that paintings are formed as naturally as the rocks and 
grasses which they depict. 

This does not mean that the art forms of Zen are left to mere 
chance, as if one were to dip a snake in ink and let it wiggle 
around on a sheet of paper. The point is rather that for Zen 
there is no duality, no conflict between the natural element of 
chance and the human element of control. The constructive pow- 
ers of the human mind are no more artificial than the formative 
actions of plants or bees, so that from the standpoint of Zen it 
is no contradiction to say that artistic technique is discipline in 
spontaneity and spontaneity in discipline. 

The art forms of the Western world arise from spiritual and 
philosophical traditions in which spirit is divided from nature, 
and comes down from heaven to work upon it as an intelligent 

174 


Zen in the Arts 175 


energy upon an inert and recalcitrant stuff. Thus Malraux speaks 
always of the artist “conquering” his medium as our explorers 
and scientists also speak of conquering mountains or conquer- 
ing space. To Chinese and Japanese ears these are grotesque ex- 
pressions. For when you climb it is the mountain as much as your 
own legs which lifts you upwards, and when you paint it is the 
brush, ink, and paper which determine the result as much as your 
own hand. 

Taoism, Confucianism, and Zen are expressions of a mentality 
which feels completely at home in this universe, and which sees 
man as an integral part of his environment. Human intelligence 
is not an imprisoned spirit from afar but an aspect of the whole 
intricately balanced organism of the natural world, whose prin- 
ciples were first explored in the Book of Changes. Heaven and 
earth are alike members of this organism, and nature is as much 
our father as our mother, since the Tao by which it works is 
originally manifested in the yang and the yin-the male and 
female, positive and negative principles which, in dynamic bal- 
ance, maintain the order of the world. The insight which lies at 
the root of Far Eastern culture is that opposites are relational 
and so fundamentally harmonious. Conflict is always compara- 
tively superficial, for there can be no ultimate conflict when the 
pairs of opposites are mutually interdependent. Thus our stark 
divisions of spirit and nature, subject and object, good and evil, 
artist and medium are quite foreign to this culture. 

In a universe whose fundamental principle is relativity rather 
than warfare there is no purpose because there is no victory to be 
won, no end to be attained. For every end, as the word itself 
shows, is an extreme, an opposite, and exists only in relation to 
its other end. Because the world is not going anywhere there is 
no hurry. One may as well “take it easy” like nature itself, and 
in the Chinese language the “changes” of nature and “ease” are 
the same word, i.? This is a first principle in the study of Zen and 
of any Far Eastern art: hurry, and all that it involves, is fatal. For 
there is no goal to be attained. The moment a goal is conceived it 


176 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


becomes impossible to practice the discipline of the art, to master 
the very rigor of its technique. Under the watchful and critical 
eye of a master one may practice the writing of Chinese char- 
acters for days and days, months and months. But he watches as 
a gardener watches the growth of a tree, and wants his student 
to have the attitude of the trec-the attitude of purposeless growth 
in which there are no short cuts because every stage of the way 
is both beginning and end. Thus the most accomplished master 
no more congratulates himself upon “arriving” than the most 
fumbling beginner. 

Paradoxical as it may seem, the purposeful life has no content, 
no point. It hurries on and on, and misses everything. Not 
hurrying, the purposeless life misses nothing, for it is only when 
there is no goal and no rush that the human senses are fully open 
to receive the world. Abscnce of hurry also involves a certain lack 
of interference with the natural course of events, especially when 
it is felt that the natural course follows principles which are not 
foreign to human intelligence. For, as we have seen, the Taoist 
mentality makes, or forces, nothing but “grows” everything. When 
human reason is seen to be an expression of the same spontaneous 
balance of yang and yin as the natural universe, man’s action 
upon his environment is not felt as a conflict, an action from 
outside. Thus the difference between forcing and growing can- 
not be expressed in terms of specific directions as to what should 
or should not be done, for the difference lies primarily in the 
quality and feeling of the action. The difficulty of describing 
these things for Western ears is that people in a hurry cannot feel. 

The expression of this whole attitude in the arts is perhaps best 
approached through painting and poetry. Although it may seem 
that the arts of Zen are confined to the more refined expressions 
of culture, it should be remembered that almost every profession 
and craft is known in Japan as a do, that is, a Tao or Way, not 
unlike what used to be known in the West as a “mystery.” To 
some extent, every do was at one time a lay method of learning 
the principles which are embodied in Taoism, Zen, and Con- 


Zen in the Arts 177 


fucianism, even as modern Masonry is a survival from times when 
the craft of the mason was a means of initiation into a spiritual 
tradition. Even in modern Osaka some of the older merchants 
follow a do or way of commerce based upon shingaku-a system 
of psychology closely related to Zen. 

After the persecution of Chinese Buddhism in 845, Zen was for 
some time not only the dominant form of Buddhism but also the 
most powerful spiritual influence in the growth of Chinese cul- 
ture. This influence was at its height during the Southern Sung 
dynasty (1127-1279), and during this time the Zen monasteries 
became leading centers of Chinese scholarship. Lay scholars, 
Confucian and Taoist alike, visited them for periods of study, and 
Zen monks in turn familiarized themselves with Chinese classi- 
cal studies. Since writing and poetry were among the chief pre- 
occupations of Chinese scholars, and since the Chinese way of 
painting is closely akin to writing, the roles of scholar, artist, and 
poet were not widely separated. The Chinese gentleman-scholar 
was not a specialist, and it was quite against the nature of the 
Zen monk to confine his interests and activities to purely “reli- 
gious” affairs, The result was a tremendous cross-fertilization of 
philosophical, scholarly, poetic, and artistic pursuits in which the 
Zen and Taoist feeling for “naturalness” became the dominant 
note. It was during this same period that Eisai and Dogen came 
from Japan to return with Zen to their own country, to be fol- 
lowed by an incessant stream of Japanese scholar-monks eager to 
take home not only Zen but every other aspect of Chinese cul- 
ture. Shiploads of monks, amounting almost to floating monas- 
teries, plied between China and Japan, carrying not only sutras 
and Chinese classical books, but also tea, silk, pottery, incense, 
paintings, drugs, musical instruments, and every refinement 
of Chinese culture-not to mention Chinese artists and crafts- 
men. . 

Closest to the feeling of Zen was a calligraphic style of paint- 
ing, done. with black ink on paper or silk—usually a painting and 
poem in one. Chinese black ink is capable of a great variety of 


178 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


tones, varied by the amount of water, and the ink itself is found 
in an enormous number of qualities and “colors” of black. The 
ink comes in a solid stick, and is prepared by pouring a little 
water into a flat stone dish, upon which the stick is rubbed 
until the liquid is of the required density. Writing or painting 
is done with a sharply pointed brush set in a bamboo stem-a 
brush which is held upright without resting the wrist on the 
paper, and whose soft hairs give its strokes a great versatility. 
Since the touch of the brush is so light and fluid, and since it 
must move continuously over the absorbent paper if the ink is 
to flow out regularly, its contro] requires a free movement of the 
hand and arm as if one were dancing rather than writing on 
paper. In short, it is a perfect instrument for the expression of 
unhesitating spontaneity, and a single stroke is enough to “give 
away” one’s character to an experienced observer. 

Sumi-e, as the Japanese call this style of painting, may have 
been perfected as early as the Tang dynasty by the almost 
legendary masters Wu Tao-tzu (c. 700-760) and Wang-wei 
(c. 698-759 ). However, the authenticity of works ascribed to them 
is doubtful, though they may be as early as the ninth century 
and include a painting so fally characteristic of Zen as the im- 
pressionistic waterfall attributed to Wang-wei-a thundering 
stream of sheer power, suggested by a few slightly curved sweeps 
of the brush between two masses of rock. The great formative 
age of this style was undoubtedly the Sung dynasty (959-1279), 
and is represented by such painters as Hsia-kuei, Ma-yiian, Mu- 
ch’i, and Liang-k’ai. 

The Sung masters were pre-eminently landscape painters, crea- 
tors of a tradition of “nature painting” which has hardly been 
surpassed anywhere in the world. For it shows us the life of na- 
ture-of mountains, waters, mists, rocks, trees, and birds—as felt 
by Taoism and Zen. It is a world to which man belongs but which 
he does not dominate; it is sufficient to itself, for it was not 
“made for” anyone and has no purpose of its own. As Hsiian- 
chiieh said: 


Zen in the Arts 179 


Over the river, the shining moon; in the pine trees, sighing wind; 
All night long so tranquil-why? And for whom? +> 


Sung landscapes are by no means as fantastic and stylized as 
Western critics often suggest, for to travel in similar territory, in 
mountainous, misty country, is to see them at every tum of the 
road, and it is a simple matter for the photographer to take pic- 
tures which look exactly like Chinese paintings. One of the most 
striking features of the Sung landscape, as of sumi-e as a whole, 
is the relative emptiness of the picture-an emptiness which ap- 
pears, however, to be part of the painting and not just unpainted 
background. By filling in just one corner, the artist makes the 
whole area of the picture alive. Ma-yiian, in particular, was a 
master of this technique, which amounts almost to “painting by 
not painting,” or what Zen sometimes calls “playing the string- 
less lute.” The secret lies in knowing how to balance form with 
emptiness and, above all, in knowing when one has “said” 
enough. For Zen spoils neither the aesthetic shock nor the satori 
shock by filling in, by explanation, second thoughts, and intel- 
lectual commentary. Furthermore, the figure so integrally related 
to its empty space gives the feeling of the “marvelous Void” 
from which the event suddenly appears. 

Equally impressive is the mastery of the brush, of strokes 
ranging from delicate elegance to rough vitality, from minutely 
detailed trees to bold outlines and masses given texture by the 
“controlled accidents” of stray brush hairs and uneven inking 
of the paper. Zen artists have preserved this technique to the 
present day in the so-called zenga style of Chinese characters, 
circles, bamboo branches, birds, or human figures drawn with 
these uninhibited, powerful brush strokes which keep on moving 
even when the painting is finished. After Mu-ch’i, perhaps the 
greatest master of the rough brush was the Japanese monk Sesshu 
(1421-1506), whose formidable technique included the most re- 
fined screens of pine trees and birds, mountain landscapes remi- 


1 Cheng-tao Ke, 24. 


180 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


niscent of Hsia-kuei, and almost violently alive landscapes for 
which he used not only the brush but fistfuls of inked straw to get 
the right texture of “flying hair lines.” 

The Western eye is immediately struck by the absence of sym- 
metry in these paintings, by the consistent avoidance of regular 
and geometrical shapes, whether straight or curved. For the 
characteristic brush line is jagged, gnarled, irregularly twisting, 
dashing, or sweeping—always spontaneous rather than predictable. 
Even when the Zen monk or artist draws a solitary circle-one of 
the most common themes of zenga-it is not only slightly eccen- 
tric and out of shape, but the very texture of the line is full of 
life and verve with the incidental splashes and gaps of the 
“rough brush.” For the abstract or “perfect” circle becomes con- 
crete and natural-a living circle-and, in the same way, rocks and 
trees, clouds and waters appear to the Chinese eye as most like 
themselves when most unlike the intelligible forms of the geome- 
ter and architect. 

Western science has made nature intelligible in terms of its 
symmetries and regularities, analyzing its most wayward forms 
into components of a regular and measurable shape. As a result 
we tend to see nature and to deal with it as an “order” from 
which the element of spontaneity has been “screened out.” But 
this order is maya, and the “true suchness” of things has nothing 
in common with the purely conceptual aridities of perfect 
squares, circles, or triangles-except by spontaneous accident. 
Yet this is why the Western mind is dismayed when ordered 
conceptions of the universe break down, and when the basic be- 
havior of the physical world is found to be a “principle of un- 
certainty.” We find such a world meaningless and inhuman, but 
familiarity with Chinese and Japanese art forms might lead us to 
an altogether new appreciation of this world in its living, and 
finally unavoidable, reality. 

Mu-chi and Liang-k’ai did many paintings of the Zen Patri- 
archs and masters, whom they represented for the most part as 
abandoned lunatics, scowling, shouting, loafing around, or roar- 


Zen in the Arts 181 


ing with laughter at drifting leaves. As favorite themes they 
adopted, as Zen figures, the two crazy hermits Han-shan and 
Shih-te, and the enormously rotund folk-god Pu-tai, to complete a 
marvelous assortment of happy tramps and rogues to exemplify 
the splendid nonsense and emptiness of the Zen life. Zen and-to 
some extent-Taoism seem to be the only spiritual traditions which 
feel secure enough to lampoon themselves, or to feel sufficiently 
un-self-conscious to laugh not only about their religion but in 
the midst of it. In these lunatic figures the Zen artists portray 
something slightly more than a parody of their own wu-shin or 
“mindless” way of life, for as “genius is to madness close allied” 
there is a suggestive parallel between the meaningless babble of 
the happy lunatic and the purposeless life of the Zen sage. In the 
words of a Zenrin poem: 


The wild geese do not intend to cast their reflection; 
The water has no mind to receive their image. 


Thus the aimless life is the constant theme of Zen art of every 
kind, expressing the artist’s own inner state of going nowhere in a 
timeless moment. All men have these moments occasionally, and 
it is just then that they catch those vivid glimpses of the world 
which cast such a glow over the intervening wastes of memory- 
the smell of burning leaves on a morming of autumn haze, a 
Hight of sunlit pigeons against a thundercloud, the sound of an 
unseen waterfall at dusk, or the single cry of some unidentified 
bird in the depths of a forest. In the art of Zen every landscape, 
every sketch of bamboo in the wind or of lonely rocks, is an echo 
of such moments. 

Where the mood of the moment is solitary and quiet it is called 
sabi.° When the artist is feeling depressed or sad, and in this 
peculiar emptiness of feeling catches a glimpse of something 
rather ordinary and unpretentious in its incredible “suchness,” 
the mood is called wabi.? When the moment evokes a more 
intense, nostalgic sadness, connected with autumn and the vanish- 
ing away of the world, it is called aware. And when the vision 


182 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


is the sudden perception of something mysterious and strange, 
hinting at an unknown never to be discovered, the mood is called 
yugen.’ These extremely untranslatable Japanese words denote 
the four basic moods of furyu,’ that is, of the general atmosphere 
of Zen “taste” in its perception of the aimless moments of life. 

Inspired by the Sung masters, the Japanese produced a whole 
cluster of superb sumi painters whose work ranks today among 
the most prized treasures of the nation’s art-Muso Kokushi 
(1275-1351), Cho Densu (d. 1431), Shubun (1414-1465), Soga 
Jasoku (d. 1483), Sesshu (1421-1506), Miyamoto Musashi 
(1582-1645), and many others. Notable paintings were also made 
by the great Zen monks Hakuin and Sengai (1750-1887), the 
latter showing a flair for abstract painting so startlingly suggestive 
of the twentieth century that it is easy to understand the interest 
of so many contemporary painters in Zen. 

Toward the beginning of the seventeenth century, Japanese 
artists developed a still more suggestive and “offhand” style of 
sumi-e called haiga as an illustrative accompaniment to haiku 
poems. These were derived from zenga, the informal paintings of 
the Zen monks accompanying verses from the Zenrin Kushu and 
sayings from the various mondo and the sutras. Zenga and haiga 
represent the most “extreme” form of sumi painting-the most 
spontaneous, artless, and rough, replete with all those “controlled 
accidents” of the brush in which they exemplify the marvelous 
meaninglessness of nature itself. 

From the earliest times the Zen masters had shown a partiality 
for short, gnomic poems-at once laconic and direct like their 
answers to questions about Buddhism. Many of these, like those 
we have quoted from the Zenrin Kushu, contained overt refer- 
ences to Zen and its principles. However, just as T’ung-shan’s 
“Three pounds of flax!” was an answer full of Zen but not about 
Zen, so the most expressive Zen poetry is that which “says 
nothing,” which, in other words, is not philosophy or commentary 
about life. A monk asked Feng-hsiieh, “When speech and silence 


Zen in the Arts 183 


are both inadmissible, how can one pass without error?” The 
master replied: 


I always remember Kiangsu in March- 
The cry of the partridge, the mass of fragrant flowers! ** 


Here again, as in painting, is the expression of a live moment in 
its pure “suchness’-though it is a pity to have to say so—and the 
masters frequently quoted classical Chinese poetry in this way, 
using couplets or quatrains which pointed, and said no more. 

The practice of taking couplets from the old Chinese poems for 
use as songs was also favored in literary circles, and at the begin- 
ning of the eleventh century Fujiwara Kinto compiled an anthol- 
ogy of such excerpts, together with short Japanese waka poems, 
under the title Roeishu, the Collection of Clear Songs. Such a use 
of poetry obviously expresses the same type of artistic vision as 
we find in the paintings of Ma-yiian and Mu-ch’i, the same use 
of empty space brought to life with a few strokes of the brush. In 
poetry the empty space is the surrounding silence which a two- 
line poem requires—a silence of the mind in which one does not 
“think about” the poem but actually feels the sensation which it 
evokes—all the more strongly for having said so little. 

By the seventeenth century the Japanese had brought this 
“wordless” poetry to perfection in the haiku, the poem of just 
seventeen syllables which drops the subject almost as it takes it 
up. To non-Japanese people haiku are apt to seem no more than 
beginnings or even titles for poems, and in translation it is im- 
possible to convey the effect of their sound and rhythm. How- 
ever, translation can usually convey the image-—and this is the 
important point. Of course there are many haiku which seem as 
stilted as the Japanese paintings on cheap lacquer trays for ex- 
port. But the non-Japanese listener must remember that a good 
haiku is a pebble thrown into the pool of the listener’s mind, 
evoking associations out of the richness of his own memory. It 


2 Wu-men Kuan, 24, 


184 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


invites the listener to participate instead of leaving him dumb 
with admiration while the poet shows off. 

The development of the haiku was largely the work of Basho 
(1643-1694), whose feeling for Zen wanted to express itself in a 
type of poetry altogether in the spirit of wu-shih—“nothing 
special.” “To write haiku,” he said, “get a three-foot child’-for 
Basho’s poems have the same inspired objectivity as a child’s 
expression of wonder, and return us to that same feeling of the 
world as when it first met our astonished eyes. 


Kimi hi take 
Yoki mono miseru 
Yukimarogel 


You light the fire; 
T'll show you something nice,— 
A great ball of snow! * 


Basho wrote his haiku in the simplest type of Japanese speech, 
naturally avoiding literary and “highbrow” language, so creating 
a style which made it possible for ordinary people to be poets. 
Bankei, his contemporary, did just the same thing for Zen, for 
as one of Ikkyu’s doka poems says: 


Whatever runs counter 

To the mind and will of ordinary people 
Hinders the Law of Men 

And the Law of Buddha.‘ 


This is in the spirit of Nan-ch’iian’s saying, “The ordinary mind is 
the Tao”-where “ordinary” means “simply human” rather than 
“merely vulgar.” It was thus that the seventeenth century saw an 


3 This and all the following translations of haiku are the work of R. H. Blyth, 
and come for the most part from his superb work, the four-volume Haiku, 
which is without any question the best treatment of the subject in English. 
Blyth has the additional advantage of some experience in Zen training, and 
as a result his grasp of Chinese and Japanese literature is unusually perceptive. 
See Blyth (2) in the Bibliography. . 

* R. H. Blyth in “Ikkyu’s Deka, The Young East, vol. 2, no. 7. (Tokyo, 1953.) 


Zen in the Arts 185 


extraordinary popularization of the Zen atmosphere in Japan, 
reaching down from the monks and samurai to farmers and 
artisans, 

The true feeling of haiku is “given away” in one of Basho’s 
poems which, however, says just too much to be true haiku: 


How admirable, 
He who thinks not, “Life is fleeting,” 
When he sees the lightning! 


For the haiku sees things in their “suchness,” without comment-a 
view of the world which the Japanese call sono-mama, “Just as it 
is,” or “Just so.” 


Weeds in the rice-field, 
Cut and left lying just so- 
Fertilizer! 


In Zen a man has no mind apart from what he knows and sees, 
and this is almost expressed by Gochiku in the haiku; 


The long night; 
The sound of the water 
Says what I think. 


And still more directly- 


The stars on the pond; 
Again the winter shower 
Ruffles the water. 


Haiku and waka poems convey perhaps more easily than paint- 
ing the subtle differences between the four moods of sabi, wabi, 
aware, and yugen. The quiet, thrilling loneliness of sabi is obvi- 
ous in 


On a withered branch 
A crow is perched, 
In the autumn evening. 


But it is less obvious and therefore deeper in 


186 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 
With the evening breeze, 


The water laps against 
The heron’s legs. 


In the dark forest 
A berry drops: 
The sound of the water. 


Sabi is, however, loneliness in the sense of Buddhist detachment, 
of seeing all things as happening “by themselves” in miraculous 
spontaneity. With this goes that sense of deep, illimitable 
quietude which descends with a long fall of snow, swallowing 
all sounds in layer upon layer of softness. 


Sleet falling; 
Fathomless, infinite 
Loneliness. 


Wabi, the unexpected recognition of the faithful “suchness” of 
very ordinary things, especially when the gloom of the future has 
momentarily checked our ambitiousness, is perhaps the mood of 


A brushwood gate, 
And for a lock- 
This snail. 


The woodpecker 
Keeps on in the same place: 
Day is closing. 
Winter desolation; 
In the rain-water tub, 
Sparrows are walking. 


Aware is not quite grief, and not quite nostalgia in the usual 
sense of longing for the return of a beloved past. Aware is the 
echo of what has passed and of what was loved, giving them a 
resonance such as a great cathedral gives to a choir, so that they 
would be the poorer without it. 


Zen in the Arts 187 


No one lives at the Barrier of Fuha; 

The wooden penthouse is fallen away; 
All that remains 

Is the autumn wind. 


The evening haze; 
Thinking of past things, 
How far-off they are! 


Aware is the moment of crisis between seeing the transience of 
the world with sorrow and regret, and seeing it as the very form 
of the Great Void. 


The stream hides itself 
In the grasses 
Of departing autumn. 


Leaves falling, 


Lie on one another; 
The rain beats on the rain. 


That moment of transition is just about to “cross over” in the 
haiku written by Issa upon the death of his child: 


This dewdrop world- 
It may be a dewdrop, 
And yet-and yet- 


Since yugen signifies a kind of mystery, it is the most bafHling of 
all to describe, and the poems must speak for themselves. 


The sea darkens; 
The voices of the wild ducks 
Are faintly white. 


The skylark: 


Its voice alone fell, 
Leaving nothing behind. 


In the dense mist, 
What is being shouted 
Between hill and boat? 


188 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


A trout leaps; 
Clouds are moving 
In the bed of the stream. 


Or an example of yugen in the Zenrin poems: 


Wind subsiding, the flowers still fall; 
Bird crying, the mountain silence deepens. 


Because Zen training had involved a constant use of these 
Chinese couplets since at least the end of the fifteenth century, 
the emergence of haiku is hardly surprising. The influence is self- 
evident in this “yugen-in-reverse” haiku by Moritake. The Zenrin 
says: 


The shattered mirror will reflect no more; 
The fallen flower will hardly rise to the branchJ 


And Moritake- 


A fallen flower 
Returning to the branch? 
It was a butterfly. 


The association of Zen with poetry must inevitably bring up 
the name of the Soto Zen monk and hermit Ryokan (1758-1831). 
So often one thinks of the saint as a man whose sincerity pro- 
vokes the enmity of the world, but Ryokan holds the distinction 
of being the saint whom everyone loved—perhaps because he was 
natural, again as a child, rather than good. It is easy to form the 
impression that the Japanese love of nature is predominantly 
sentimental, dwelling on those aspects of nature which are “nice” 
and “pretty’—butterflies, cherry blossoms, the autumn moon, 
chrysanthemums, and old pine trees.' But Ryokan is also the poet 
of lice, fleas, and being utterly soaked with cold rain. 


6 An impression especially sickening to the poetic mood of the middle twenti- 
eth century. It comes, however, from a level of haiku and other art forms 
which corresponds to our own greeting-card verse and confectionery-box 


Zen in the Arts 189 
On rainy days 
The monk Ryokan 
Feels sorry for himself. 


And his view of “nature” is all of a piece: 


The sound of the scouring 
Of the saucepan blends 
With the tree-frogs’ voices. 


In some ways Ryokan is a Japanese St. Francis, though much less 
obviously religious. He is a wandering fool, un-self-consciously 
playing games with children, living in a lonely hut in the forest 
where the roof leaks and the wall is hung with poems in his 
marvelously illegible, spidery handwriting, so prized by Japanese 
calligraphers. He thinks of the lice on his chest as insects in the 
grass, and expresses the most natural human feelings-sadness, 
loneliness, bewilderment, or pity-without a trace of shame or 
pride. Even when robbed he is still rich, for 


The thief 
Left it behind— 
The moon at the window. 


And when there is no money, 


The wind brings 
Fallen leaves enough 
To make a fire. 


When life is empty, with respect to the past, and aimless, with 
respect to the future, the vacuum is filled by the present-normally 
reduced to a hairline, a split second in which there is no time 


art. But consider the almost surrealistic imagery of the following from the 
Zenrin: 

On Mount Wu-t’ai the clouds are steaming rice; 

Before the ancient Buddha hall, dogs piss at heaven. 


And there are many haiku such as this from Issa: 


The mouth 
That cracked a flea 
Said, “Namu Amida Butsul” 


190 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


for anything to happen. The sense of an infinitely expanded pres- 
ent is nowhere stronger than in cha-no-yu, the art of tea. Strictly, 
the term means something like “Tea with hot water,” and through 
this one art Zen has exercised an incalculable influence on Jap- 
anese life, since the chajin, or “man of tea,” is an arbiter of taste 
in the many subsidiary arts which cha-no-yu involves—architec- 
ture, gardening, ceramics, metalwork, lacquer, and the arrange- 
ment of flowers (ikebana). 

Since cha-no-yu has become a conventional accomplishment 
for young ladies, it has been made the subject of a great deal of 
sentimental nonsense-associated with brocaded young dolls in 
moonlit rooms, nervously trying to imitate the most stilted feel- 
ings about porcelain and cherry blossom. But in the austere 
purity of, say, the Soshu Sen School the art of tea is a genuine 
expression of Zen which requires, if necessary, no further appa- 
ratus than a bowl, tea, and hot water. If there is not even that, 
chado—“the way of tea”-can be practiced anywhere and with 
anything, since it is really the same as Zen. 

If Christianity is wine and Islam coffee, Buddhism is most cer- 
tainly tea. Its quietening, clarifying, and slightly bitter taste 
gives it almost the same taste as awakening itself, though the 
bitterness corresponds to the pleasing roughness of “natural 
texture,” and the “middle path” between sweet and sour. Long 
before the development of cha-no-yu, tea was used by Zen 
monks as a stimulant for meditation, and in this context it was 
drunk in a mood of unhurried awareness which naturally lent 
itself to a ritualistic type of action. In summer it refreshed and in 
winter warmed those wandering hermit-monks who liked to 
build grass and bamboo huts in the mountain forests, or by rock- 
filled streams in the gorges. The totally undistracting emptiness 
and simplicity of the Taoist or-Zen hermitage has set the style 
not only for the special type of house for cha-no-yu but for 
Japanese domestic architecture as a whole.® 


* An influence combined with a native style which can still be seen at the 
ancient Shinto shrine of Ise—a style which strongly suggests the cultures 
of the southern Pacific islands. 


Zen in the Arts 191 


The monastic “tea ceremony” was introduced into Japan by 
Eisai, and though its form is different from the present cha-no-yu, 
it was nonetheless its origin, and appears to have been adopted 
for lay use during the fifteenth century. From this the cha-no-yu 
proper was perfected by Sen-no-Rikyu (1518-1591), and from 
him descend the three main schools of tea now flourishing. Cere- 
monial tea is not the ordinary leaf tea which is steeped in hot 
water; it is finely powdered green tea, mixed with hot water by 
means of a bamboo whisk until it becomes what a Chinese 
writer called “the froth of the liquid jade.” Cha-no-yu is most 
appreciated when confined to a small group, or just two com- 
panions, and was especially loved by the old-time samurai—as 
today by harassed businessmen-as a frank escape from the tur- 
moil of the world.’ 

Ideally, the house for cha-no-yu is a small hut set apart from 
the main dwelling in its own garden. The hut is floored with 
tatami, or straw mats, enclosing a fire-pit; the roof is usually 
thatched with rice straw; and the walls, as in all Japanese homes, 
are paper shoji supported by uprights of wood with a natural 
finish. One side of the room is occupied by an alcove, or toko- 
noma, the position for a single hanging scroll of painting or 
calligraphy, together with a necks a spray of flowers, or some 
other object of art. 

The atmosphere, though formal, is strangely relaxed, and the 
guests feel free to talk or watch in silence as they wish. The host 
takes his time to prepare a charcoal fire, and with a bamboo 
dipper pours water into a squat kettle of soft brown iron. In the 
same formal but completely unhurried manner, he brings in the 
other utensils—a plate with a few cakes, the tea bowl and caddy, 
the whisk, and a larger bowl for leavings. During these prepara- 
tions a casual conversation continues, and soon the water in the 
kettle begins to simmer and sigh, so that the guests fall silent to 
listen. After a while, the host serves tea to the guests one by one 
7 Since it is frequently my pleasure to be invited for cha-no-yu by Sabro 
Hasegawa, who has a remarkable intuition for issuing these invitations at the 


most hectic moments, I can testify that I know no better form of psycho- 
therapy. 


192 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


from the same bowl, taking it from the caddy with a strip of 
bamboo bent into a spoon, pouring water from the kettle with 
the long-handled dipper, whipping it into a froth with the whisk, 
and laying the bow] before the first guest with its most interesting 
side towards him. 

The bowls used for cha-no-yu are normally dull-colored and 
roughly finished, often unglazed at the base, and on the sides the 
glaze has usually been allowed to run-an original fortunate mis- 
take which has been seen to offer endless opportunities for the 
“controlled accident.” Specially favored are Korean rice bowls 
of the cheapest quality, a peasant ware of crude texture from 
which the tea masters have selected unintentional masterpieces 
of form. The tea caddy is often of tarnished silver or infinitely 
deep black lacquer, though sometimes old pottery medicine 
jars are used-purely functional articles which were again picked 
out by the masters for their unaffected beauty. A celebrated 
caddy once smashed to pieces was mended with gold cement, 
and became the much more treasured for the haphazard network 
of thin gold lines which then covered its surface. After the tea 
has been drunk, the guests may ask to inspect all the utensils 
which have been used, since every one of them has been made or 
chosen with the utmost care, and often brought out for the 
occasion because of some feature that would particularly appeal 
to one of the guests. 

Every appurtenance of the cha-no-yu has been selected in 
accordance with canons of taste over which the most sensitive 
men in Japan have brooded for centuries. Though the choice is 
usually intuitive, careful measurement of the objects reveals 
interesting and unexpected proportions-works of spontaneous 
geometry as remarkable as the spiral shell of the nautilus or the 
structure of the snow crystal. Architects, painters, gardeners, and 
craftsmen of all kinds have worked in consultation with the 
cha-no-yu masters, like an orchestra with its conductor, so that 
their “Zen taste” has passed on into the objects made by the same 
craftsmen for everyday use. This applies most particularly to 
ordinary, functional things-kitchen implements, shoji paper, soup 


Zen in the Arts 193 


bowls, common teapots and cups, floor mats, baskets, utilitarian 
bottles and jars, textiles for everyday clothing, and a hundred 
other simple artifacts in which the Japanese show their good 
taste to best advantage. 

The “Zen” of the cha-no-yu comes out all the more for the 
purely secular character of the ritual, which has no liturgical 
character like the Catholic Mass or the elaborate ceremonies of 
Shingon Buddhism. Though the guests avoid political, financial, 
or business matters in their conversation, there is sometimes non- 
argumentative discussion of philosophical matters, though the 
preferred topics are artistic and natural. It must be remembered 
that Japanese people take to such subjects as readily and un- 
self-consciously as we talk of sports or travel, and that their dis- 
cussion of natural beauty is not the affectation it might be in our 
own culture. Furthermore, they do not feel in the least guilty 
about this admitted “escape” from the so-called “realities” of 
business and worldly competition. Escape from these concerns 
is as natural and necessary as sleep, and they feel neither com- 
punction nor awkwardness in belonging for a while to the 
Taoist world of carefree hermits, wandering through the moun- 
tains like wind-blown clouds, with nothing to do but cultivate 
a row of vegetables, gaze at the drifting mist, and listen to the 
waterfalls. A few, perhaps, find the secret of bringing the two 
worlds together, of seeing the “hard realities” of human life to 
be the same aimless working of the Tao as the patterns of 
branches against the sky. In the words of Hung Tzu-ch’eng: 


If the mind is not overlaid with wind and waves, you will always 
be living among blue mountains and green trees. If your true nature 
has the creative force of Nature itself, wherever you may go, you 
will see fishes leaping and geese flying.® 


The style of garden which goes with Zen and cha-no-yu is not, 
of course, one of those ornate imitation landscapes with bronze 
cranes and miniature pagodas, The intention of the best Japanese 
8 Ts’ai-ken T’an, 291. Hung’s book of “vegetable-root talk” is a collection of 


wandering observations by a sixteenth-century poet whose philosophy was a 
blend of Taoism, Zen, and Confucianism. 


194 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


gardens is not to make a realistic illusion of landscape, but 
simply to suggest the general atmosphere of “mountain and 
water” in a small space, so arranging the design of the garden 
that it seems to have been helped rather than governed by the 
hand of man. The Zen gardener has no mind to impose his own 
intention upon natural forms, but is careful rather to follow the 
“intentionless intention” of the forms themselves, even though this 
involves the utmost care and skill. In fact the gardener never 
ceases to prune, clip, weed, and train his plants, but he does 
so in the spirit of being part of the garden himself rather than a 
directing agent standing outside. He is not interfering with 
nature because he is nature, and he cultivates as if not culti- 
vating. Thus the garden is at once highly artificial and extremely 
natural! 

This spirit is seen at its best in the great sand and rock gardens 
of Kyoto, of which the most famous example is the garden of 
Ryoanji. It consists of five groups of rocks laid upon a rectangle 
of raked sand, backed by a low stone wall, and surrounded by 
trees. It suggests a wild beach, or perhaps a seascape with rocky 
islands, but its unbelievable simplicity evokes a serenity and 
clarity of feeling so powerful that it can be caught even from a 
photograph. The major art which contributes to such gardens is 
bonseki, which may well be called the “growing” of rocks. It 
requires difficult expeditions to the seashore, to mountains and 
rivers, in search of rock forms which wind and water have shaped 
into asymmetrical, living contours. These are carted to the garden 
site, and placed so as to look as if they had grown where they 
stand, so as to be related to the surrounding space or to the 
area of sand in the same way as figure to background in Sung 
paintings. Because the rock must look as if it had always been in 
the same position, it must have the air of moss-covered antiquity, 
and, rather than try to plant moss on the rock, the rock is first 
set for some years in a place where the moss will grow by itself, 
and thereafter is moved to its final position. Rocks picked out by 
the sensitive eye of the bonseki artist are ranked among Japan's 


Zen in the Arts 195 


most precious national treasures, but, except to move them, they 
are untouched by the human hand. 

The Zen monks liked also to cultivate gardens which took ad- 
vantage of an existing natural setting-to arrange rocks and plants 
along the edges of a stream, creating a more informal atmosphere 
suggesting a mountain canyon adjoining the monastery buildings. 
They were always sparing and reserved in their use of color, as 
were the Sung painters before them, since masses of flowers in 
sharply varying colors are seldom found in the state of nature. 
Though not symmetrical, the Japanese garden has a clearly 
perceptible form; unlike so many English and American flower 
gardens, they do not resemble a daub in oil colors, and this de- 
light in the form of plants carries over into the art of flower 
arrangement inside the house, accentuating the shapes of single 
sprays and leaves rather than bunched colors. 

Every one of the arts which have been discussed involves a 
technical training which follows the same essential principles as 
training in Zen. The best account of this training thus far avail- 
able in a Western language is Eugen Herrigel’s Zen in the Art 
of Archery, which is the author’s story of his own experience 
under a master of the Japanese bow. To this should be added the 
already mentioned letter on Zen and swordsmanship (kendo) by 
the seventeenth-century master Takuan, translated by Suzuki in 
his Zen Buddhism and Its Influence on Japanese Culture. 

The major problem of each of these disciplines is to bring the 
student to the point from which he can really begin. Herrigel 
spent almost five years trying to find the right way of releasing 
the bowstring, for it had to be done “unintentionally,” in the same 
way as a ripe fruit bursts its skin. His problem was to resolve 
the paradox of practicing relentlessly without ever “trying,” and 
to let go of the taut string intentionally without intention. His 
master at one and the same time urged him to keep on working 
and working, but also to stop making an effort. For the art can- 
not be learned unless the arrow “shoots itself,” unless the string 
is released wu-hsin and wu-nien, without “mind” and without 


196 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


blocking, or “choice.” After all those years of practice there came 
a day when it just happened-how, or why, Herrigel never under- 
stood. 

The same is true in learning to use the brush for writing or 
painting. The brush must draw by itself. This cannot happen if 
one does not practice constantly. But neither can it happen if one 
makes an effort. Similarly, in swordsmanship one must not first 
decide upon a certain thrust and then attempt to make it, since 
by that time it will be too late. Decision and action must be 
simultaneous. This was the point of Dogen’s image of firewood 
and ashes, for to say that firewood does not “become” ashes is 
to say that it has no intention to be ash before it is actually ash- 
and then it is no longer firewood. Dogen insisted that the two 
states were “clearly cut,” and in the same way Herrigel’s master 
did not want him to “mix” the two states of stretching and re- 
leasing the bow. He instructed him to draw it to the point of 
fullest tension and stop there without any purpose, any intention 
in mind as to what to do next. Likewise, in Dogen’s view of 
za-zen one must be sitting “just to sit” and there must not be any 
intention to have satori. 

The sudden visions of nature which form the substance of 
haiku arise in the same way, for they are never there when one 
looks for them. The artificial haiku always feels like a piece of life 
which has been deliberately broken off or wrenched away from 
the universe, whereas the genuine haiku has dropped off all by 
itself, and has the whole universe inside it. 

Artists and craftsmen of the Far East have, indeed, measured, 
analyzed, and classified the techniques of the masters to such a 
degree that by deliberate imitation they can come close to “de- 
ceiving, if it were possible, even the elect.” By all quantitative 
standards the work so contrived is indistinguishable from its 
models, just as bowmen and swordsmen trained by quite other 
methods can equal the feats of Zen-inspired samurai. But, so far 
as Zen is concerned, the end results have nothing to do with it. 
For, as we have seen all along, Zen has no goal; it is a traveling 


Zen in the Arts 197 


without point, with nowhere to go. To travel is to be alive, but 
to get somewhere is to be dead, for as our own proverb says, “To 
travel well is better than to arrive.” 

A world which increasingly consists of destinations without 
journeys between them, a world which values only “getting some- 
where” as fast as possible, becomes a world without substance. 
One can get anywhere and everywhere, and yet the more this is 
possible, the less is anywhere and everywhere worth getting to. 
For points of arrival are too abstract, too Euclidean to be enjoyed, 
and it is all very much like eating the precise ends of a banana 
without getting what lies in between. The point, therefore, of 
these arts is the doing of them rather than the accomplishments. 
But, more than this, the real joy of them lies in what turns up 
unintentionally in the course of practice, just as the joy of travel 
is not nearly so much in getting where one wants to go as in 
the unsought surprises which occur on the journey. 

Planned surprises are as much of a contradiction as intentional 
satori, and whoever aims at satori is after all like a person who 
sends himself Christmas presents for fear that others will forget 
him. One must simply face the fact that Zen is all that side of 
life which is completely beyond our control, and which will not 
come to us by any amount of forcing or wangling or cunning- 
stratagems which produce only fakes of the real thing. But the 
last word of Zen is not an absolute dualism-the rather barren 
world of controlled action on the one side, and the spontaneous 
world of uncontrolled surprise on the other. For who controls 
the controller? 

Because Zen does not involve an ultimate dualism between 
the controller and the controlled, the mind and the body, the 
spiritual and the material, there is always a certain “physio- 
logical” aspect to its techniques. Whether Zen is practiced 
through za-zen or cha-no-yu or kendo, great importance is at- 
tached to the way of breathing. Not only is breathing one of the 
two fundamental rhythms of the body; it is also the process in 
which control and spontaneity, voluntary and involuntary action, 


198 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


find their most obvious identity. Long before the origins of the 
Zen School, both Indian yoga and Chinese Taoism practiced 
“watching the breath,” with a view to letting—not forcing—it to 
become as slow and silent as possible. Physiologically and psy- 
chologically, the relationship between breathing and “insight” is 
not yet altogether clear. But if we look at man as process rather 
than entity, rhythm rather than structure, it is obvious that 
breathing is something which he does—and thus is—constantly. 
Therefore grasping air with the lungs goes hand-in-hand with 
grasping at life. 

So-called “normal” breathing is fitful and anxious. The air is 
always being held and not fully released, for the individual seems 
incapable of “letting” it run its full course through the lungs. He 
breathes compulsively rather than freely. The technique therefore 
begins by encouraging a full release of the breath-easing it out 
as if the body were being emptied of air by a great leaden ball 
sinking through the chest and abdomen, and settling down into 
the ground. The returning in-breath is then allowed to follow as 
a simple reflex action. The air is not actively inhaled; it is just 
allowed to come-and then, when the lungs are comfortably 
filled, it is allowed to go out once more, the image of the leaden 
ball giving it the sense of “falling” out as distinct from being 
pushed out. 

One might go as far as to say that this way of breathing is Zen 
itself in its physiological aspect. Yet, as with every other aspect 
of Zen, it is hindered by striving for it, and for this reason begin- 
ners in the breathing technique often develop the peculiar 
anxiety of feeling unable to breathe unless keeping up a conscious 
control. But just as there is no need to try to be in accord with the 
Tao, to try to see, or to try to hear, so it must be remembered 
that the breath will always take care of itself. This is not a 
breathing “exercise” so much as a “watching and letting” of the 
breath, and it is always a serious mistake to undertake it in the 
spirit of a compulsive discipline to be “practiced” with a goal in 
mind, 


Zen in the Arts 199 


This way of breathing is not for special times alone. Like 
Zen itself, it is for all circurnstances whatsoever, and in this way, 
as in others, every human activity can become a form of za-zen. 
The application of Zen in activity is not restricted to the formal 
arts, and, on the other hand, does not absolutely require the 
specific “sitting technique” of za-zen proper. The late Dr. 
Kunihiko Hashida, a lifelong student of Zen and editor of the 
works of Dogen, never used formal za-zen. But his “Zen practice” 
was precisely his study of physics, and to suggest his attitude he 
used to say that his lifework was “to science” rather than “to 
study science.” 

In its own way, each one of the arts which Zen has inspired 
gives vivid expression to the sudden or instantaneous quality of 
its view of the world. The momentariness of sumi paintings and 
haiku, and the total presence of mind required in cha-no-yu and 
kendo, bring out the real reason why Zen has always called it- 
self the way of instantaneous awakening. It is not just that satori 
comes quickly and unexpectedly, all of a sudden, for mere speed 
has nothing to do with it. The reason is that Zen is a liberation 
from time. For if we open our eyes and see clearly, it becomes 
obvious that there is no other time than this instant, and that the 
past and the future are abstractions without any concrete reality. 

Until this has become clear, it seems that our life is all past and 
future, and that the present is nothing more than the infinitesi- 
mal hairline which divides them. From this comes the sensation 
of “having no time,” of a world which hurries by so rapidly that 
it is gone before we can enjoy it. But through “awakening to the 
instant” one sees that this is the reverse of the truth: it is rather 
the past and future which are the fleeting illusions, and the pres- 
ent which is eternally real. We discover that the linear succession 
of time is a convention of our single-track verbal thinking, of a 
consciousness which interprets the world by grasping little 
pieces of it, calling them things and events. But every such grasp 
of the mind excludes the rest of the world, so that this type of 
consciousness can get an approximate vision of the whole only 


200 PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE 


through a series of grasps, one after another. Yet the super- 
ficiality of this consciousness is seen in the fact that it cannot and 
does not regulate even the human organism. For if it had to con- 
trol the heartbeat, the breath, the operation of the nerves, glands, 
muscles, and sense organs, it would be rushing wildly around 
the body taking care of one thing after another, with no time to 
do anything else. Happily, it is not in charge, and the organism 
is regulated by the timeless “original mind,” which deals with 
life in its totality and so can do ever so many “things” at once. 

However, it is not as if the superficial consciousness were one 
thing, and the “original mind” another, for the former is a 
specialized activity of the latter. Thus the superficial conscious- 
ness can awaken to the eternal present if it stops grasping. But 
this does not come to pass by trying to concentrate on the present 
-an effort which succeeds only in making the moment seem ever 
more elusive and fleeting, ever more impossible to bring into 
focus. Awareness of the “eternal now” comes about by the same 
principle as the clarity of hearing and seeing and the proper 
freedom of the breath. Clear sight has nothing to do with trying 
to see; it is just the realization that the eyes will take in every 
detail all by themselves, for so long as they are open one can 
hardly prevent the light from reaching them. In the same way, 
there is no difficulty in being fully aware of the eternal present 
as soon as it is seen that one cannot possibly be aware of any- 
thing else-that in concrete fact there is no past or future. Making 
an effort to concentrate on the instantaneous moment implies at 
once that there are other moments. But they are nowhere to be 
found, and in truth one rests as easily in the eternal present as 
the eyes and ears respond to light and sound. 

Now this eternal present is the “timeless,” unhurried flowing 
of the Tao— 


Such a tide as, moving, seems to sleep, 
Too full for sound or foam. 


As Nan-ch’iian said, to try to accord with it is to deviate from it, 
though in fact one cannot deviate and there is no one to deviate. 


Zen in the Arts 201 


So, too, one cannot get away from the eternal present by trying 
to attend to it, and this very fact shows that, apart from this 
present, there is no distinct self that watches and knows it-which 
is why Hui-k’o could not find his mind when Bodhidharma asked 
him to produce it. However puzzling this may be, and however 
many philosophical problems it may raise, one clear look is 
enough to show its unavoidable truth. There is only this now. 
It does not come from anywhere; it is not going anywhere. It is 
not permanent, but it is not impermanent. Though moving, it is 
always still. When we try to catch it, it seems to run away, and 
yet it is always here and there is no escape from it. And when we 
turn round to find the self which knows this moment, we find that 
it has vanished like the past. Therefore the Sixth Patriarch says 
in the T’an-ching: 
In this moment there is nothing which comes to be. In this moment 
there is nothing which ceases to be. Thus there is no birth-and- 
death to be brought to an end. Wherefore the absolute tranquillity 
(of nirvana) is this present moment. Though it is at this moment, 
there is no limit to this moment, and herein is eternal delight. (7) * 


Yet, when it comes to it, this moment can be called “present” 
only in relation to past and future, or to someone to whom it is 
present. But when there is neither past nor future, and no one to 
whom this moment is present, what is it? When Fa-ch’ang was 
dying, a squirrel screeched on the roof. “It’s just this,” he said, 
"and nothing else.” 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


The Bibliography is divided into two parts: (1) The principal 
original sources consulted in the preparation of this book. The 
Japanese pronunciations are in round brackets. References are 
to the Japanese edition of the complete Chinese Tripitaka, the 
Taisho Daizokyo in 85 volumes (Tokyo, 1924-1932), and to 
Nanjio’s Catalogue of the Chinese Translation of the Buddhist 
Tripitaka (Oxford, 1883; repr., Tokyo, 1929). (2) A general 
bibliography of works on Zen in European languages, together 
with some other works on Indian and Chinese philosophy to 
which reference has been made in this book. To the best of my 
knowledge, this section includes every important book or schol- 
arly article on Zen published until the present time, July, 1956. 


1, PRINCIPAL SOURCES 


Cheng-tao Ke (Shodoka) #3 % dk 
Song of the Realization of the Way. 
Yung-chia Hsiian-chiieh (Yoka Genkaku), 665-718. 
Taisho 2014. 
Trans. Suzuki (6), Senzaki & McCandless (1). 


Ching-te Ch’uan-teng Lu (Keitoku Dento Roku) $ 4% 18 12 3% 
Record of the Transmission of the Lamp. 
Tao-yiian (Dogen), ec. 1004. 
Taisho 2076. Nanjio 1524. 


Daiho Shogen Kokushi Hogo X3¢¥ Oh Bens 

Sermons of the National Teacher Daiho Shogen (ie, 

Bankei). 

Bankei Zenji, 1622-1693. 

Ed. Suzuki and Furata. Daito Shuppansha, Tokyo, 1943. 
Hstn-hsin Ming (Shinjinmei) & »s $2 

Treatise on Faith in the Mind. 

203 


204 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Seng-ts'an (Sosan), d. 606. 
Taisho 2010. 
Trans. Suzuki (1), vol. 1, and (6), and Waley in Conze (2). 


Ku-tsun-hsii Yti-lu (Kosonshuku Goroku) & @ 3 e& 3h 
Recorded Sayings of the Ancient Worthies. 
Tse (Seki), Sung dynasty. 
Fu-hsiieh Shu-chii, Shanghai, n.d. Also in Dainihon Zoku- 
zokyo, Kyoto, 1905-1912. 
Lin-chi Lu (Rinzai Roku) ge xR 
Record of Lin-chi. 
Lin-chi I-hsiian (Rinzai Gigen), d. 867. 
Taisho 1985. Also in Ku-tsun-hsii Yti-lu, fase. 1. 


Liu-tsu T’an-ching (Rokuso Dangyo) 3x #2 34 4&2 
Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch. 
Ta-chien Hui-neng (Daikan Eno), 638-718. 
Taisho 2008. Nanjio 1525. 

Trans. Wong Mou-lam (1) and Rousselle (1). 


Pi-yen Lu (Hekigan Roku) 3 aK 
Record of the Green Rock. 
Yuan-wu K’o-ch’in (Engo Kokugon ), 1063-1135. 
Taisho 2003. 
Shen-hui Ho-chang I-chi (Jinne Osho Ishu) #9 #4 ¥ 
Collected Traditions of Shen-hui. 
Ho-tse Shen-hui (Kataku Jinne ), 668-770. 
Tun-huang MS, Pelliot 3047 and 3488. 
Ed. Hu Shih. Oriental Book Co., Shanghai, 1930. 
Trans. Gernet (1). 


Shobo Genzo ¥ 3¢ GR fh 
The Eye Treasury of the. True Dharma. 
Dogen Zenji, 1200-1253. 
Ed. Kunihiko Hashida. Sankibo Busshorin, Tokyo, 1939. 
Also in Dogen Zenji Zenshu, pp. 3-472. Shinjusha, 
Tokyo, 1940. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 205 


Wu-men Kuan (Mumon Kan) . f*) fl 
The Barrier Without Gate. 
Wu-men Hui-k’ai (Mumon Ekai), 1184-1260. 
Taisho 2005. 
Trans. Senzaki & Reps (1), Ogata (1), and Dumoulin (1). 


2. WORKS IN EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 


ANESAKI, M. History of Japanese Religion. Kegan Paul, London, 
19380. 

Benoit, H. The Supreme Doctrine. Pantheon, New York, and 
Routledge, London, 1955. 

Biytu, R. H. (1) Zen in English Literature and Oriental Classics. 
Hokuseido, Tokyo, 1948. 
(2) Haiku. 4 vols. Hokuseido, Tokyo, 1949-1952. 
(8) Buddhist Sermons on Christian Texts. Kokudosha, 
Tokyo, 1952. 
(4) “Ikkyu’s Doka,” The Young East, vols. II. 2 to III. 9. 
Tokyo, 1952-1954, 

Cuapin, H. B. “The Ch’an Master Pu-tai,” Journal of the Ameri- 
can Oriental Society, vol. LIII, pp. 47-52. 

Cxu Ciran (BLoFELD, J.) (1) The Huang Po Doctrine of Uni- 
versal Mind. Buddhist Society, London, 1947. 
(2) The Path to Sudden Attainment. Buddhist Society, Lon- 
don, 1948. 

Cu’u Ta-kao Tao Te Ching. Buddhist Society, London, 1937. 

Conze, E. (1) Buddhism: Its Essence and Development. Cas- 
sirer, Oxford, 1953. 
(2) Buddhist Texts Through the Ages. Edited in conjunction 
with I. B. Horner, D. Snellgrove, and A. Waley. Cassirer, Ox- 
ford, 1954. 
(3) Selected Sayings from the Perfection of Wisdom. Bud- 
dhist Society, London, 1955. 

Coomaraswamy, A. K. “Who Is Satan and Where Is Hell?” The 
Review of Religion, vol. XII. 1, pp. 76-87. New York, 1947. 


206 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


DEMIEVILLE, P. (1) Hobogirin. 4 fasc. Edited in conjunction witb 
S. Levi and J. Takakusu. Maison Franco-Japonaise, Tokyo, 
1928-1981. 

(2) Le Concile de Lhasa. vol. I. Imprimerie Nationale de 
France, Paris, 1952. 

Dumovutin, H. (1) “Das Wu-men-kuan oder “Der Pass ohne 
Tor, ” Monumenta Serica, vol. VIII. 1943. 

(2) “Bodhidharma und die Anfange des Ch’an Buddhismus,” 
Monumenta Nipponica, vol. VII. 1951. 

Dumou.w, H., & Sasaki, R. F. The Development of Chinese Zen 
after the Sixth Patriarch. First Zen Institute, New York, 1953. 

Duyvenpak, J. J. L. Tao Te Ching. Murray, London, 1954. 

Exror, Sir C. Japanese Buddhism. Amold, London, 1935. 

First Zen INstrruTe oF AMERICA. (1) Cat’s Yawn, 1940™194]. 
Published in one vol., First Zen Institute, New York, 1947. 
(2) Zen Notes. First Zen Institute, New York, since Janu- 
ary, 1954. 

Func Yu-Ltan (1) A History of Chinese Philosophy. 2 vols. 
Tr. Derk Bodde. Princeton, 1953. 

(2) The Spirit of Chinese Philosophy. Tr. E. R. Hughes. 
Kegan Paul, London, 1947. 

Gatensy, E. V. The Cloud Men of Yamato. Murray, London, 
1929. 

GerneT, J. (1) “Entretiens du Maitre de Dhyana Chen-houei du 
Ho-ts6,” Publications de [Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient, 
vol. XXXI. 1949. 

(2) “Biographie du Maitre Chen-houei du Ho-tsé,” Journal 
Asiatique, 1951. 

(3) “Entretiens du Maitre Ling-yeou du Kouei-chan,” Bul- 
letin de [Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient, vol. XLV. 1. 
1951. 4 

Gres, H. A. Chuang-tzu. Kelly & Walsh, Shanghai, 1926. 

Gus, L. Taoist Teachings. Translations from Lieh-tzu. Murray, 
London, 1925. 

Grosse, E. Die Ostasiatische Tuschmalerei. Cassirer, Berlin, 1923. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 207 


Harnison, E. J. The Fighting Spirit of Japan. Unwin, London, 
1913. 

Henricet, E. Zen in the Art of Archery. Pantheon, New York, 
1953. 

Humpnreys, C. Zen Buddhism. Heinemann, London, 1949. 

Hu Sumi (1) “The Development of Zen Buddhism in China,” 
Chinese Political and Social Review, vol. XV. 4. 1932. 
(2) “Ch’an (Zen) Buddhism in China, Its History and 
Method,” Philosophy East and West, vol. III. 1. Honolulu, 
1953. 

Kerru, Sm A. B. Buddhist Philosophy in India and Ceylon. Ox- 
ford, 1923. 

LiEBENTHAL, W. “The Book of Chao,” Monumenta Serica, Monog., 
XIII. Peking, 1948. 

Lin Yutanc The Wisdom of Lao-tse. Modern Library, New York, 
1948, 

Lunssen, R. Essais sur le Bouddhisme en général et sur le Zen en 
particulier. 2 vols. Editions Etre Libre, Brussels, 1954. 

Masunaca, R. “The Standpoint of Dogen and His Treatise on 
Time,” Religion East and West, vol. I. University of Tokyo, 
1955. 

Murat, T. R. V. The Central Philosophy of Buddhism. Allen & 
Unwin, London, 1955. 

NEEDHAM, J. Science and Civilization in China. 2 vols. (5 vols. to 
follow). Cambridge University Press, 1954 and 1956. 

Nuxaniya, K. The Religion of the Samurai. Luzac, London, 1913. 

Ocata, S. Guide to Zen Practice. A partial translation of the 
Mu-mon Kan. Bukkasha, Kyoto, 1934. 

Onmasama, S., & Faust, A. Zen, der lebendige Buddhismus in 
Japan. Gotha, 1925. 

Oeaxuna, K. The Book of Tea. Foulis, Edinburgh, 1919. 

Pewiiot, P. “Notes sur quelques artistes des Six Dynasties et des 
Tang,” Toung Pao, vol. XXII. 1923. 

Rousse, E. “Liu-tsu T’an-ching,” Sinica, vols. V, VI, & XI. 1930, 
1931, 1936. 


208 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Sasaki, T. Zen: With Special Reference to Soto Zen. Soto Sect 
Headquarters, Tokyo, 1955. 

Sencal India-Ink Drawings. Oakland Museum, Oakland, 1956. 

Senzak1, N. Zen Meditation. Bukkasha, Kyoto, 1936. 

Senzaki, N., & McCann.ess, R. Buddhism and Zen. Philosophical 
Library, New York, 1958. 

SENzAKI, N., & Reps, P. (1) The Gateless Gate. A translation 
of the Mu-mon Kan. Murray, Los Angeles, 1934. 
(2) 101 Zen Stories. McKay, Philadelphia, n.d. 

Smen, O. “Zen Buddhism and Its Relation to Art,” Theosophical 
Path. Point Loma, Calif. October, 1934. 

SocEn AsaHIna Zen. Sakane, Tokyo, 1954. 

Soroxin, P. (ed). Forms and Techniques of Altruistic and Spirit- 
ual Growth. Beacon Press, Boston, 1954. 

SoYEN Suaxu Sermons of a Buddhist Abbot. Open Court, Chi- 
cago, 1906. 

STCHERBATSKY, Tui. The Conception of Buddhist Nirvana. Lenin- 
grad, 1927. 

STEINILBER-OBERLIN, E., & Matsuo, K. The Buddhist Sects of 
Japan. Allen & Unwin, London, 1938. 

Suzuni, D. T. (1) Essays in Zen Buddhism. 3 vols. Luzac, Lon- 
don, 1927, 1933, 1934. Repr., Rider, London, 1949, 1950, 1951. 
(2) Studies in the Lankavatara Sutra. Routledge, London, 
1930. 
(3) The Lankavatara Sutra. Routledge, London, 1932. Repr., 
1956. 
(4) Introduction to Zen Buddhism. Kyoto, 1934. Repr., 
Philosophical Library, New York, 1949. 
(5) Training of the Zen Buddhist Monk. Eastern Buddhist 
Society, Kyoto, 1934. 
(6) Manual of Zen Buddhism. Kyoto, 1935. Repr., Rider, 
London, 1950. 
(7) Zen Buddhism and Its Influence on Japanese Culture. 
Eastern Buddhist Society, Kyoto, 1938, (Shortly to be re- 
printed in the Bollingen Series. ) 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 209 


(8) The Essence of Buddhism. Buddhist Society, London, 
1947. 
(9) The Zen Doctrine of No-Mind. Rider, London, 1949. 
(10) Living by Zen. Rider, London, 1950. 
(11) Studies in Zen. Rider, London, 1955. 
(12) “Professor Rudolph Otto on Zen Buddhism,” Eastern 
Buddhist, vol. III, pp. 93-116. 
(13) “Zen Buddhism on Immortality. An Extract from the 
Hekiganshu,” Eastern Buddhist, vol. III, pp. 213-23. 
(14) “The Recovery of a Lost MS on the History of Zen in 
China,” Eastern Buddhist, vol. IV, pp. 199-298. 
(15) “Ignorance and World Fellowship,” Faiths and Fellow- 
ship. Watkins, London, 1937. 
(16) “Buddhist Symbolism,” Symbols and Values. Harper, 
New York, 1954. 
(17) “Zen and Pragmatism,” Philosophy East and West, vol. 
IV. 2. Honolulu, 1954. 
(18) “The Awakening of a New Consciousness in Zen,” 
Eranos-Jahrbuch, vol. XXIII. Rhein-Verlag, Ziirich, 1955. 
Taxakusu, J. Essentials of Buddhist Philosophy. University of 
Hawaii, Honolulu, 1947. 

Wa ey, A. Zen Buddhism and Its Relation to Art. Luzac, Lon- 
don, 1922. 

Watts, A. W. (1) The Spirit of Zen. Murray, London, 1936. 2nd 
ed., 1955. 
(2) Zen Buddhism. Buddhist Society, London, 1947. 
(3) Zen. (Same as above, but enlarged.) Delkin, Stanford, 
1948, 
(4) The Way of Liberation in Zen Buddhism. American 
Academy of Asian Studies, San Francisco, 1955. 
(5) “The Problem of Faith and Works in Buddhism,” Re- 
view of Religion, vol. V. 4. New York, May, 1941. 

Wentz, W. Y. E. Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines. Oxford, 
1935. 

Wuxe, R. (1) The Secret of the Golden Flower. A transla- 


210 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


tion of the Tai I Chin Hua Tsung Chih, with commentary by 
C. G. Jung. Kegan Paul, London, 1931. 
(2) The I Ching or Book of Changes. 2 vols. Tr. Cary 
Baynes. Pantheon, New York, 1950. 

Wonc Mov-LaM The Sutra of Wei Lang (Hui-neng ). Luzac, Lon- 
don, 1944. 


CHINESE NOTES 


Read horizontally, from left to right 


I. 1. THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE TAO 


AUR 2A 


4 6714S } 
aoe Se MA 
i ix om ‘* 


sik a eae “s 
a, ieee 
ws "2B us Ath wes FZ wes 


I. 2. THE ORIGINS OF BUDDHISM 


4~ F 38 


I. 3. MAHAYANA BUDDHISM 


‘AOR RR CER 


‘Ss ‘se 37 $B tte 
‘BSB He 

ew Ye BRA BH 
S Pl wetg 2 B24 KB 
BOR ARE Sa AR 
zt Ro wah, “SH 
SMA RAIMA ZB biz 
Soa RA wei 
ZA eI R744 BZA 
Bis FZ PLS 

AR wb RN 1B 


A f= 2 
tL RK F, 


212 


@ HA, 
PE Re AIR, 

'g% poe obi DTS, 
ATA Ee Re te, 
BALD, ME * B. 
ARE FE Be EA. 
S44. BA 4. 
Wows ws AR A $4, 
ee ope. % BS AR AR EPA. 
Ba oft 28 er Oe A 28 BA 
a 44 BR AF ARS, 
YE RA ewHReS 
& ok Sy th hk ARR E 


213 


"Sth A B® Mt 3h eae. 
RRA - ARAB. 
ReEGG A Ae Ms 
pra auyrnys 
ka LE TUNE LGR 
2h ft 2 eee PAY A, 
4E SHA 2m RE RS 
444 AA 40 GE. 
Zee PARA BCE MZ 
BARE gee PBS 
H- th —- MGB ABA WA 
Fe #2 & B , 
SAM BKM RAH 


214 


Mew aA PAVE H. 
AF VA, —s 7 Oe 
ea 2 ie —-M-H, 
ZAFLMPRASBA. 
AMER AREA, 
OF VE RUA HE. 
KALE Hh BA OEM, 
RO ATED DR, 
— aD AEA bay RFE 
A th se i OL aA 
Me MOE, bi BE TE BR. 
JE 78S 4B HHO Pe 
BS IK “SB 


215 


we FB SS 4 4g tH 
m S38 gp Base 
FM BEAFESZ 


mA BR RASA HR 

By BRBRVBAE Bee 
BR BAT HL SH ws FB on 

Ste RE aD HE ay the 

$i eo Hh 3B 28 tS omg 
SH 2% 40 HORE OR, 


216 


Ah iB LAR RR LEER 
SRRER EZ RARH 
RPA RAZ HK BM ke, 
WAR REE AR we 
FG) IA 45 MR OR eG A 


se "Se 1 By x & 2 6, 


217 


eh eB Dag ae ae BE 
BD ee te GABE 
AREAS BME 
Be bea oe Eve 
“ER MOE Eb 

PE EAB. 

AHH 4 VA 

EG eBe ve aR RE 
MUN DARRA. 
ER AZ AKA, 
RG Pha HF MAE, 
NF RAM, 


218 


o RwS GS RPSM 
S SHAE TRI, 
BADER RRA, 
‘GER E RMA SKE 
PRME BZ AG CS A G BF 
RK ER, 
ME aw kK, 
LS oe 
YSZ RARE HAS, 
AAS BRS HE RH ARM, 
“ata yd tA RA, 
RO oe Sk de yh ae of 3 ih 
MERAA SKA Thy 


219 


$e =SETH ty RE ae. 
weg w LRERAE 
BRS A x0 BABAR. 
wo ew ACER, 
mM AAS 8 HE BK RAR A BL 
Wy AK GE Wy, ‘aia abie 

BME -— WS Th 
2S th KG A q 2% + he yy). 
WHA - WERAE, 


$44 F we Pe DW 5x 
DAW ZABZ ISR LAF 
ZR, 4M F Kw sw 
ASHE TEL TD, 
IM CMON AR Bes Be Ag 
GU PIAR MZ AES 
RRZAFEBRE WA Ke 
ZME ER A OAR.- 
AE TT FT BY, 
Ws Bd RBH, 
we HS A Bl, 
Ht SF A A, 


221 


RRS SFRSRE Ge 

HMagy de4as 

YAR AT awh 

AT VA wR, 

k FA SRew BPR 

sie decent 
pada iatlned 


iamsne” 

— 32% PA ke HABLA iB, 
HE Go 3, 

FAG REINA, 
PRAKASH W DN, 


222 


1 Log at BERS, 
z eee Be ot 
Ke ZR ETH 
Aw a vs gen 
abled te B pokey fa 


Bq FB pAgRt 
AMZ RS BA 
ARPES eZ RAR 
2S MRF KR ETE 
SER GRE AZ ARH ARAL Ah 
AALS AB ILA 
aus A HW E Ad i AG AG 


223 


z 
a be - 
_s 
HS 
=a ae 
S 
ae 
\- 

Ns 
oy fais 
a OF a} » 


WSs 


’ A 


ZMANRR DALE, 
NG READ 

Bie PRR, 

Mesh @ se Fi BL, 
ae oe ae 
ERIK. 

DRFH SARA BH. 
SET AAR WE BL g, 
A 2H SIP RE, 
2DANG iB ATS BOE, 
Bh 344 Bee) Dy de te — ay 


224 


AED OR A AH. 
AB 2 Be HA BAS, 
We we Ae ELA 
~ 324 EERE EAH 
a A I Me ey A 8 
sit 
a et eee ee 
pare 2g a Sh, 
Re 42 “RH WK AR 
AR £2 1 RI] 2S KEE 


225 


KR LaS 

he 
But 4% Be WS, 
gh 44 KG HO 3h FE LO, 
‘ey ety Ay ft de A 
GH PT pL Hl mw 
aS a ee oe RH 


226 


INDEX 


Proper names of persons are printed in capitals, and, in the case of 
Chinese Zen masters, the Japanese pronunciation follows the Chinese 
in parentheses. Titles of works are printed in italics. 


Abstraction 7, 12, 72 

Advaita 39 

Ahimsa 58 

Alava-vijnana 75 

Alice in Wonderland 167 

AMITABHA (J., AMIDA) 59, 68f, 
108, 172 

Amarayus 68 

Ananda 35, 62 

Anatman (Pali: Anatta) 47f 

Anecdotes, Zen. See Wen-ta 

Anitya (Pali: Anicca) 46 

See also Impermanence 

Archery 195 

Architecture, Japanese 190 

Arhan (Pali: Arhat) 60, 101 

Art, Far-Eastern 27f, 174-196 

Asamskrita 52n 

AsancGa 58, 72 

Ashrava 78 

Ashtasahasrika 65 

Asoxa, Emperor 58 

ASVAGHOSHA 58 

Atma-bodha 36 

Atma-jnana 36 

Atma-yajna 32 

Atman 33ff, 38, 43, 44, 47 

Avatamsaka Sutra 59, 7Of, 90, 
103, 161 

See also Hua-yen 


Avidya 47f 
Awakening 170 

See also Bodhi 
Aware 181, 186f 
Awareness 52, 155, 200 


Banke! ZENJ1 108, 111, 149f, 169, 
171, 172 
on the Keisaku 157n 
on Nien 141f 
on Satori 145 
on Seeking 159 
BasHo 108, 184ff 
BATESON, Grecorny 138n 
Beatific Vision 147 
Bhagavad-Gita 34 
Bhakti 60 
Bhavachakra 162n 
Blocking 140, 148ff 
Biytn, R. H. 4, 48, 131, 167, 
184n 
Bodhi 44, 63, 77, 97, 101 
BopHIDHARMA (J., DanuMaA) 78n, 
83f, 201 
Bopuiructi 84 
Bodhisattva doctrine 60ff, 166 
Bonscki 194 
Book of Chao 82 
Brahman 36f, 39, 42 
Breathing 156, 198f 


227 


228 


Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 34 
BupDHA 

See Gautama 
Buddha nature 68, 90, 99 
Buddhism, origins of 43ff 
Bushido 107f 


Calligraphy, Chinese 176, 177£ 
Caste 33, 44 
Ceramics 192 
Ch’an 54 
CHANDRAGUPTA Maunya 58 
Cha-no-yu (“Tea Ceremony”) 
111, 143, 1908 
Cuao-cHou Ts'UNG-SHEN (J, 
Josuu Justin) 98, 105, 127 
Wu koan 164f 
Cheng-tao Ke (J., Shodoka) 96, 
145 
CumH-k’ar 90 
China, history of Zen in 80-107, 
108-109 
Chinese language 5, 7, 9 
Ching (mental power) 16 
Cu’ING-YUAN _ HsING-ssu 
SEIGEN GyosHI) 95, 126 
Chit 35 
Cuo Densu 182 
Cuvuanc-tTzu (J., Sose) 17 
on Art 26 
on the Drunken Man 23 
on Language 28 


(J-» 


on Lao-tzu and Confucius 26 


on the Senses 23, 24 
on Te 20 

on the Unknown 17 
on Wv-hsin 24n 
Huang-po on 100 


INDEX 


Ch’uan Hsin Fa Yao (J. Denshin- 
hoyo) 99f, 141, 142 
Chuan Teng Lu (J., Keitokuden- 
toroku) 89, 105 
Church, Christian 11 
Circles, calligraphic 180 
Citta 72f 
See also Hsin 
Cittamatra 72, 74 
Color, Lao-tzu on 27 
Communication 7, 49 
Concentration 96 
See also Samadhi 
Confucianism 10, 29f 
and Zen 143, 148, 177 
ConrFucius 18, 26 
Contemplation 155 
Convention 4ff, 10, 40f, 55, 107, 
122, 142f 
Coomaraswamy, A. K. 35 
Crucifixion 147 
Cybernetics 48, 49, 136ff 


DEMIEVILLE, P. 95n 
Deva 30 
Dharma 51, 70 
Dhamnnadhatu 70f, 168 
Dharmakaya 71 
Dharani 59 
Dhyana 54f, 77, 85, 92, 97 
School 78, 85 
Soto view of 107 
Direct pointing 45, 77, 88, 
127 
Discipline 96f, 104, 145 
Docen 82, 107f, 122-125, 158f, 
196 
Doubt 106, 170 


INDEX 229 
Duality 35, 73 GerneT, J. 88 
See also Dvandva, Relativity Gocniku 185 
Duhkha (Pali: Dukkha) 46 God 68 


Dumou.wy, H. 95n 
Duyvenpak, J. J. L. 16n 
Dvandva 35 

See also Relativity 


Ego 23, 47f, 61, 119-122, 143f 
See also Anatman, Atman 
Eightfold Path 51 
E1sar 107, 191 
Ekaksana 55 
See also Now, the Eternal 
Evil, problem of 35 


Fa-cn’anc (J., Hoyo) 201 

Fa-Tsanc 90 

Fa-YEN WEN-I (J., HOGEN Bun- 
EXI) 103, 128 

Fa-runc 89, 152 

Fatalism 118 

Feed-back analogy 136f 

FEN-YANG SHAN-CHAO (J., FUN- 
NYO ZENSHO) 103 

FENG-HSUEH YEN-CHAO (J., Fu- 
kETsu EnsHo) 182f 

Five Ranks 103, 161, 167f 

Four Dharma Realms 70 

Four Invisibles 170 

Four Noble Truths 46ff 

Free will 169 

Fujrwara Kinto 183 

Func Yu-Lan 84, 95n 

Furyu 182 


Gardens 102, 194f 
GAUTAMA THE BuppHa 31, 43ff, 
71 


and Tao IIf, 16% 
GODEL, Kurt 74 


Haiga 182 
Haiku 182-189, 196 
Haxuw Exaxu 108, 135, 145, 182 
and Koan system 160 
“One Hand” koan 164f 
HaAn-sHAN (J., HANzAN) 181 
HaseEcawa, Sasro 174, 191n 
Hasuma, Kunrniko 199 
Hearing, analogy of 172 
HERRIGEL, EuGEN 195 
Hinayana 
See Theravada 
Hinduism 30, 32f, 43 
Ho (J., Kwatsu) 97 
Horto 128f 
Hs1a-KvE1 178 
and Sesshu 180 
HSIANG-YEN CHIH-HSIEN (J., Kyo- 
GEN CuHikan) 145 
Hs1eEH Linc-yun 83 
Hsin (J., Shin, Kokoro) 24f, 87 
Chuang-tzu on 26 
Hsin-hsin Ming (J., Shinjinmei) 
88f, 115 
Hsiian (J., Gen) 18, 83 
Hstian-cHUEH, YUNG-CHIA (J., 
Yoxa GENnKAku) 95, 96, 145, 
178f 
Hswan-TSanc 90 
Hu Sr 84n 
Hua-yen (J., Kegon) 90, 103, 
120, 161, 168 


280 


See also Avatamsaka 
Hual-Janc, NAN-YUEH (J., NAN- 
cakxu Ejo) 94, 96f 
on Za-zen 110 
Huanc-Lunc Hut-nan (J., Oryo 
Enan) 106 
Huanc-ro Hsi-ytw (J., Osaku 
Krun) 83, 99f, 141, 142 
Hour-cuune (J., Ecuu) 95 
Hut-r’o (J., Exa) 84, 87, 201 
HuI-NENG, Ta-CHIEN (J., DAIKAN 
Eno) 83, 85, 90-94 
“Original Face” koan 164 
on the Present Moment 201 
on Za-zen 111 
Hut-Tan 83 
Hur-yuan 81, 83 
Hunec Tzu-cuH’enc (J., Kojise1) 
193 
Hunc-Jan (J., Gunn or Konin) 
90f 


I (J., Gi) 29 
I Ching (J., Ekikyo) 13f, 19, 103, 
175 


Idealism, philosophical 40, 72f£ 
Ikebana 190 
Ixxru 162, 164, 184 
Impermanence 42f 
See also Anitya 
Inka 161 
IpPEN SHONIN 128f 
Issa 187, 189n 


Japan 
and Chinese culture 177 


Zen in 107f, 111 
Jen (Man) 7 


INDEX 


Jen (Human-heartedness) 21 and 
n, 29 
Jivanmukta 40 
Jivatman 47 
Judo 171 
See also Ju-jutsu 
Ju-jutsu 111 


Kalpa 35, 99 
KANAKAMUNI BuDDHA 71 
K’an-hua (J., Kanna) Zen 107 
Karma 49, 52, 75, 101, 146, 151, 
162 
Karuna 69f, 71, 76, 154, 166 
Kasyapa BuppHa 71 
Keisaku 157 and n 
Kerrn, Sm ARTHUR BERRIEDALE 
57 
Kendo 195 
Kicner 172 
KIERKEGAARD, S. 66 
Klesa 63, 81, 96, 97 
Knowledge, types of 4f, 13, 17, 
86, 171 
Koan (Ch., Kung-an) 108, 117n, 
149, 159-173 
origins of 105£ 
types of 160f, 164-169 
Ko-i 81 
Kokoro 25 
See also Hsin 
Konzysski, ALFRED 130 
Kozux1 Rosur 149 
Kumarajiva 58, 80, 84 
Kung-an 
See Koan 
Kwalsen 135 


INDEX 


Lankavatara Sutra 61, 64, 66, 74- 
75, 78 
Lao-tzu (J., Rosu1) 138 
on Knowledge 21 
on Names 1380 
on Relativity 115 
on use of the Senses 27 
on Speech 77 
on “Stupidity” 20 
on Tao 16, 17, 18, 182 
on Te 25 
Law 17n 
Leg, Invinc 130 
Lhasa, Council of 95n 
Li (J., Ri) 70 
Lranc-x’ar (J., Ryoxar) 178, 180 
Liberation, way of, 3f 
LiEH-Tzu 22 
Lila 34 
Liy-cut I-nstian (J., Ruvzar Gr- 
GEN) 100ff, 125, 151, 153, 
168 
Lin-chi Lu (J., Rinzai Roku) 
100ff, 151 
Ly Cn’ 81f 
Lokasamgraha 169 


Madhyamika 62f, 75n 

MasaxkasyaPa 45 

Mahayana 28, 49, 57-76 
Canon 31 

Maithuna 59n 

Matraux, ANDRE 175 

Manas 42, 75 

Mandukya Upanishad 38 

Manyjusni 68, 157 

Mano-vijnana 75 


231 


Ma-tsu Tao-r (J., Baso Dorrsv) 
82n, 96f, 122, 123 
Ma-yUan (J., BaeNn) 178, 179 
Matter 12, 39, 72 
Maya 38ff, 44f, 56, 75, 180 
Measurement 41f, 72, 180 
See also Maya 
Meditation 54f, 154-159 
See also Dhyana, Za-zen 
Memory 6 
Middle Way 30 
Mind 
See Hsin 
Miyamoto MusasH 182 
Mo-chao (J., Mokusho) 
107 
Mo chih ch’u 148f 
Moksha 386ff, 50 
Monasticism 81, 99, 103f 
Mondo 
See Wen-ta 
Monier WILuiamMs, Sm M. 31n 
Monism 40 
Moon-in-the-Water 118f 
Morality 52, 107, 147£ 
MonriTAkE 188 
Mu 
See Wu 
Mu-cu’! (J., MoxkE1) 178, 179, 
180 
Mu-cuou Tao-tsunc (J., Boxuyu 
Dosno or Domyo) 117 
Mundaka Upanishad 34 
Muatl, T. R. V. 67n 
Music, Oriental and Western 9 
Muso Koxusm 182 
Mythology 34 


Zen 


232 


Nacarjuna 58, 59, 62, 66, 67n, 
71f 
and Pure Land 69 
Nama 41, 43 
Nama-rupa 42 
Namo-amitabhaya 68 
Namu Amida Butsu 129 
See also Amitabha, Nembutsu, 
Pure Land 
NAN-CH'UAN P’u-yUAN (J., NAN- 
SEN Fucan) 98, 129, 184, 
200 
Naturalness 102, 184, 152 
See also Tzu-jan 
Nature 12 
NEEDHAM, JOSEPH 17n 
Negative doctrine 37 
Nembutsu 171f 
See also Amitabha, Pure Land 
Neti, neti 34 
Nien (J., Nen) 13, 93, 151 
Nirmanakaya 71, 158 
Nirvana (Pali: Nibbana) 50f, 57f, 
60, 63f, 69, 78, 101, 144, 
201 
Nirvikalpa 38 
Niu-t’ou, Mount, 89 
Nonduality 40, 53 
Nonsense 146 
Now, the Eternal 55, 154, 199ff 
Dogen on 158f 
Hui-neng on 201 


Opa Nosunaca 135 
Organism, philosophy of 16f, 17n 


Padmasana 54 


Painting 177-182 
Pali Canon 31, 45, 54n, 58, 60 


INDEX 


Pali scholarship 30f 
P’anc-YunN (J., Hoxojr) 133 
Pantheism 146 
PARAMARTHA 84 
Paravritti 78 
Patriarchate, the Zen, 84 
Peuuiot, P. 84 and n 
Pi-kuan 86f 
Pi-yen Lu (J., Hekigan Roku) 108 
Pinc-TING TuNG-Tzu 128 
Po-cHanc Huar-nal (J., Hyakuyo 

Exar) 85n, 98f, 122, 129 
Poetry 177 

See also Haiku 

Prajna 66, 69, 71, 82, 96, 109, 

153, 154, 166 
Prajna-paramita 62 
Prajna-paramita-hridaya Sutra 64 
Prana 50 
Pratitya-samutpada 48n 
Pratyeka-buddha 101 
Preta 30 
Pure Land 59, 69, 108, 129 
Purposelessness 147, 176, 181 
Purusha 32 
Pu-tar (J., Horer) 181 


RATNASAMBHAVA 68 
Rebirth 49 
Relativity 63, 115-122 
Relaxation 171 
Rigveda 32f 
RINZAI 

See Lin-chi 
Rinzai School 95, 106, 111, 159 
Rishi 44 
Ritual 158 
Roeishu 183 


INDEX 


Role 5f 

Rorschach Test 14 
Roshi 109, 161,, 162f£ 
Rupa 41, 43, 64, 72 
Ryoanji 194 

Ryokan 108, 188f 


Sabi 181, 185f 
Sadhana 37 
Sahaja 79 
Samadhi 52f, 98, 96, 109 
Sambhogakaya 71 
Sambodhi 82 
Samsara 45, 48 and n, 60ff, 63f, 
69, 188 
Samurai 107, 143 
Samyak 51 
Sangha 31 
Sanskrit scholarship 30f 
Sanzen 109, 149, 157, 163, 164f 
Saptasatika-prajna-paramita Sutra 
64, 68 
SanaHa 78f 
Sasaxk1, RutH 95n, 131n, 161n 
Sasak1, SOKEI-AN 121, 167 
Sat 35 
Satori (Ch., Tun-wu) 22, 77, 83, 
87f, 105, 126, 154, 158 
Bankei on 145 
and Doubt 170 
Intentional 197 
and Koan 106, 161 
and Relaxation 171 
Wu-men on 164 
Self 6 
See also Anatman, Atman, Ego 
Semantics 130f 
Sen (Soshu) School 190 


233 


SEN-NO-Rikyu 191 

Senc-cHao 80ff, 85 

SENG-Ts'AN (J., Sosan) 88f 

SENGAI 182 

Sesshin 157 

SEssHu 108, 179f, 182 

Shakti 59 

SHAnKana 36f 

SHEN-HsIu (J., SHINSHU or JIN- 
sHu) 91f 

SHEN-HuUI, Ho-TsE (J., KaTaKu 
JInNE) 83, 95, 96 

on Meditation practice 109 

Shih (J., Ji) 70 

SHIH-TE (J., Jrroxu) 181 

Sumn-t’ou Hsi-cH'1en (J., SEKITO 
KisEN) 97 

Shingaku 177 

Shingon 110n 

SHINRAN SHONIN 171 

Shobogenzo 82, 108, 122, 123, 
124, 158, 159 

Short Path 79 

SHuBuN 182 

Smriti 52f 

Sodo 156 

Soca Jasoxu 182 

Sono-mama 185 

Soto School 95, 106, 107, 111, 
154, 158f, 169 

Spirit 12 

Spontaneity 

See Naturalness, Tzu-jan 

Sravaka 60 

STCHERBATSKY, T. 63 

Su 2] andn 

Sukha 46 

Sukhavati 59 


234 
Sumi-e 178f 
Sunya, -ta 62, 64, 67, 71, 74, 82, 
170 
in Painting 179 
Sunyavada 62, 66 
Suzux1, DaiseTz T. 22, 83, 86, 
95n, 128, 149 
Svabhava 41, 63 
Ta-Hu1 Tsunc-Kao (J, Dar 
Soxo) 105 
Takuan ZENJ1 139, 149, 151, 195 
T’an-ching (J., Rokusodangyo) 
92n, 93, 94, 111, 201 
Tantra 59 and n, 78f 
Tao (J., Do) 12, 15ff, 97, 98, 99, 
100, 115 
as a “Craft-way” 176 
and Speech 16 and n 
Yiin-men on 141 
Tao-an 81 
TAO-HSIN (J., Dostin) 89 
TAo-sHENG 83, 85 
Tao Te Ching 13 
See also Lao-tzu 
Tao-yYUan (J., Docen) 105 
Taoism 3-28 
and Alchemy 103, 109 
and Art 175f 
and Yoga 198 
and Zen 81, 85, 88, 93, 100, 
134 
Tapas 44 
Tathagata 55, 67 
Tathata 67f, 71, 78, 74, 127, 
131 
Te (J., Toku) 13, 25ff, 185 
Te-cHao 103 


INDEX 


TE-SHAN HSUAN-CHIEN (J., TOKU- 
SAN SENKAN) 131 
Tea 86, 190f 
See also Cha-no-yu 
Theosophy 161f 
Theravada 31 
Thought 53, 123 
See also Hsin, Nien 
Tibetan Buddhism 79 
Tien-t’ai (J., Tendai) 91, 103 
TiLopa 79 
Time, Indian view of, 35 
Zen view of 122ff, 158f, 199fF 
Toyo Ercuo 117n 
Trikaya 71 
Trishna (Pali: Tanha) 44, 47£ 
Ts'ai-ken T’an (J., Saikontan) 193 
andn 
Ts’AO-SHAN PEN-CHI (J., SOZAN 
Honyjakvu) 103 
T’so-chan I (J., Zazengi) 110n 
Ts’uI-wEI (J., Suir) 125, 130 
TsunGc-MI, KUEI-FENG (J., Keno 
SHumitsu) 103 
T’UNG-SHAN LIANG-CHIEH_  (J., 
Tosan Ryoxa1) 18, 103, 168 
T'UNG-SHAN SHOU-CH’U (J., TOSAN 
. SHusHO) 127f, 182 
Tzu-jan (J., Shizen) 10, 12, 15, 
17, 79n, 89, 134ff, 144 


Unbom 141 

Upanishads 30, 31, 43, 47 

Upaya 58, 59, 60, 69, 127, 161, 
163 


VaIROCANA 68 
Vajracchedika 45, 61, 78, 91, 126 


INDEX 


VASUBANDHu 58, 72 
Vedanta 3, 40 

Vedas 30, 44 

Vijnana 75 
Vijnaptimatra 72, 90 
Vikridita 75 
Vimalakirti Sutra 80f 
Vinaya 85, 161 
Vision analogy 8f, 19, 23f, 200 
Visuddhimagga 56 
Vritti 50 


Wabi 181, 186 
Waka 183 
Wanc-wE1 178 
Warfare, Zen and, 107 
Wave analogy 123 
Wayman, A. 79n 
WEI-LANG 
See Hui-neng 
Wen-ta (J., Mondo) 87, 94, 130 
and Koan 105 


Quoted: 

“I don’t know” (Bodhi- 
dharma) 86 

Peace of mind (Bodhi- 
dharma) 87 


“Who binds you?” (Seng- 
ts'an) 89 

Name and nature (Tao-hsin) 
90 

Polishing tile (Huai-jang) 96 
Ordinary mind (Nan-ch’iian) 
98 

Three _ Barriers 
lung) 106 
Dressing and eating (Mu- 
chou) 117 


(Huang- 


235 


Wild geese (Ma-tsu) 122 
Cypress tree (Chao-chou) 
127 
Three pounds of flax (T’ung- 
shan) 127 
Ping-ting (Fa-yen) 128 
Namu Amida Butsu (Ippen) 
129 
Pitcher (Po-chang) 129 
Chin-rest (Ts’ui-wei) 130 
Winter and Spring (Yiin- 
men 132 
“Come closer” (Bankei) 150 
“Cloud in sky” (Yao-shan) 
153 
“Kiangsu in March” (Feng- 
hsiieh) 182 
Squirrel (Fa-ch’ang) 201 
Wheel of Becoming 162n 
Wu (J., Mu) 98 
Koan 105 
Wu, Emperor 84, 86 
Wv-hsin (J., Mushin) 23, 79n, 93, 
100, 139f, 181, 195 
Wu-men Hutr-x’ar (J., Mumon 
Exar) 163f 
Wu-men Kuan (J., Mumonkan) 
98, 105, 163 
Wu-nien (J., Munen) 79n, 93, 
100, 139, 151, 195 
Wu-shih (J., Buji) 126, 148, 152, 
168, 170 
and Haiku 184 
Wu Tao-tzu 178 
Wv-tsunc, Emperor 103 
Wu-wei (J., Mui) 16f, 19, 52, 89, 
96, 141, 148 
See also Purposelessness 


236 


Yang 175, 176 

YAO-sHAN 153 

Yathabhutam 52 

YEN-sHou 103 

YEN-T’ou CuH’UaN-HUO (J., GANTo 
ZENKATSU) 135 

Yin 175, 176 

Yoga 3, 44, 50, 76, 198 

Yogacara 72ff, 90 

Yogasutra 50, 80 

Yoriromo 107 

YUan-wu K’o-cu’'tn (J., ENco Ko- 
xucon) 105, 147 

Yugapat 78 

Yugen 182, 187f 

YUn-FENG 170 


INDEX 


YUN-MEN WEN-YEN (J., UmMoNn 
Bunen) 132, 185, 139, 141, 
169 


Za-zen (Ch., T’so-chan) 85, 92, 
109-112, 154-159, 196 
Breathing 198f 
Posture 156 
Zen, origin of term, 54 
Zendo 156 
Zenga 179, 182 
Zenrin Kushu 117 and n, 118, 
119, 125, 126, 184, 136, 146, 
147, 152, 153, 171, 181, 188 
and Haiku 182 
and Koan 167 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


ALAN waTTs, who held both a master’s degree in theology and 
a doctorate of divinity, is best known as an interpreter of Zen 
Buddhism in particular, and of Indian and Chinese philosophy 
in general. Standing apart, however, from sectarian membership, 
he has earned the reputation of being one of the most original and 
“unrutted” philosophers of the century. He was the author of some 
twenty books on the philosophy and psychology of religion. He 
died in 1973. 


