BUDDHISM 
‘THE RELIGION OF 
No-RELIGION 


BUDDHISM 


THE RELIGION OF NO-RELIGION 


THE EDITED TRANSCRIPTS 


ALAN WATTS 
at a seminar aboard the SS Vallejo, 1966 


BUDDHISM 


THE RELIGION OF NO-RELIGION 


THE EDITED TRANSCRIPTS 


Ay wants 


TUTTLE Publishing 


Tokyo | Rutland, Vermont | Singapore 


Paperback published in 1999 by Tuttle Publishing, an imprint of 
Periplus Editions (HK) Ltd. 


www.tuttlepublishing.com 
Copyright © Mark Watts 1996 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without 
ptior permission from the publisher. 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 


Watts, Alan, 1915-1973. 
Buddhism, the religion of no-religion: the edited transcripts/ 
by Alan Watts. —Ist ed. 
xii, 98 p. ; 23 cm.—(Love of wisdom library) 
ISBN 0-8048-3056-8 I. Buddhism. 
I. Title. II. Series: Watts, Alan, 1915-1973. 
Alan Watts “Love of wisdom” library. 
BQ4055.W356 1996 
294.3—dc20 95051266 
CIP 


Photo courtesy of Alan Watts Electronic Educational Programs 


ISBN 978-0-8048-3203-8 
ISBN 978-1-4629-0167-8 (ebook) 


Distributed by: 


North America, Latin America & Europe 
Tuttle Publishing 


364 Innovation Drive 

North Clarendon, VT 05759-9436 U.S.A. 

Tel: I (802) 773-8930; Fax: I (802) 773-6993 
info@tuttlepublishing.com 


www.tuttlepublishing.com 


Asia Pacific 

Berkeley Books Pte. Ltd. 

61 Tai Seng Avenue #02-12 

Singapore 534167 

Tel: (65) 6280-1330; Fax: (65) 6280-6290 
inquiries@periplus.com.sg 


www.periplus.com 

17161514 131211109 I405MP 
Cover design by Jeannet Leendertse 

Printed in Singapore 


Tuttle Publishing® is a registered trademark of Tuttle Publishing, a 
division of Periplus Editions (Hk) Ltd. 


Dedicated to the living teachings 
of Shunryu Suzuki, Roshi 


CONTENTS 


Introduction 

I. The Journey from India 

II. The Middle Way 
III. Religion of No-Religion 
IV. Buddhism As Dialogue 

V. Wisdom of the Mountains 
VI. Transcending Duality 


INTRODUCTION 


Aue widespread influence of Buddhism is due in part to the skill with 


which a way of liberation, first taught in ancient India, was refined by its 
teachers and became accessible to people of diverse cultures. For, as Alan 
Watts commented during a seminar aboard his ferryboat home in 
Sausalito, California, in the late sixties: 


The Hindus, the Buddhists, and many other ancient peoples do not, 
as we do, make a division between religion and everything else. 
Religion is not a department of life; it is something that enters into 
the whole of it. But when a religion and a culture are inseparable, it is 
very difficult to export a religion, because it comes into conflict with 
the established traditions, manners, and customs of other people. 


So the question arises, what are the essentials of Hinduism that 
could be exported? And when you answer that question, you will find 
Buddhism. As I explained, the essence of Hinduism, the real deep 
root, is not a kind of doctrine or even a special kind of discipline, 
although of course disciplines are involved. The center of Hinduism 
is an experience of liberation called moksha, in which, through the 
dissipation of the illusion that each man and woman is a separate 
thing in a world consisting of nothing but a collection of separate 
things, you discover that you are, in a way, on one level an illusion, 
but on another level you are what they call the self, the one self, 
which is all that there is. 


Alan Watts’s interest in Eastern thought can be followed back to his 
childhood, where he was surrounded by Oriental art. His mother was a 
teacher for the children of missionaries who traveled abroad, and often 
on their return from China the missionaries would give her gifts of 
embroideries and landscape paintings in the style of the great classical 
Asian artists. Years later, while on tour in Japan with a small group of 
students, Watts recounted the origins of his interest in the arts and 


philosophies of the Far East: 


I had an absolute fascination for Chinese and Japanese secular 
painting—the landscapes, the treatment of flowers and grasses and 
bamboo. There was something about that treatment that struck me 
as astonishing, even though the subject matter was extremely 
ordinary. Even as a child I had to find out what that strange element 
in those bamboo and grasses was. I was, of course, being taught by 
those painters to see grass, but there was something else in their 
paintings I could never put my finger on. That “something else” was 
the thing I will call the religion of no-religion. It is the supreme 
attainment of a buddha: it cannot be detected; it leaves no trace. 


As a young man growing up in Kent, England, Alan Watts’s curiosity 
about the philosophies of Asia led him to explore the bookstores around 
Cambridge and eventually to the Buddhist Lodge in London. He 
attended lodge meetings with Christmas Humphreys and soon met the 
Zen Buddhist scholar D. T. Suzuki. Watts’s formative articles on 
Buddhism are found in his collected early writings, and they reflect an 
understanding of Buddhist thought quite advanced for his time. His two 
subsequent books on Zen Buddhism enjoyed widespread popularity, and 
by the early sixties Alan Watts was living in California, writing 
extensively on Eastern thought, and conducting regular speaking tours 
across the country and in Europe. During this period Alan Watts 
traveled to Japan twice—once in 1963 and again in 1965. It was on the 
second Japan tour that he recorded himself in a series of talks that have 
come to be known as the Japan Seminars. Today these sessions offer one 
of the most readily comprehensible introductions to Buddhism available 
in the English language. Watts presents the essential tenets of Buddhism 
in a concise form, rich with illustrative stories and infused with the spirit 
in which this great tradition has evolved. The current volume is 
composed of four sessions from the Japan Seminars— The Journey from 
India, The Middle Way, Religion of No-Religion, and Buddhism As 
Dialogue—and two sessions on Tibetan Buddhism recorded four years 
later in 1969 aboard his ferryboat in Sausalito, California— Wisdom of 
the Mountains and Transcending Duality. These selections provide an 
intimate overview of the development of Buddhist thought and offer an 
introduction to one of the world’s most fascinating ways of liberation. 


—Mark Watts 


August 1995 


THE JOURNEY FROM INDIA 


CHAPTER ONE 


L, order to introduce Buddhism, it is necessary to remember the whole 


background of the worldview of India and study Indian cosmology, just 
as you would have to study the Ptolemaic cosmology and worldview in 
order to understand Dante and much of medieval Christianity. The 
Hindu cosmology and view of the universe has come into Japanese life 
through Buddhism, but it antedates Buddhism. Buddhism simply 
adopted it as a matter of course, just as you would probably adopt the 
cosmology of modern astronomy if you invented a new religion today. 


Human beings have had three great views of the world. One is the 
Western view of the world as a construct or artifact, by analogy with 
ceramics and carpentry. Then there is the Hindu view of the world as a 
drama, looked at as a play. Third is the organic Chinese view, looking on 
the world as an organism, a body. But the Hindu view sees it as a drama, 
or simply that there is what there is, and always was, and always will be, 
which is called the self; in Sanskrit, atman. Atman is also called 
brahman, from the root bri: to grow, to expand, to swell, related to our 
word breath. Brahman, the self in the Hindu worldview, plays hide-and- 
seek with itself forever and ever. How far out, how lost can you get? 
According to the Hindu idea, each one of us is the godhead, getting lost 
on purpose for the fun of it. And how terrible it gets at times! But won't 
it be nice when we wake up? That’s the basic idea, and I’ve found that any 
child can understand it. It has great simplicity and elegance. 


This cosmology or conception of the universe has many features, 
including the kalpas, or vast periods of time through which the universe 
passes. Another aspect is the six worlds, or paths of life. This idea of six 
worlds is very important in Buddhism, although it comes from 
Hinduism, and is represented in what is called the phava chakra. Phava 
means “becoming”; chakra means “wheel.” The wheel of becoming, or 
wheel of birth and death, has six divisions. The people on top are called 


devas. The people on the bottom are called naraka. Devas are angels, the 
people who are the supreme worldly successes. The naraka are 
tormented in hell and they are the supreme worldly failures. These are 
the poles: the happiest people and the saddest people. In between comes 
the world of the pretas, or hungry ghosts, next to the naraka in hell. The 
pretas are the frustrated spirits who have tiny mouths and enormous 
bellies—huge appetites but very limited means of satisfying them. Next 
up from the pretas are the human beings. They are supposed to hold a 
middle position in the six worlds. Then you go up from the human 
beings to the devas and then you start coming down again. The next 
world is called the asura, in which are the wrathful spirits, 
personifications of scorn and of all the anger and violence of nature. 
Next down are the animals, coming between the asura and the hells. 


These needn't be taken literally; they are different modalities of the 
human mind. We are in the naraka world when we are frustrated and in 
torment. When we are merely chronically frustrated we are in the preta 
world. When we are in a state of equanimity or even-mindedness, we are 
in the human world. When we are deliriously happy we are in the deva 
world. When we are furious we are in the asura world. And when we are 
dumb we are in the animal world. These are all modalities, and it is 
terribly important to understand that in Buddhism, the better you get, 
the more you go up to the deva world, the worse you get, the more you 
go down to the naraka world. Everything that goes up has to come down; 
you can't improve yourself indefinitely. If you improve yourself beyond a 
certain limit you simply start to get worse, like when you make a knife 
too sharp and it begins to wear away. Buddhahood, liberation, or 
enlightenment is not on any place on the wheel, unless it might be the 
center. By ascending, by becoming better, you tie yourself to the wheel by 
golden chains. By retrogressing and becoming worse, you tie yourself to 
the wheel with iron chains. But the Buddha is the one who gets rid of the 
chains altogether. 


This explains why Buddhism, unlike Judaism and Christianity, is not 
frantically concerned with being good; it is concerned with being wise. It 
is concerned with being compassionate, which is a little different from 
being good, with having tremendous sympathy and understanding and 
respect for all the ignorant people who don’t know that they’re it but 
who are playing the very far-out game of being “you and I” This is why 
every Hindu greets his brother not by shaking hands but by putting his 
hands together and bowing. And this is basically why the Japanese bow 
to each other, and why the Buddhist rituals are full of the bowing 


gesture, because you are honoring the self playing the roles of all the 
people around you. All the more honor is due when the self has 
forgotten what it is doing and is therefore in a very far-out situation. That 
is the basic Hindu view of the world, and the cosmology that goes along 
with Buddhism. 


According to taste, temperament, tradition, popular belief, and so on, 
there is this additional idea that when the lord, or self, pretends that it is 
each of us, it first of all pretends that it is an individual soul called the 
jivatman. The jivatman reincarnates through a whole series of bodies, 
life after life after life. According to what is called karma, literally 
meaning “doing” or “the law of doing, acts occur in a series and are 
linked with each other in an unbreakable chain. Everybody’s karma is the 
life course that he will work out through perhaps innumerable lifetimes. 
I’m not going into that, because a lot of Buddhists do not believe it. 


For example, Zen people are quite divided on this, and say they don’t 
believe literally in reincarnation—that after your funeral you suddenly 
become somebody different, living somewhere else. They say 
reincarnation means that if you, sitting here now, are really convinced 
that you are the same person who walked in the door half an hour ago, 
you are being reincarnated. If you are liberated, you will understand that 
you are not. The past does not exist; the future does not exist. There is 
only the present. That is the only real you that there is. Zen master 
Dogen put it this way, “Spring does not become summer. First there is 
spring and then there is summer. Each season stays in its own place’ In 
the same way, the you of yesterday does not become the you of today. T. 
S. Eliot has the same idea in his poem Four Quartets, where he says that 
when you settle down in the train to read your newspaper, you are not 
the same person who, a little while before, left the platform. If you think 
you are, you are linking up your moments in a chain. This is what binds 
you to the wheel of birth and death, unlike when you know that every 
moment where you are is the only moment. So a Zen master will say to 
somebody, “Get up and walk across the room.’ And when they come 
back he asks, “Where are your footprints?” They’ve gone. 


Where are you? Who are you? When we are asked who we are, we 
usually give a kind of recitation of a history. “I’m So-and-so. I was given 
this name by my parents. I’ve been to such-and-such a college. I’ve done 
these things in my profession” And we produce a little biography. The 
Buddhist says, “Forget it; that’s not you. That is some story that’s all past. 
I want to see the real you, the you you are now.’ Nobody knows who that 


is, because we do not know ourselves except through listening to our 
echoes and consulting our memories. But then the real you leads us back 
to this question, Who is the real you? We shall see how they play with 
this in Zen koans to get you to come out of your shell and find out who 
you really are. 


In India this worldview is tied up with a whole culture involving 
every circumstance of everyday life, but Hinduism is not a religion in the 
same sense that Episcopalianism or even Roman Catholicism are. 
Hinduism is not a religion, it is a culture. In this respect it’s more like 
Judaism than Christianity, because a person is still recognizable as a Jew 
even though they don’t go to synagogue. Jewish people, coming from a 
line of Jewish parents and ancestors who have been practicing Jews, still 
continue certain cultural ways of doing things, certain mannerisms and 
attitudes, so they are cultural Jews instead of religious Jews. Hinduism is 
the same sort of thing; it is a religious culture. Being a Hindu really 
involves living in India. Because of the differences of climate, of arts, 
crafts, and technology, you cannot be a Hindu in the full sense in Japan 
or in the United States. 


Buddhism is Hinduism stripped for export. The Buddha was a 
reformer in the highest sense: someone who wants to go to the original 
form, or to re-form it for the needs of a certain time. The word buddha is 
a title, not a proper name, in the same way as Christ means “the 
anointed” and is not the surname of Jesus. “Buddha” is not the surname 
of Gautama, but means “the one who is awakened” (from the root in 
Sanskrit budh, to know); Buddha is the man who woke up, who 
discovered who he really was. 


The crucial issue wherein Buddhism differs from Hinduism is that it 
doesn’t say who you are; it has no idea, no concept. I emphasize the 
words idea and concept. It has no idea and no concept of God because 
Buddhism is not interested in concepts, it is interested in direct 
experience only. From the Buddhist standpoint all concepts are wrong, 
in the same way that nothing is really what you say it is. Is this a stool? 
When I turn it over—now it’s a wastebasket. When I beat on it, it’s a 
drum. So this thing is what it does. Anything you can use it for is what it 
is. If you have a rigid idea that it is a stool and you can only sit on it, 
you're kind of stuck. But if you see all these other things as well, then you 
suddenly see that anything can be everything. In the same way, 
Buddhism does not say that what you really are is something definable, 
because if you believe that, you are stuck with an idea and cling to it for 


spiritual security. 


A lot of people say they want a religion as something to hold on to. A 
Buddhist would say to cut that out. As long as you hold on to something, 
you do not have religion. You are only really there when you let go of 
everything and do not depend on any fixed idea or belief for your sanity 
or happiness. You might think Buddhism is very destructive, because it 
breaks down or does not believe in God. It does not believe in an 
immortal soul or seek any solace in any idea of life after death. It 
absolutely faces the fact of the transiency of life. There is nothing you can 
hold on to, so let go. There is no one to hold on to anything, anyway. 
Buddhism is the discipline of doing that. But if you do that, you see, you 
discover something much better than any belief, because you have got 
the real thing, only you cannot say what it is. 


They say in Zen that if you are enlightened you are like a dumb man 
who has had a wonderful dream. When you have had a wonderful dream 
you want to tell everybody what it is, but you cannot if you are dumb, if 
you cannot speak. The real thing in Buddhism, which they call nirvana, is 
sort of equivalent to moksha, or liberation. Nirvana means “to blow 
out”—the sigh of relief—because if you hold your breath, you lose it. If 
you hold on to yourself, you hold on to life or the breath or spirit; you 
hold on to God. Then it is all dead; it becomes just a rock, just an idol. 
But let go, breathe out, and you get your breath back. That’s nirvana. 


The Buddhists’ doctrine is the highest negativism. They characterize 
the ultimate reality as sunyata, which means emptiness; in Japanese this 
is ku, the character used for the sky or the air. When you get an airmail 
envelope to write home, the second character is ku, air, which means 
emptiness. They use this character to translate sunyata, emptiness; the 
fundamental nature of reality, the sky. But the sky is not negative 
emptiness; it contains all of us. It is full of everything that is happening, 
but you cannot put a nail in the sky and pin it down. In the same way, 
Buddhism is saying that you do not need any gizmos to be in the know. 
You do not need a religion. You do not need any Buddha statues, 
temples, Buddhist rosaries, and all that jazz. But when you get to the 
point that you know you do not need any of those things, you do not 
need a religion at all; then it is fun to have one. Then you can be trusted 
to use rosaries, ring bells, hit drums and clappers, and chant sutras. But 
those things will not help you a bit. They will just tie you up in knots if 
you use them as methods of catching hold of something. So every 
teacher of Buddhism is a debunker, not to be a smart aleck and show 


how clever he is, but out of compassion. Just as when a surgeon chops off 
a bad growth or a dentist pulls out a rotten tooth, so the Buddhist 
teacher is getting rid of your crazy ideas for you, which you use to cling 
to life and make it dead. 


There are two kinds of Buddhism, the first called Mahayana; maha is 
Sanskrit for “great”; yana means a vehicle or conveyance. The other is 
Hinayana, meaning the little vehicle; hina in Sanskrit means “little” That 
term was invented by the Mahayanists for the other people, who don't 
like it. They call themselves Theravada, which means: vada, the way; 
thera, of the elders. Theravada Buddhism you find now in Ceylon, 
Burma, Thailand, Cambodia, and generally South Asia. Mahayana you 
find in Nepal and northern India, where it originated, and in Tibet, 
China, Mongolia, Japan, and, to some extent, Indonesia. All the sects of 
Japanese Buddhism are Mahayana. 


What is the great difference between these two schools? The 
Theravada is very strict. It is a way for monks, essentially, rather than 
laymen. There are many ways of living Buddhism. The Theravada 
Buddhists are trying to live without desires: to have no need for wives or 
girlfriends, husbands or boyfriends; not to kill anything at all; living the 
strictest vegetarian way; and even straining their water so that they do 
not eat any little insects with it. Also in this very strict way, they 
meditate all the time and eventually attain nirvana, which involves total 
disappearance from the manifested world. 


Mahayana feels that that is a dualistic point of view. You do not need 
to get away from this world to experience nirvana, because nirvana is 
what there is. It is here; it is now. The ideal person of Mahayana is called 
a bodhisattva. This originally meant somebody on the way to becoming a 
buddha, but in Mahayana it means somebody who has become a buddha 
but has gone back into the world, in the spirit of compassion, in order to 
help all other beings to become awakened. And that is an endless task, 
like filling a well with snow. Putting snow into a well, it never fills up. At 
the Zen monastery, after they have said their homage to the Buddha, the 
dharma, which is the Buddha’s doctrine or method, and the sangha, the 
order of followers of the Buddha, then they take four vows, and one of 
them is “However innumerable sentient beings are, I vow to liberate 
them all?” So there is no end to that; there never comes a time when all 
sentient beings are liberated. But from the standpoint of one who is a 
buddha, everybody is liberated. In other words, a buddha would not say, 
“Look everybody, I’m a buddha. I’m more experienced than you, and I 


know more than you, and you owe me respect on that account.” On the 
other hand, a buddha would see you all as being exactly right; just where 
you are, all of you are buddhas. Even for those of you who do not know 
it, it is right for you not to know it at this moment. 


It is absolutely fundamental to an understanding of Buddhism to 
recognize that its whole method of teaching is dialectical. It consists of a 
dialogue between a teacher and a student. The method of this dialogue is 
called upaya, or “skillful means” used by the teacher to bring about the 
enlightenment of the student. Upaya implies expert pedagogy in 
teaching, but “deceit,” when used in a political context. Since Buddhism 
is a dialogue, what you ordinarily understand as the teachings of 
Buddhism are not the teachings of Buddhism, they are simply the 
opening gambit or process of this dialogue. The point is that Buddhism is 
not a teaching. Its essence consists in a certain kind of experience, a 
transformation of consciousness, which is called awakening or 
enlightenment, that involves our seeing through or transcending the 
hoax of being a separate ego. A Buddhist does not have the same 
tendency that a Christian has to want to find out what his faith is by 
going back to the most original sources. There has always been a 
tendency in Christianity to ask, “What did Jesus really teach? What is the 
pure New Testament, uncorrupted by theologians and by scribes who 
inserted things into the mouth of the master?” 


It does not occur to Buddhists to have this attitude because of this 
dialectic pattern. When you have an acorn, if it is a lively acorn it grows 
into an oak. That is the way it should be, it should develop into 
something. And just so Buddhism, as it has developed since the days of 
the Buddha, has gone a long way. It has become sometimes more 
complex, sometimes more simple, but it has changed radically because 
the seed that the Buddha planted was alive. For example, when we ask 
what the Buddhist scriptures are we might get two answers. In the 
Southern (Theravada) school there is a set of scriptures written in the 
Pali language, that are divided into three sections, called the Tripitaka, 
which means “three baskets,’ because the palm-leaf manuscripts on 
which these sutras were eventually written down were carried around in 
baskets, and three baskets of these palm-leaf manuscript volumes 
composed the Buddhist scriptures. 


However, in the evolution of these scriptures, the Buddha himself 
wrote nothing, nor did his immediate disciples. It is very important to 
remember that all Indian scriptures were, for many centuries, handed 


down orally. We have no clear guide as to their dates, because in handing 
down an oral tradition you are not always likely to preserve historical 
landmarks. Suppose we are talking about a certain king, and the name of 
this king will mark a historical point. In an oral tradition the name of the 
king is likely to be changed every time the story is told, to correspond to 
the king then reigning. Things that do change, that have a historical 
rhythm like a succession of kings, will be changed in handing down the 
oral tradition. But things that do not change, such as the essential 
principle of the doctrine, will not be altered at all. So remember that the 
Buddhist scriptures were handed down orally for some hundreds of 
years before they were ever committed to writing, and that accounts for 
their monotonous form. 


Everything is numbered; there are four noble truths, eight steps of 
the eightfold path, ten fetters, five skandhas, four brahma-viharas or 
meditation states, and so on. Everything is put in numerical lists so as to 
be memorized easily. Formulas are constantly repeated, and this is 
supposed to aid the memory. It is obvious that those scriptures of the 
Pali canon, when you really sit down and read them, have a certain 
monotony because of mnemonic aids, but also that, in the course of the 
time before they were written down, many monks spent wet afternoons 
adding to them and adding things in such a style that no inspired person 
would ever have said them. They have made commentaries on 
commentaries, and lots of them had no sense of humor. I always loved 
the passage where the Buddha is giving instructions on the art of 
meditation and he is describing a number of things on which one could 
concentrate. A commentator is making little notes on this and has made 
his list of things on which you could concentrate, like a square drawn on 
the ground or the tip of your nose or a leaf or a stone, and then it says, 
“or on anything” The commentator adds the footnote, “but not any 
wicked thing” That’s professional clergy for you, the world over. 


This sort of thing has obviously happened. But this accumulation, 
with attribution of one’s own writings to the Buddha, is not done in a 
dishonest way. It would be dishonest today with our standards of literary 
historicity and correctness. It would be very wrong of me to forge a 
document and pretend that it was written by some very venerable 
person, say by D. T. Suzuki or by Goethe. But centuries ago, both in the 
West and in the East, it was considered quite immoral to publish any 
book of wisdom under your own name, because you, personally, were 
not entitled to the possession of this knowledge. That is why you always 
put on any book of wisdom the name of the real author, that is the 


person who inspired you. In this way, it is perfectly certain that Solomon 
never wrote the Book of The Wisdom of Solomon. But it was attributed 
to Solomon because Solomon was an archetype of the wise man. In the 
same way, over the centuries, when various Buddhist monks and 
scholars wrote all kinds of sutras, or scriptures, and ascribed them to the 
Buddha, they were being properly modest. They were saying that these 
doctrines are not my doctrines, they are the doctrines that proceed from 
the Buddha in me, and therefore they should be ascribed to Buddha. And 
so over and above the Pali canon, there is an enormous corpus of 
scriptures written originally in Sanskrit and subsequently translated into 
Chinese and Tibetan. We have very inadequate manuscripts of the 
original Sanskrit, but we have very complete Chinese and Tibetan 
translations. 


It is primarily from Chinese and Tibetan sources that we have the 
Mahayana canon of scriptures, over and above the Theravada canon 
written in the Pali language. Pali is a softened form of Sanskrit. Whereas 
in Sanskrit one says “nirvana,” in Pali one says “nibbana.” Sanskrit says 
“karma”; Pali says “kamma.” Sanskrit says “dharma”; Pali says “dhamma.” 
It is a very similar language, but it is softer in its speech and articulation. 
It is a general feeling among scholars of the West today that the Pali 
scriptures are closer to the authentic teachings of the Buddha than the 
Sanskrit ones. With our Christian background and approach to 
scriptures, the West has built up a very strong prejudice in favor of the 
authenticity of the Theravada tradition as against the Mahayana 
tradition. 


The Mahayanists have a hierarchy of scriptures, the first for very 
simpleminded people. Next are about four grades, going progressively to 
the scriptures for the most insightful people. They say that the Buddha 
preached these to his intimate disciples first. Then slowly, as he reached 
out from the most intimate group to others, he came down to what is 
now the Pali canon, as the scriptures for the biggest dunderheads, but 
the ones he preached first were not revealed until long, long after his 
death. So the Mahayanists have no difficulty in making a consistent story 
about the fact that the scriptures in Sanskrit represent a level of 
historical evolution of Buddhist ideas that, from our point of view, could 
not possibly have been attained in the Buddha’s lifetime. But they say 
that the latest revealed was actually the first taught to the inmost 
disciples. 


We have to make allowances for these differences in points of view, 


and not entirely project Western standards of historical and 
documentary criticism onto Buddhist scriptures, because it is in the 
essence of Buddhism to be a developing process in dialogue. The initial 
steps of the dialogue are in the presumed earliest records of Buddhism. 
In the Four Noble Truths, it says that the problem that Buddhism faces is 
suffering. This word duhkha, which we translate as “suffering,” is the 
opposite of suhkha. Suhkha means what is sweet and delightful. Duhkha 
means the opposite, the bitter and frustrating. Mahayanists explain that 
the Buddha always taught by a dialectical method. That is, when people 
were trying to make the goal of life the pursuit of suhkha, or the pursuit 
of happiness, he counteracted this wrong view by teaching that life is 
essentially miserable. When people thought that there was a permanent 
and eternal self in each one of us, and clung to that self, in order to 
counteract this one-sided view, the Buddha taught the other extreme 
doctrine, that there is no fixed self in us, no ego. But a Mahayanist would 
always say that the truth is the Middle Way, neither suhkha nor duhkha, 
neither atman nor anatman, self nor nonself. This is the whole point. 


Once R. H. Blyth was asked by some students, “Do you believe in 
God?” He answered, “If you do, I don’t. If you don’t, I do” In much the 
same way, all Buddhist pedagogy is specifically addressed not to people 
in general, but to the individual who brings a problem. Wherever he 
seems to be overemphasizing things in one way, the teacher 
overemphasizes in the opposite way so as to arrive at the middle way. So 
this emphasis on life as suffering is simply saying that the problem we are 
dealing with is that we hurt. We human beings feel pretty unfairly 
treated because we are born into a world arranged so that the price we 
pay for enjoying it, for having sensitive bodies, is that these bodies are 
capable of the most excruciating agonies. Isn’t that a nasty trick to play 
on us? What are we going to do about it? This is the problem. 


When the Buddha says, “The cause of suffering is desire; the word 
translated as desire might better be something like “craving,” “clinging,” 
or “grasping.” He is saying, “I’m suggesting that you suffer because you 
desire.” Then suppose you try not to desire, and see if by not desiring you 
can cease from suffering. You could put the same thing in another way 
by saying to a person, “It’s all in your mind. There is nothing either good 
or ill, but thinking makes it so” Therefore, if you can control your mind 
you have nothing else that you need control. You do not need to control 
the rain if you can control your mind. If you get wet it is only your mind 
that makes you think it’s uncomfortable to be wet. A person who has 
good mental discipline can be perfectly happy wandering around in the 


rain. You do not need a fire if you have good mind control. But if you 
have ordinary, bad mind control, when it is cold you start shivering 
because you are putting up a resistance to the cold; you are fighting it. 
But don’t fight it, relax to the cold, as a matter of mental attitude, and 
then you will be fine. Always control your mind. This is another way of 
approaching it. 

As soon as the student begins to experiment with these things, he 
finds out that it is not so easy as it sounds. Not only is it very difficult not 
to desire, or to control your mind, but there is something phony about 
the whole business. This is exactly what you are intended to discover— 
that when you try to eliminate desire in order to escape from suffering, 
you desire to escape from suffering. You are desiring not to desire. I am 
not merely playing with logic but saying that a person who is escaping 
from reality will always feel the terror of it. It will be like the hound of 
heaven that pursues him. In a way he is escaping even when he tries not 
to escape. This is the point that this method of teaching was supposed to 
educate about and draw out from you. The first step is not to explain all 
this to you but to make the experiment not to desire, or the experiment 
to control your mind thoroughly. To understand this, you must go 
through some equivalent of that so as to come to the point where you see 
you are involved in a vicious circle. In trying to control your mind, the 
motivation is still clinging and grasping, still self-protection, lack of trust 
and love. When this is understood, the student returns to the teacher 
and says, “This is my difficulty, I cannot eliminate desire because my 
effort to do so is itself desire. I cannot eliminate selfishness because my 
reasons for wanting to be unselfish are selfish” 


As one of the Chinese Buddhist classics puts it, “When the wrong 
man uses the right means, the right means work in the wrong way.’ Right 
means are all the traditional disciplines you use. You practice zazen and 
make yourself into a buddha. But if you are not a buddha in the first 
place, you cannot become one, because you will be the wrong man. You 
are using the right means, but because you are using them for a selfish or 
fearful intent, you are afraid of suffering; you do not like it and you want 
to escape. These motivations frustrate the right means. One is meant to 
find that out. 


In time, as this was thoroughly explored by the Buddha's disciples, 
there developed a very evolved form of this whole dialectic technique, 
which was called Madhyamika, meaning the middle way. It was a form 
of Buddhist practice and instruction developed by Nagarjuna, who lived 


in approximately 200 A.D. Nagarjuna’s method is simply an extension to 
logical conclusions of the method of dialogue that already existed, except 
that Nagarjuna took it to an extreme. His method is simply to undermine 
and cast doubts on any proposition to which his student clings, to 
destroy all intellectual formulations and conceptions, whatsoever, about 
the nature of reality or the nature of the self. 


You might think this was simply a parlor game, a little intellectual 
exercise. But if you engaged in it you would find it was absolutely 
terrifying, bringing you very close to the verge of madness, because a 
skillful teacher in this method reduces you to a shuddering state of total 
insecurity. I have watched this being done among people you would 
consider perfectly ordinary, normal Westerners, who thought they were 
just getting involved in a nice, abstract intellectual discussion. Finally the 
teacher, as the process goes on, discovers in the course of the discussion 
what are the fundamental premises to which every one of his students is 
clinging. What is the foundation of sanity? What do you base your life 
on? When he has found that out for each student, he destroys it. He 
shows you that you cannot found a way of life on that, that it leads you 
into all sorts of inconsistencies and foolishness. The student turns back 
to the teacher and says, “It’s all very well for you to pull out all carpets 
from under my feet; what would you propose instead?” And the teacher 
says, “I don’t propose anything” He’s no fool. He doesn't put up 
something to be knocked down. But here you are; if you do not put up 
something to be knocked down, you cannot play ball with the teacher. 
You may say, “I don’t need to.” But on the other hand, there is something 
nagging you inside, saying that you do. So you go play ball with him, and 
he keeps knocking down whatever you propose, whatever you cling to. 

This exercise produces in the individual a real traumatic state. People 
get acute anxiety that you would not expect if it were seen as nothing 
more than a very intellectual and abstract discussion. When it really gets 
down to it, and you find that you do not have a single concept you can 
really trust, it’s the heebie-jeebies. But you are preserved from insanity 
by the discipline, by the atmosphere set up by the teacher, and by the fact 
that he seems perfectly happy without anything in the way of a concept 
to cling to. The student looks at him and says, “He seems to be all right; 
maybe I can be all right too.” This gives a certain confidence, a certain 
feeling that all is not mad, because the teacher in his own way is perfectly 
normal. 


THE MIDDLE WAY 


CHAPTER Two 


| to emphasize that the religions of the Far East—Hinduism, 


Buddhism, and Taoism—do not require a belief in anything specific. 
They do not require obedience to commandments from above, and they 
do not require conformity to any specific rituals. Their objective is not 
ideas or doctrines, but rather a method for the transformation of 
consciousness, and our sensation of self. 


I emphasize the word sensation because it is the strongest word we 
have for direct feeling. When you put your hand on the corner of a table 
you have a very definite feeling, and when you are aware of existing, you 
also have a definite feeling. But in the view of the methods or disciplines 
of the East, our ordinary feeling of who we are and how we exist is a 
hallucination. To feel oneself as a separate ego, a source of action and 
awareness entirely separate and independent from the rest of the world, 
locked up inside a bag of skin, is in the view of the East a hallucination. 
You are not a stranger on the earth who has come into this world as the 
result of a fluke of nature, or as a spirit from somewhere outside nature 
altogether. In your fundamental existence you are the total energy of this 
universe playing the game of being you. The fundamental game of the 
world is the game of hide-and-seek. The colossal reality, the unitary 
energy that is the universe, plays at being many: it manifests itself as all 
these particulars around us. This is the fundamental intuition of 
Hinduism, Buddhism, and Taoism. 


Buddhism originated in northern India close to the area that is now 
Nepal, shortly after 600 B.c. A young prince by the name of Gautama 
Siddhartha became the man we call the Buddha. “Buddha” is a title based 
on the Sanskrit root budh, which means to be awake. A buddha is an 
individual who has awakened from the dream of life as we ordinarily take 
it to be and discovered who we truly are. This idea was not something 
new. There was already in the whole complex of Hinduism the idea of 


buddhas, of awakened people. Curiously, they are ranked higher than 
gods. According to the Hindus, even the gods or the angels—the devas— 
are still bound on the wheel of life, are still trapped within the rat race 
pursuit of success, pleasure, virtue (which originally meant strength), 
magical power, or other positives. They are under illusion—are bound to 
the wheel of life—because they still believe positive and negative are 
opposites and that either one can exist without the other. This is illusion. 
You only know what “to be” is by contrasting it with “not to be” The 
front of a coin implies the existence of the back. If you try to gain the 
positive and escape the negative, it is as if you were trying to arrange 
everything in a room so that all of it was up and nothing was down. You 
cannot do it; you have set yourself an absolutely insoluble problem. 


The basis of life is unity. Most people think of blue and red as being 
at opposite ends of the spectrum, but when they come together in the 
color purple, they actually complete a circle. Purple is the mixture of red 
and blue. Similarly, all sensations, all feelings, all experiences, occupy a 
point on a circle of sensations. Everyone is constantly operating through 
all the possible variations of experience. You cannot have one point on 
the circle without also knowing all the others. Even if you wanted to have 
only your favorite color, purple, you still have to have blue and red 
because without them you cannot have purple. 


Of course, behind all the various colors in the spectrum is white 
light. Behind everything that we experience, all our various sensations of 
sound, of color, of shape, of touch, there is also white light, but here I am 
using that phrase symbolically, not literally. Yet common to all sensation 
is this basic sense. If you explored your sensations and began reducing 
them to the basic sense, you would be on your way to reality, to that 
which underlies everything, the ground of being, the basic energy. To the 
extent that you realize this basic energy and know that you are identical 
with it, you transcend, overcome, and surpass the illusion that you are 
simply John Doe, Mary Smith, or whoever. The Buddha, the man who 
woke up, is regarded as one buddha among a potentiality of myriads of 
buddhas. Everybody can be a buddha. All people have in themselves the 
capacity to wake up from the illusion of being simply a separate 
individual. 


Buddhist teachings are divided and subdivided into groups of 
precepts. We are going to look at the Four Noble Truths of Buddhism, 
within which we will also encounter the Three Signs of Being, the 
Eightfold Path, the Five Vows, and the Three Refuges. Numbered 


statements of this type make the doctrines of Buddhism easier to 
understand. 


Before waking up to his buddha nature, Gautama Siddhartha 
practiced the various disciplines that were offered in the Hinduism of his 
time. He found them _ unsatisfactory, however, because they 
overemphasized asceticism, which required one to put up with as much 
pain as possible. There was a feeling at the time that if the problem of life 
is pain, let us suffer. This is the reason ascetics lie on beds of nails, hold a 
hand up forever, eat only one banana a day, renounce sex, and do other 
weird things. If they headed into pain, they believed, and did not become 
afraid but suffered as much as possible, they would overcome the 
problem of pain and set themselves free from anxiety. There is a certain 
sense to this. If you had absolutely no fear of pain, no anxieties, no hang- 
ups about it, how strong you would be! You would have ultimate 
courage. 


But the Buddha was very subtle. He was really the first historical 
psychologist, the first great psychotherapist. He saw that a person who is 
fighting pain, who is trying to get rid of pain, is still fundamentally afraid 
of it. Therefore the way of asceticism would not work, and equally, 
hedonism, the opposite of asceticism, would not work. Therefore the 
Buddha devised the doctrine that is called the Middle Way, that is 
neither ascetic nor hedonistic. 


This doctrine is summed up in what are called the Four Noble 
Truths. The first Noble Truth is duhkha, which in a very generalized 
sense means suffering. You could as easily say it means chronic 
frustration. Life as lived by most people is duhkha. It is, in other words, 
an attempt to solve insoluble problems, to draw a square circle, to have 
light without dark or dark without light. The attempt to solve problems 
that are basically insoluble, and to work at them through your whole life, 
is duhkha. 


Buddha went on to subdivide this first Noble Truth into the Three 
Signs of Being. 


The first sign is duhkha itself, frustration. 


The second is anitya, impermanence. Every manifestation of life is 
impermanent. Our quest to make things permanent, to straighten 
everything out and get it fixed, presents us with an impossible and 
insoluble problem, and therefore we experience duhkha, the sense of 
fundamental pain and frustration that results from trying to make 
impermanent things permanent. 


The third Sign of Being is anatman. The word atman means “self” 
Anatman means “nonself” I have explained elsewhere—in talking about 
Hinduism—that the idea of the ego is a social institution with no 
physical reality. The ego is simply your symbol of yourself. Just as the 
word water is a noise that symbolizes a certain liquid reality without 
being it, so too the idea of the ego symbolizes the role you play, who you 
are, but it is not the same as your living organism. Your ego has 
absolutely nothing to do with the way you color your eyes, shape your 
body, or circulate your blood. That is the real you, and it is certainly not 
your ego, because you do not even know how it is done. So anatman 
means, first, that the ego is unreal; there isn’t one. 


This brings us to the second of the Four Noble Truths, which is called 
trishna. Trishna is a Sanskrit word and the root of our word thirst. It is 
usually translated “desire” but it is better translated as “clinging,” 
“grabbing,” or to use excellent modern American slang, “a hang-up’ 


That is exactly what trishna is: a hang-up. When a mother is so afraid 
that her children may get into trouble that she protects them excessively, 
and as a result prevents them from growing, that is trishna. When lovers 
cling to each other excessively and feel they have to sign documents that 
they will swear to love each other always, they are in a state of trishna. 
When you hold on to yourself so tightly that you strangle yourself, that is 
trishna. 


The second Noble Truth leads back to the first: clinging is what 
makes for suffering. When you fail to recognize that this whole world is a 
phantasmagoria, an amazing illusion, a weaving of smoke, and you try to 
hold on to it, then you will suffer seriously. 


Trishna is itself based on avidya. Avidya is ignorance, and it means to 
ignore or overlook. We notice only what we think noteworthy, and so we 
ignore all kinds of things. Our vision of reality is highly selective; we pick 
out a few things and say that they are the universe. In the same way, we 
select and notice the figure rather than the background. Ordinarily, for 
instance, when I draw a circle on the blackboard, people see a ball, a 
circle, or a ring. But I have drawn a wall with a hole in it. You see? 
Similarly, we think we can have pleasure without pain. We want pleasure, 
the figure, and do not realize that pain is the background. Avidya is this 
state of restricted consciousness, or restricted attention. Bound by that 
state, we move through life, concentrating on one extreme or another, 
unaware of the fact that “to be” implies “not to be,’ and vice versa. 


The third Noble Truth is called nirvana. This word means “exhale?” 


You know that breath is life, and the Greek word pneuma conveys this 
same idea. It can mean either breath or spirit. In the Book of Genesis, 
when God had made the clay figurine that was later to be Adam, He 
breathed the breath of life into its nostrils and it became alive. Life is 
breath; but if you hold your breath you will lose your life. He who would 
save his life must lose it. Breathe in, in, in, get as much life as you can, 
and if you cling to it, you lose it. So nirvana means to breathe out: it is a 
great sigh of relief. Let the breath of life go because it will come back to 
you if you do. But if you do not let it go you will suffocate. A person in 
the state of nirvana is in a state of exhalation. Let go, don’t cling, and you 
will be in the state of nirvana. 


I reemphasize that I am not preaching to you about what you ought 
to do with your life. I am simply pointing out the state of affairs of the 
world as it is. There is no moralism in this whatsoever. If you put your 
hand into a fire, you will get burned. It is all right to get burned if you 
want to, but if it so happens that you do not want to get burned, then 
don’t put your hand in a fire. It is the same if you do not want to be ina 
state of anxiety. It is perfectly all right to be anxious, if you like to be 
anxious. Buddhism never hurries anyone. It says, “You've got all eternity 
to live in various forms, therefore you do not have just one life in which 
to avoid eternal damnation. You can go running around the wheel in the 
rat race just as long as you want, so long as you think it’s fun. And if 
there comes a time when you no longer think it’s fun to be anxious, you 
don't have to continue” Someone who disagrees with this may say, “We 
ought to engage the forces of evil in battle and put this world to right, 
and arrange everything in it so that everything is good and nothing is 
bad.” Try it, please. It is perfectly okay to try. And if you discover that 
these attempts are futile, you can then let go. You can give up clinging. 
Relax in that way and you will be in the state of nirvana. You will become 
a buddha. Of course, that will make you a rather astonishing person, 
although you may be subtle about it and disguise your buddhahood so 
that you will not get people mixed up. 


The Buddha explained that his doctrine or method was a raft, 
sometimes called a yana, meaning a vehicle or conveyance. When you 
cross a river on a raft and you get to the other shore, you do not pick up 
the raft and carry it on your back. People who are hooked on religion are 
always on the raft. They are going back and forth and back and forth on 
the raft. The clergyman tends to become a ferryman who is always on the 
raft and never gets over to the other shore. There is something to be said 
for that, of course. How else are we to get the raft back to the first shore 


to bring over more people? Somebody has to volunteer to make the 
return journey. But one must realize that the real objective is to get the 
people across and set them free. If you dedicate yourself to ferrying 
people across, do not ask them to come back on the raft with you. People 
must not think that the raft is the goal; they must understand that it is 
simply a conveyance to the other shore, which is the real goal. When 
clergymen say, “We would like your pledge, your voluntary contribution,’ 
and nobody knows how much money to give, that is attachment to the 
idea of the raft. 


We come now to the fourth Noble Truth, which is called marga. This 
word means “path” The way of Buddhism is often called the Noble 
Eightfold Path because of the eight methods or practices that are 
components of this last noble truth. These eight steps can be divided into 
three phases. They are not sequential and so do not need to be followed 
in any particular order. They are described by the word samyak, which, 
though it is usually translated as meaning “right, is actually the same, 
really, as our word sum: total, complete, all-inclusive. We might also use 
the word integrated—as when we say a person has integrity, is all of a 
piece, is not divided against himself—as a synonym for samyak. 


The first phase of the eightfold path of the fourth Noble Truth 
consists of three components: right view, right consideration, and right 
speech. Right view, samyak drishti, is related to samyak darshan, which 
means a point of view, or a viewing. When you go to visit a great guru or 
teacher to have darshan, you look at him and offer your reverence to 
him. Darshan has many senses, but it means, simply, to view, or to look 
at the view. 


As an example of right view, let us consider the right view of the 
constellation called the Big Dipper. When we look out from our specific, 
earthly point in space, it seems that the stars that form the Big Dipper 
must naturally form it, and always will. But imagine looking at them 
from somewhere else in space altogether. Those stars would not look like 
a dipper. They would be in an altogether different position relative to 
each other. What is the true relationship of those stars, then? There isn’t 
one? Or else you could say that the true view of those stars would be 
their relationship when looked at from all points of view simultaneously. 
That would be the truth. But there is no such thing as the truth. The 
world, in other words, does not exist independently of those who witness 
it. Its existence derives from the existence of a relationship between the 
world and its witnesses. So if there are no eyes in this world, the sun 


doesn’t make any light, nor do the stars. That which is, is a relationship. 
You can, for example, prop up two sticks by leaning them against each 
other. They will stand, but only by depending on each other. Take one 
away and the other falls. So in Buddhism it is taught that everything in 
this universe depends on everything else. 


This is called the Doctrine of Mutual Interdependence. Everything 
hangs on you and you hang on everything, just as the two sticks support 
each other. This idea is conveyed in the symbol of Indra’s net. Imagine a 
multidimensional spider’s web covered with dewdrops. Every dewdrop 
contains the reflection of all the other dewdrops, and in each reflected 
dewdrop are the reflections of all the other dewdrops in that reflection, 
and so on, ad infinitum. That is the image of the Buddhist conception of 
the universe. The Japanese call that ji ji muge. Ji means a thing, event, or 
happening. Muge means “no separation” So, between happening and 
happening there is no separation: ji ji muge. 

The second phase of the fourth Noble Truth has to do with action. It 
consists of three more paths: the paths of right action, right livelihood, 
and right effort. The Buddhist idea of ethics is based on expediency. If 
you are engaged in the way of liberation and you want to clarify your 
consciousness, your actions must be consistent with that goal. To this 
end, every Buddhist takes comfort in three refuges and makes five vows. 


The Three Refuges are the Buddha; the dharma, or doctrine; and the 
sangha, or the fellowship of all those who are on the way. The Five 
Precepts are to undertake to abstain from taking life, from taking what is 
not given, from exploiting the passions, from falsifying speech, and from 
being intoxicated. 


If you kill people you have to become involved in the consequences 
of that action. If you steal you have to suffer attachment to the 
consequences of that action. If you exploit your passions you must pay 
the consequences of that. A lot of people who suffer from obesity are 
trying simply to fill their empty psyche by stuffing themselves with food, 
but it is the wrong cure. If you start lying, you will become involved with 
the consequences of that action. Speech will collapse. So these five 
precepts represent a purely practical and utilitarian approach to 
morality. 

The last phase of the Eightfold Path concerns the mind, or its state of 
consciousness, and has to do with what we would ordinarily call 
meditation. In this phase are the two final aspects of the path, the 
seventh and eighth. They are called samyak smriti and samyak samadhi. 


Smriti means recollection or mindfulness. The word re-collect means 
to gather together what has been scattered. The opposite of “remember” 
is obviously “dismember.” What has been chopped up and scattered 
becomes re-membered. In the Christian scheme—“Do this in 
remembrance of me”’—the Christ has been sacrificed and chopped up, 
and the mass is a ritual of remembrance. One of the old liturgies says 
that the wheat that has been scattered all over the hills and then grows is 
gathered again into the bread, i.e., re-membered. In the Hindu view the 
world is regarded as the result of the dismemberment of the self, the 
brahman, the godhead. The one has been dismembered into the many. 
So remembrance means to realize that each single member of the many 
is really the one; that is re-collection. 


You can think of this in another way. It is really the same way, but I 
will not explain exactly how. I will leave you with a few puzzles. This 
other way to be recollected is to be completely here and now. 


There was a wise old boy who used to give lectures on these things 
and he would get up and not say a word. He would just look at the 
audience and examine every person individually, and everyone would 
start to feel uncomfortable. He wouldn't say anything but would just look 
at everyone. Then he would suddenly shout, “WAKE UP! Youre all 
asleep,” 


Are you here, recollected? Most people aren’t. They are bothering 
about yesterday and wondering what they are going to do tomorrow, and 
they are not all here. That is a definition of sanity, to be all here. To be 
recollected is to be completely alert and available for the present, which 
is the only place you are ever going to be in. Yesterday does not exist. 
Tomorrow never comes. There is only today. A great Sanskrit invocation 
says, “Look to this day, for it is life. In its brief course lies all the realities 
of our existence. Yesterday is but a memory. Tomorrow is only a vision. 
Look well then to this day.’ 


Beyond smriti, recollectedness, being all here, comes the last step of 
the Eightfold Path, samyak samadhi. Samyak samadhi is integrated 
consciousness; in it there is no separation between knower and the 
known, subject and object. You are what you know. 


We think ordinarily that we are witnesses to a constantly changing 
panorama of experience from which we, as the knowers of this 
experience, stand aside and watch. We think of our minds as a kind of 
tablet on which experience writes a record. Eventually experience, by 
writing so much on the tablet, wears it out, scratches it away, and then 


we die. But actually there is no difference between the knower and the 
known. I cannot explain this to you in words; you can only find it out for 
yourself. When I say, “I see a sight; I feel a feeling,’ 1 am being redundant. 
“I see” implies the sight. “I feel” implies the feeling. Do you hear sounds? 
No, you just hear. Or else you can say simply that there are sounds; either 
way of expressing it will do. If you thoroughly investigate the process of 
experiencing, you will find that the experience is the same as the 
experiencer. This is the state of samadhi. 


I suggested before that the organism and the environment are a 
single behavioral process. Now I will put it another way: the knower and 
the known are the same. You, as someone who is aware—along with all 
that you are aware of—are a single process. That is the state of samadhi. 


You get to the samadhi state by the practice of meditation. Virtually 
every Buddha figure is seen in the posture of meditation, sitting quietly, 
aware of all that is going on without commenting on it, without thinking 
about it. When you cease categorizing, verbalizing, talking to yourself, 
the difference between knower and known, self and other, simply 
vanishes. What is the difference, anyway? Can you point to the thing that 
makes my fingers different from each other? There is no thing called 
difference. The idea of difference is an abstraction. It just does not exist 
in the physical world. 


This is not to say, however, that my fingers are all the same. They are 
neither different nor the same. Difference and sameness are ideas. You 
cannot point to an idea. You cannot put your finger on it. This is what 
Buddhists mean when they say the world is basically sunya, empty, a 
void. Everything is sunya. You cannot catch the world in a conceptual net 
any more than you can catch water in a net. Sunya does not mean that 
the world itself and the energy of the world are nothing, however. It 
means that no concept of the world is valid. No ideas or beliefs or 
doctrines or systems or theories can contain the universe. 


If you “exhale,” then, if you let go of conceptions, you will be in the 
state of nirvana, for no reason that anybody can explain. When you enter 
that state there will well up from within you what the Buddhists call 
karuna, or compassion. This is the sense that you are not separate from 
everybody else but that everybody else is suffering as you are. It is a 
tremendous sense of solidarity with all other beings. The person who 
reaches nirvana does not withdraw from the world, therefore, but comes 
back from samadhi into it and its difficulties and all the problems of life 
renewed and filled with compassion for everyone. 


This is the secret of the Middle Way: you cannot be saved alone 
because you are not alone. You are not an isolated point on a circle. You 
are not one extreme point on a spectrum, separate from any of the other 
points. You are the whole cosmos. 


RELIGION OF NO-RELIGION 


CHAPTER THREE 


P reviousy I have discussed the bodhisattva doctrine in Mahayana 


Buddhism and have related it to the two great tendencies in Indian 
spirituality: antiworldliness—or — otherworldliness—and —_ world 
affirmation. I have shown that the highest kind of buddha is in a certain 
way a non-buddha. 


The highest kind of buddha is like an ordinary person. This comes 
out clearly in various tendencies in Zen. For example, all the paintings 
characteristic of Zen Buddhism in the Chinese and Japanese traditions 
are secular. They have a nonreligious atmosphere about them, whereas 
the paintings of the older Japanese Shingon and Tendai sects are 
religious paintings; you can tell at once that the subject matter of these 
paintings is religious. But with Zen painting the way of dealing with 
philosophical or spiritual themes is secular. 


This ordinary quality is apparent in the works of Sengai, a Zen monk 
from seventeenth-century Japan. When an artist like Sengai paints the 
Buddha, there is something slightly humorous about the image of the 
Buddha. He wears his halo over one ear, and there is an informality to 
him, a slight raffishness. This style comes from China, from those great 
Sung dynasty artists like Liangkai, who painted the sixth patriarch of Zen 
chopping bamboo, looking like an unkempt country oaf. The greatest 
Zen painting has as its subject matter themes that are not really religious 
at all. It uses pine branches, rocks, bamboos, and grasses, and you would 
never know that these were religious icons. 


Likewise in poetry, which we will go into more extensively later. A 
superb expression of Zen poetry is derived from the Chinese poet 
Layman Pang, who says, “Wondrous action, supernatural power, 
chopping wood and carrying water.” That is a little bit too religious for 
Zen taste, however. Preferable is Basho’s famous poem, “The old pond; a 
frog jumps in. Plop” “Plop” is the best English translation for the 


Japanese mizu no oto, which means, literally, “the water’s sound” That is 
a very high-style Zen poem, because it has nothing in it about religion. 
There is another poem by Basho that says, “When the lightning flashes, 
how admirable, he who does not think life is fleeting” The flash of 
lightning is a Buddhist cliche for the transiency of the world, that life 
goes by and disappears as fast as a flash of lightning. How admirable, the 
poet is saying, not to be trapped by a cliche. 


All religious comments about life eventually become cliches. Religion 
is always falling apart and promoting lip service and imitation. The 
imitation of Christ, for instance, is a perfect example. It is a terrible idea 
because everyone who imitates Christ becomes a kind of fake Jesus. In 
the same way, there are all kinds of imitation Buddhas in Buddhism, not 
only sitting on gilded wooden altars but sitting around in the 
monasteries, too. One might say that the highest kind of religious or 
spiritual attainment shows no sign that it is religious or spiritual. As a 
metaphor for this, there is in Buddhism the idea of the tracks of birds in 
the sky. Birds do not leave tracks, and so the way of the enlightened man 
is like the tracks of a bird in the sky. As a Chinese poem says, “Entering 
the forest, he does not disturb a blade of grass. Entering the water, he 
does not make a ripple” 


In other words, there is no sign about the spiritually advanced to 
indicate that they are self-consciously religious. Nor are they self- 
conscious about giving the world no sign of their advanced spiritual 
state. They are not like Protestants, self-consciously proud of their 
simplicity, criticizing the Catholics with their rituals. Historically, 
however, the real reason Protestants think Catholic rituals are insincere 
is that they are expensive. Protestantism started in the burgher cities of 
Europe, places like Augsburg, Hamburg, and Geneva, where the 
merchant class, who were the foundation of the bourgeoisie, were 
annoyed because every time a saint’s day came around all their 
employees got a day off to attend mass. There were so many of these 
nuisance holy days, as well as numerous contributions assessed by the 
church to pay for masses for the dead and to buy one’s way out of 
purgatory, that the merchants found this very uneconomical. The priests 
were getting the money instead of them, so they decried as unbiblical, 
irreligious, and wasteful all the finery of the Catholic religion, and sought 
a plain and simple alternative. In the course of time it became a sign of 
being genuinely religious to avoid rituals and colorful clothing and 
splendor in churches, and to be as ordinary as possible. But this is not an 
example of the way real religion gives no sign of being religious, because 


this simplicity and absence of ritual was itself a sign of piety; it was a way 
of advertising how spiritual one was. 


The true bodhisattva does not leave a track of any kind, either by 
being overtly religious or by being overtly nonreligious. 


But how can you be neither religious nor nonreligious? That is the 
great test. How can you avoid that trap of being one or the other? It is 
similar to the question, Are you a theist or an atheist? The theist is 
caught by God, and the idea of God or the belief in God, but the atheist 
is equally caught. If, for instance, an atheist is an atheist because he 
cannot stand the idea that God is watching him all the time—that there 
is an all-seeing eye prying into his most private life—then he is as 
trapped by his opposition to God as a theist is caught by his idea of God. 
Atheists who advertise their disbelief in God are very pious people. 
Nobody believes in God like an atheist: “There is no God, and I am His 
prophet.” The true bodisattva state is very difficult to pin down. It is 
neither supremely religious nor blatantly secular. It is a very subtle state. 
Everyone misses the point. Even people who think that the height of 
Buddhism or Zen is to be perfectly ordinary have still missed the point. 


There is an element of the nonreligious in the art, the painting, and 
the poetry that has been inspired by the appearance of ordinariness in 
Buddhist saints. Nevertheless, there is something about the way in which 
this nonreligious subject matter is handled that stops you. You know 
there is something strange about it. This is how I first became interested 
in Oriental philosophy. I had an absolute fascination for Chinese and 
Japanese secular painting—the landscapes, the treatment of flowers and 
grasses and bamboos. There was something about that treatment that 
struck me as astonishing, even though the subject matter was extremely 
ordinary. Even as a child I had to find out what the strange element in 
those bamboos and grasses was. I was, of course, being taught by those 
painters to see grass, but there was something else in their paintings that 
I could never put my finger on. That “something else” was this thing that 
I will call the religion of no-religion. It is the supreme attainment of a 
buddha: it cannot be detected; it leaves no trace. 


Some of you have seen the paintings of the Ten Stages of Spiritual 
Ox-herding. There are two sets of these paintings: a heterodox sequence 
and an orthodox. In the heterodox sequence, as the man catches the ox, 
the ox becomes progressively whiter, until in the end it disappears 
altogether. The last picture is of an empty circle. But the orthodox set of 
paintings does not end with the empty circle. The image of the empty 


circle is followed by two others. After the man has attained the state of 
emptiness—the state of no attachment to any spiritual or psychological 
or moral crutch—there follow two more steps. The first is called 
“Returning to the Origin.” It is represented by a tree beside a stream. The 
last is called “Entering the City With Gift-bestowing Hands.” It shows a 
picture of the Buddha Putai, in Japanese known as Hotei, who has an 
enormous belly, big ears, and carries around a colossal bag. What do you 
think his bag has in it? Trash, wonderful trash. Everything that children 
love. Things that everybody else has thrown away, and thought of as 
valueless, this Buddha collects and gives away to children. The saying is, 
“He goes on his way without following the steps of the ancient sages. His 
door is closed”—that is, the door of his house—“and no glimpses of his 
interior life are to be seen” 


In other words, when you erect a building, you have to put all kinds 
of scaffolding up. This shows that building is going on. When the 
building is complete, however, the scaffolding is taken down. The 
scaffolding is religion. To open a door, as they say in Zen, you may need 
to knock on it with a brick. But when the door is open, you do not carry 
the brick inside. Similarly, to cross a river you need a boat, but when you 
have reached the other side, you do not pick up the boat and carry it 
across the land on your back. The brick, the boat, the scaffolding, all 
represent religious technology, or method, and in the end these are all to 
disappear. The saint will not be found in church. However, do not take 
what I say literally. The saint can perfectly readily go to church without 
being sullied by church. It is ordinary people who too frequently come 
out of church stinking of religion. 


A disciple once asked a great Zen master, “Am I making progress?” 
He said, “You’re doing all right, but you have a trivial fault” 

“What is that?” 

“You have too much Zen.” 


“Well” the student said, “when you're studying Zen, don’t you think 
it’s very natural to be talking about it?” 


The master said, “When it is like an ordinary conversation, it is much 
better’ 


Another monk who was standing by, listening to this exchange, said 
to the master, “Why do you so dislike talking about Zen?” 


The master replied, “Because it turns one’s stomach” 
What did he mean when he said that it is better to talk about Zen 


when it is like an ordinary, everyday conversation? When the old master 
Joshu was asked, “At the end of the present epoch of history, when 
everything will be destroyed in fire, one thing will remain. What will it 
be?” Joshu replied, “It’s windy again this morning” 

In Zen when you are asked a question about religion you reply in 
terms of the secular. When you are asked about something secular, you 
reply in terms of religion: “What is the eternal nature of the self?” “It is 
windy again this morning’ 

When a student asked his master to hand him a knife, the master 
handed it to him blade first. The student said, “Please give me the other 
end.’ “What would you do with the other end?” the master asked. Do you 
see? The disciple started out with the ordinary and suddenly found 
himself involved in a metaphysical problem. But if he’d started out with 
the metaphysical, he would have found himself involved with the knife. 


To go deeply into the religion of no-religion we have to understand 
what might be called the final, ultimate attainment of Mahayana 
Buddhist philosophy. This is contained in a school of thought that is 
called in Chinese Huayen, and in Japanese Kegon. Kegon is the 
intellectual foundation for Zen. There was a great Chinese master by the 
name of Tsungmi, or Shumitsu in Japanese, who was simultaneously a 
Zen master and the fifth patriarch of the Chinese Huayen sect. Hua 
means “flower”; yen, “garland”? The Garland of Flowers is a lengthy 
Sanskrit sutra called the Avatamsaka; in Japanese it is called the Kegon- 
kyo. One subject of this vast and visionary sutra is what are called the 
four dharma worlds, and I will explain what these four worlds are. 


First there is a level of being that is called ji in Japanese, shih in 
Chinese. This is the world of things and events. It is what you might call 
the commonsense world, the everyday world that our senses normally 
record. The Chinese character shih has a multiplicity of meanings. It can 
mean a thing or an event, and it can mean important business. It can 
mean affectation, putting something on or showing off. A person who is 
a master in Zen is called buji, which means “no business, no affectation, 
nothing special” A poem says, “On Mount Lu there is misty rain, and the 
River Zhe is at high tide. When you have not been there, your heart is 
filled with longing. But when you have been there and come back, it was 
nothing special. Misty rain on a mountain. A river at high tide” 

This “nothing special” is buji. We feel that when something is nothing 
special it must be ordinary. But buji does not mean ordinary. It means, 
paradoxically—to our ears—that the mountain and river were nothing 


special in the same way that individuals with no religion can be the most 
truly religious of all. They are not just common, ignorant people, though 
they may appear that way. You have to know what they know to 
recognize them for who and what they are. The “nothing special” of buji 
means that the inner specialness does not stick out like a sore thumb. So 
the world of ji is in general the world of particulars, the world of 
multiplicity. It is the world we ordinarily feel we are living in, and it is the 
first of the four dharma worlds. 


The second dharma world is called the world of ri in Japanese; in 
Chinese, li. In Chinese this character means the markings in jade, the 
grain in wood, the fiber in muscle; the organic principle of order. In the 
Huayen philosophy, the word li or ri means the universal that underlies 
all particulars, the unity underlying all multiplicity, the unitive principle, 
as distinct from shih, or ji, which is the differentiation principle. 


When you first see into the nature of the world, you start from ji. You 
begin by noticing all the particular things in the world and by being 
baffled by their multiplicity, and by dealing with the multiplicity of 
things. But as you progress in understanding, you become aware of the 
relationship each thing has to the other, and eventually you see the unity 
that lies behind them. The multiplicity of the world dissolves into unity. 


At this point you encounter a problem. You can see the world as a 
unity and you can see it as a multiplicity. But how the devil are you to 
put those two visions together? If you are to be a practical success in 
business, in family life, and so on, you have to pay attention to the world 
of particulars. It is particulars that matter. You have to know chalk from 
cheese. But if you become a saint, a monk, or a hermit—or perhaps even 
a poet or an artist—then you will have to forget about the practical 
matters and contemplate the unity, the secret meaning underlying all 
events. But then all the practical people are going to say, “Youre falling 
down on the job. You're avoiding life” They feel that the world of 
particulars is the only real world. But the saint will say, “Your particulars 
are not real. You make a success of things, but it is only a temporary 
success. You think you’re an important person, you're really contributing 
to human life, but actually your success will last for only a few years and 
then you will fall apart like everybody else. When you're dead, where will 
your success be then?” From the standpoint of the person who 
concentrates on the underlying unity of the world, such success isn't real. 


To solve the problem of unifying the visions of the first two dharma 
worlds, we have to go to the third of these worlds, which is called ri ji 


muge. The name of this world is formed from the names of the first two, 
combined with muge, meaning “no block’ It means that between ri and 
ji there is no blockage; there is no obstruction between the world’s unity 
and its particulars. The world of the universal and the world of 
particulars are not incompatible. To demonstrate this, let’s take two very 
different things—for example, shape and color—and see how they can be 
united. A shape can never be a color, a color can never be a shape, but 
shape and color can be joined in a single object. Think of color and shape 
as the first two dharma worlds. They can be united in an object—such as 
a circle—to form, metaphorically, the third dharma world. 


The properly rounded person is an embodiment of the third dharma 
world, is both spiritual and material, is both otherworldly and worldly. 
This is the supreme attainment of a human being, to be fully both 
worldly and otherworldly, to avoid the extreme of one-sidedness. The 
person who is just a materialist ends up by being very boring. You can 
live the successful life of the world and own every kind of material 
refinement, have the most beautiful home, the most delicious food, the 
most marvelous yachts and cars, but if you have no touch of the mystical 
about you, material success will eventually become perfectly boring, and 
you will get tired of it. On the other hand, there are people who are 
purely spiritual, who live in a dry world where all luxury has been 
scrubbed away, and they are very intense people. When you are in the 
presence of an excessively spiritual person, you feel inclined to sit on the 
edge of your chair. You are not at ease. 


It is always puzzling to people brought up in a Western environment 
that, in the East, great spiritual people are often quite sensuous. They 
cannot be materialists in the ordinary sense, but neither can they be the 
kind of straightforward sensualists who use the world purely for their 
own pleasure. The world is too wonderful for that. Human beings, for 
instance, are too marvelous to be treated as merely sensual objects. A 
person may indeed be very sexual, but they are also, in addition, so 
wonderful that one has to stop and delve into the wholeness of their 
marvelous personality, as well as into their sensual qualities. 

A problem with sensuality keeps recurring in the West. For instance, 
one goes to a church with a fine clergyman who is idolized, the very 
exemplar of life, and then suddenly there develops a frightful scandal; he 
has an affair with his secretary, for instance. 

When this happens, a Westerner tends to think that all is lost, the 
faith has been sold out, and everything is going to wrack and ruin, all 


because the clergyman was not purely spiritual but also had a hidden 
sensual side. In the West we frequently see this kind of one-sidedness— 
of excessive materialism or spirituality—because in our world we tend to 
make the spiritual and the material mutually exclusive. But in the third 
dharma world of ri ji muge, we see that there is no separation between 
the spiritual and the material. 


The attainment of this world might seem to be the highest possible 
achievement. But there is still one more world beyond it, which is called 
ji ji muge. Suddenly ri, the world of unity, has disappeared, but between ji 
and ji—particular and particular—there is still no obstruction. Between 
one event and any other event or events there is no mutual 
exclusiveness, nothing that need be united with an underlying unity. This 
is the highest doctrine of Mahayana Buddhism. It is the idea of the 
mutual interpenetration of all things, or the mutual interdependence of 
all things. Its symbol is Indra’s net, the principle of which is elaborated in 
the Avatamsaka sutra. 


Imagine at dawn a multidimensional spider’s web covered with dew, 
a vast spider’s web that is the whole cosmos. It exists in four, five, six, or 
more dimensions, and at every intersection of web are rainbow-colored 
jewels of dew on which are reflected every other drop of dew, and 
therefore also the reflections of all the other drops of dew, and also the 
reflections of the reflections, and so on, ad infinitum. 


This is the Mahayana vision of the world. No thing, no event, can 
exist without every other thing or event. Every event implies all events; 
every event—the total universe, past, present, future—depends on every 
particular event or thing. It is easy to say, “I depend on the universe. 
There could be no me unless there was everything else.” It is harder to 
see the corollary, that the whole universe depends on you. “After all,” you 
might say, “before I was born the universe was here, and after I die I’m 
sure it will go on. How can it be said, then, that the whole universe 
depends on me?” Very simply: without your parents you would not have 
come into being. For you to exist it was necessary for your parents to 
exist. That necessity doesn’t change when they die. Therefore you depend 
on your parents even when they have gone. In the same way the universe 
will still depend on you, on your having been here, even when you 
disappear. And if you have not yet been born, it depends on your future 
arrival here. The fact that you exist tells us something about the kind of 
universe we're living in: it once produced you. You are a symptom of the 
kind of universe we're living in, just as an apple is a symptom of a certain 


kind of tree. It tells us something about that tree, what its function is. A 
world that produces a John Doe, who is nobody in particular, who is not 
even remembered by anybody, nevertheless depends on him, despite his 
obscurity, for its existence, just as it depends equally on every fruit fly, 
every gnat, every vibration of every gnat’s wing, on every last electron in 
every last gnat’s wing—on every one of its manifestations—however 
brief those manifestations may be. 


What I am saying is that everything that exists implies everything 
else, and all those other things, collectively, in their totality—which we 
call the universe—in turn imply each individual object and event. That is 
the meaning of Indra’s net. When you have a chain and you pick up a 
link, all the other links come up with it, and this is called in Zen, “to take 
up a blade of grass and use it as a golden Buddha, sixteen feet high” 
There is no such thing as a single, solitary event. The only possible single 
event is all events whatsoever. That could be regarded as the only 
possible atom; the only possible single thing is everything. The 
manifestations of the universe that we call things all imply each other. 
We know what we are only in relation to what we are not. We know the 
sensation of the self only in relation to a sensation of the other. The self 
implies the other as the back implies the front. However short or long it 
may be, everything depends on your life. If you did not happen, nothing 
would happen. The whole world bears your signature, and it would not 
be the same world if you weren't in it. 


Have you heard of the pathetic fallacy? This was a nineteenth- 
century idea that asserted that it is false and illegitimate to project 
human feelings onto the world. The wind in the pine trees is not sighing; 
you are projecting sighing onto the sound. The sun is not happy; you are 
projecting your own happiness onto the shining sun. The sun has no 
feeling; the sun is not human. The wind has no feeling; it is not human. 
The poet may say, “The moon doth with delight look around her when 
the heavens are bare.” But the logician will answer: “No, it is the poet 
who is looking around with delight at the moon in the bare heavens’ 
How awful. If that were true, it would be better to ban poetry from the 
world. But actually the moon does look around with delight when the 
poet does, because the same world that manifests itself as the moon also 
manifests itself as the poet. They go together. A world where there is a 
moon implies a world where there is a poet. A world where there is a 
poet implies a world where there is a moon. So, through the agency of 
the poet, the moon can in fact be said to look around with delight. You 
cannot separate poet and moon without destroying the universe, any 


more than you can separate head and feet without destroying the body. 
In that sense then this whole world is a human world. We should not 
take seriously the silly idea of the pathetic fallacy, which says that outside 
our skins everything is inhuman—a mass of dumb and blind forces—and 
that only inside the skin is there a human world. All the world is human, 
and it depends not only on the existence of humanity in general but also 
on every individual in particular. 


The whole world is covered, as it were, with your personal signature. 
However, the moment you see yourself as central to the existence of the 
universe, you will suddenly see the obverse of this as well: that your 
particular personality is nothing at all without the existence of 
everything else and everybody else. In order for me to be Alan Watts I 
need every single other human being, including their uncontrollable 
otherness. They are going to be themselves whatever I do, and I depend 
on all their differences from me, and they all depend, likewise, on my 
differences from them. So I am in a very funny position. The moment I 
would be egoless and say, “I am nothing without you,’ I find that I am the 
kingpin: they all depend on me. And when I get swell-headed about 
being the kingpin, I discover I am nothing at all without them. The 
moment you think you're in one state, that state transforms itself into its 
opposite. That is ji ji muge, the fourth dharma world. In it everybody is 
the boss and nobody is. The whole thing takes care of itself. In this sense 
the world is a colossal democracy, and every man, every nightingale, 
every snail, is king in this world and commoner at the same time. That’s 
how it works. 


There is no great king. In Hinduism they do have what is to us a very 
strange idea called Ishvara. This is the supreme personal god, the top 
being in the deva world. Many Buddhists also believe in such a god or 
ruler of the universe, but they think that he is lower than a buddha, 
because, like all gods and all angels, but unlike a buddha, he is still 
subject to the round of being and will eventually dissolve into nothing. 
This is a very curious idea to our minds. Buddhists believe in this kind of 
supreme god, but they do not believe that that god is particularly 
important. There are no shrines in Buddhism to Ishvara. 


So it is this idea of the mutual interpenetration and interdependence 
of all things that is the philosophical basis for Zen as a practical, 
nonintellectual way of life. Because the most ordinary events or things— 
charcoal brazier, mat, soup for dinner, sneezing, washing hands, going to 
the bathroom—all imply, despite their separateness, the unity of the 


universe. That is why Zen people use ordinary events to demonstrate 
cosmic and metaphysical principles. They do not rationalize it in this 
way, however. To see infinity in a grain of sand and eternity in an hour is 
still ri ji muge, not ji ji muge. Ji ji muge is when you offer somebody the 
grain of sand without thinking about eternity. There is no difference 
between the grain of sand and eternity. You do not have to think about 
eternity as something implied by the grain of sand. The grain of sand is 
eternity. In exactly the same way, our sitting here at this moment is not 
something different from nirvana. We are in nirvana sitting here exactly 
as we are. You do not have to make any philosophical comment on the 
grain of sand or on our sitting here. Comment is unnecessary. Such 
comment is called “legs on a snake” or “beard on a eunuch.” Putting legs 
on a snake embarrasses the snake; a eunuch does not need a beard. In 
our idiom we say, “Don’t gild the lily” Zen says, “Do not put frost on top 
of snow.” 


All specifically religious activity is “legs on a snake.” Eventually 
religion will be eliminated, just as, eventually, when every individual 
becomes self-governing and able to relate properly to his brother, the 
state will vanish. That is why in the Book of Revelation, in the New 
Testament, it is said that in heaven there is no temple. The whole place is 
the temple. Similarly, when we achieve the fulfillment of Buddhism, 
there will be no Buddha, no temple, no gong, no bell, because the whole 
world is the sound of the bell, and the image of Buddha is everything you 
see. 


A Zen master was asked, “Mountains and hills, are they not all forms 
of the body of Buddha?” The master replied, “Yes they are, but it’s a pity 
to say so” 


BUDDHISM AS DIALOGUE 


CHAPTER FOUR 


| to proceed now with a discussion of the particular subset of 
Mahayana Buddhism that is known as Zen Buddhism. 


Zen plays a little game with you. Whenever I or somebody like D. T. 
Suzuki talks about Zen, all the others say that because we're talking 
about it we do not understand it. In the words of Lao-tzu, “Those who 
know do not say; those who say do not know,’ and though he said that, 
he wrote a book of eighty chapters or so to explain the Tao and the fe, its 
power. We can’t help ourselves; we’ve got to talk. Human beings are 
chatterboxes. When we have something on our minds, we have to talk 
about it, even if we can’t say what we mean. 


Poetry is the great language. It is the art of saying what cannot be 
said. Every poet knows that he is trying to describe the indescribable. 
Every poet knows that nothing is describable. Whether you take some 
sort of ineffable mystical experience at one extreme, or an ordinary rusty 
nail at the other, nothing is really describable. In the words of the famous 
Count Korzybski, “Whatever you say something is, it isn’t.’ 


There used to be a professor at Northwestern who would produce a 
matchbook in front of his class and say, “What is this?” The students 
would say, “A match-book” And he would say, “No, no, no. ‘Matchbook’ 
is a noise. Is this a noise? What is it really?” And to answer this, he would 
throw it at them. That is what it was. 


So nothing can really be described, and yet we all know perfectly well 
what we mean when we talk. If you have shared an experience with 
somebody else, then of course you can talk about it. We can all talk 
about fire and air and water and wood because we know what they are, 
and there is no mystery. In the same way, something so esoteric as Zen 
can be discussed. Zen people play games or little tricks, however, and 
test each other. I remember the first time I met Paul Reps, who wrote 


that lovely book Zen Flesh, Zen Bones. He said to me, “You've written 
quite a number of books by now, you must think you're pretty fancy’ I 
said, “I haven't said a word.” This is simply a Zen game where people feel 
each other out. A poem says, “When two Zen masters meet each other 
on the road, they need no introduction; thieves recognize one another 
instantaneously.’ 


If I were to give you a truly proper and educated talk about Zen, I 
would gather you around and sit here in silence for five minutes and 
leave. This would be a much more direct exposition of it than what I am 
going to do instead, which is to talk about it. I am afraid that you would 
feel disappointed and somewhat cheated if I just left after five minutes of 
silence though. 


The word zen is the Japanese way of mispronouncing the Chinese 
word chan which, in turn, is the Chinese way of mispronouncing the 
Sanskrit word dhyana. Dhyana is a very difficult if not impossible word 
to translate into English. It has been called meditation, but meditation in 
English generally means sitting quietly and thinking about something, 
and that is not what Zen is. Contemplation might come a little nearer if 
you use the word in the very technical sense that is still used among 
Catholic mystics. Contemplation, as we normally use the word, has a 
sense of inactivity, a sense of not doing anything but being completely 
still and passive. Zen, however, is something highly active. So we really 
do not have an English word for dhyana, Chan, or Zen. 


But I would say that we do know what Zen is, because we do all sorts 
of things every day of our lives in the spirit of Zen. For example, most 
Americans have driven cars since they were teenagers and are very 
expert drivers. And when they drive a car, they do not think about it; 
they are one with the car. Similarly, an expert horse rider is one with the 
horse. When you watch a good cowboy or cavalry rider, he’s glued to the 
horse, almost like a centaur. As the horse moves, he moves. Which is in 
control? Is the horse riding the man or the man riding the horse? You 
really don't know. The same is true when you have an excellent dancing 
partner; who leads? Who follows? It seems as if you are one body and 
you move together. That is Zen. 


In a wider sense, when a person does not react to life, on the one 
hand, or tries to dominate it, on the other, but allows the internal world 
of his own organism and the external world of other people and other 
things to move together as if they were one and the same motion, that is 
Zen. So you could say in a very simple way that the real concern of Zen is 


to realize—not merely rationally but in one’s bones—that the world 
inside your skin and the world outside your skin are all one world and 
one being, one self. And you are it. 


Once you know that, you have abolished all the problems that arise 
when you feel that you are a stranger in the world, set down in the 
middle of an alien world, surrounded by lifeless galaxies that are 
inhabited by strange people. This whole sense of estrangement from a 
foreign world is overcome in Zen. 


I will illustrate this, before we go into Zen in any kind of technical 
way, with a few rather superficial but nevertheless significant facts out of 
Japanese culture and the place of Zen in it. Japanese culture is 
extraordinarily ritualistic. There is a right way of doing everything, a 
good form, a proper style. Nowhere is this more apparent than in such 
practices as the tea ceremony or flower arrangement, or in knowing how 
to dress or how to organize a formal dinner. The punctiliousness and skill 
of these people in doing these things is quite remarkable. But to the same 
degree that they are very skillful at doing these things, they are very 
worried about them. For example, the whole question of bringing 
presents to somebody is of great concern. Have they given us more than 
we have given them? Did we remember this or that occasion? These 
questions weigh very heavily on the Japanese soul. The debt that you owe 
to your parents, the debt that you owe to your country and to your 
emperor, are immeasurable, infinite debts that never can be paid. These 
weigh very heavily. Therefore Japan—until the partial breakaway of 
modern youth, with its Westernized ideals—has had a very nervous 
culture, concerned about whether one is playing the ritual correctly. 


A culture like that needs an outlet, a safety valve, and Zen provides 
just that. So when you meet a Japanese person who is thoroughly trained 
in Zen, he has a different kind of personality altogether when compared 
with his countryman who is not trained in Zen. His manners are not 
studiedly courteous, nor is he brusque, but he is simply at ease. He gives 
you his whole attention, so long as you give him your whole attention. If 
your attention starts wandering, though, he has work to do and promptly 
leaves. But so long as you are wanting to talk to him, he is there for you 
and for nobody else. He sits down, and he really sits, unworried about 
whether he ought to be somewhere else. He is able to sit in one place 
with complete serenity. If you have half an idea that you ought to be 
worrying about something out in the garden, or that you ought to be 
cooking dinner, or that you ought to be down in your office, you cannot 


sit where you are. You are not really there. You are a kind of helium 
balloon that keeps wanting to wander off. But when you meet people 
connected with Zen you see they are grounded. Even the most neophyte, 
novice priest, has this atmosphere of knowing how to live in the present 
without being fidgety or giggly or worrying about whether he has done 
the right thing, and that is very much the Zen style. 


Although Zen people do have a very exacting and demanding 
discipline, the function of this discipline is rather curious: it is to enable 
them to be comfortable. It is to enable them, for example, to be able to 
sleep on a concrete sidewalk on a cold, wet night and enjoy it. It is to 
enable them to be able to relax completely under any situation or 
hardship. Ordinarily, if you sit out in the cold, you will start shivering. 
This is because you will be resisting the cold, tightening your muscles 
against it. But Zen discipline teaches you to do something else, to take it 
easy, go with the cold, relax. 


All those monks in monasteries in Japan are cold as hell in winter. 
And they simply sit there, most of the time. We would feel frozen to 
death and miserable, and would start coming down with influenza and 
pneumonia, but they simply relax and learn how to accept the cold. 
There is nothing about Zen discipline that is masochistic, however. It has 
nothing to do with the idea that you must beat your body because your 
body is bad because it is the creation of the devil. It simply teaches the 
disciple how to be comfortable under all circumstances. But all of this is 
rather incidental to the main question of Zen. 


The Zen people, as you meet them and get to know their personality 
style, are at ease in a culture that is not at ease but instead is chronically 
concerned with protocol. Japanese culture is a terribly self-conscious 
culture. Everybody is always watching themselves and having second 
thoughts about everything. This becomes tiresome. The discipline of Zen 
emerged out of this situation as a method for enabling students of Zen to 
act without watching themselves; to act unself-consciously, we would 
say. The Japanese are terrified of this kind of action, as are we. They, and 
we too, think, “If I don’t watch myself constantly I will make a mistake. If 
I don’t hold a club over my own head, I will cease to be civilized; I will 
become a barbarian. If I don’t discipline myself and repress those 
passions of mine, I will become like the monk from Siberia who burst 
from his cell one day and devoured the father superior” 


Our basic mistrust of our own spontaneity makes us wonder whether 
the Zen people are really spontaneous. If they do not plan and 


premeditate and hold clubs over themselves, won't they become very 
dangerous people socially? Won't they go out and rape their mothers and 
daughters, and murder their grandmothers to inherit their fortunes, and 
so forth? Zen people just do not do that, of course, and yet they really are 
perfectly spontaneous. To show how this can be, I will try to indicate 
how this discipline called Zen actually works. This will involve letting the 
cat out of the bag a little bit, but that cannot be helped. 


Let us go back to what is fundamental to Buddhism. Buddhism is 
unlike Western religions in that it does not tell you anything. It does not 
require you to believe in anything. It is a dialogue. The teachings of 
Buddhism are nothing more than the opening phrases or exchanges in 
that dialogue. 


Buddhism is a dialogue between a buddha and an ordinary man, or 
rather, between a buddha and another buddha who insists on defining 
himself as an ordinary man, thereby creating a problem. There is a saying 
that “anybody who goes to a psychiatrist ought to have his head 
examined.” In exactly the same way, in the Buddhist culture, anybody 
who goes to a guru, a spiritual teacher, a Zen master, or whatever, ought 
to have his head examined. As the old Chinese master Tokusan put it, “If 
you ask any question, you get thirty blows with my stick. If you don’t ask 
any question, you get thirty blows just the same.” In other words, “What 
the hell are you doing here defining yourself as a student and me as a 
teacher?” You raise a problem when you do that, and in the Zen way of 
training, this problem is very clearly emphasized. 


If you go to a Zen teacher and approach him in the traditional way, 
the first thing he will do is say, “I haven’t anything to teach. Go away.” 


You may say, “What are these people doing around here? Aren't they 
your students?” 


He will answer, “They are working with me. But unfortunately we are 
very poor these days. We don’t have enough rice to go around. We can't 
make ends meet as it is. We cannot take on anybody else in this 
community”’ 


So you have to insist on being taken in. Every postulant for Zen 
training assumes immediately that the teacher has given him the brush- 
off in order to test his sincerity. In other words, “If you really want this 
thing, you have got to work for it.’ That is not the real point. The point is 
that you have got to make such a fuss to get in that you cannot withdraw 
gracefully after having made such a fuss. You put yourself on the spot 
and define yourself as somebody needing help, or as somebody with a 


problem who needs a master in order to be helped out of the problem. In 
the old days—anzd it is still the rule today among the Zen monasteries of 
Japan—a postulant who wanted to come into a monastery had to sit 
outside the gate for five days, in a position of supplication, with head 
bowed down on the steps. The monks inside would let him in at night 
because they must give hospitality to any wandering monk, but he was 
expected not to sleep any of those five nights but to sit in meditation. 
You sit, and you sit, and you sit there, making a fool of yourself and 
saying, “I insist on being admitted into this monastery. I insist on 
learning the secret of the master here.” The master has already told you 
that he does not have a secret and that he does not teach anything. But 
you insist that he does. 


This is the situation of everyone who feels that life is a problem to be 
solved. Whether you seek to solve that problem through psychoanalysis, 
integration, salvation, or buddhahood, you define yourself in a certain 
way when you see life as a problem to be solved. 


The real desire that everybody brings to these teachers can be stated 
in this way: “Teacher, I want to get one up on the universe. I feel I am a 
stranger in this world and that life is a problem. Having a body means 
that I am subject to disease and change and death. Having emotions and 
passions means that I am tormented by feelings I cannot help having, 
and yet it is not possible to act on those feelings without creating 
trouble. I feel trapped by this world and so I want to get the better of it. 
Is there some wise man around who is a master of life and who can teach 
me to cope with all this?” That is what everybody is looking for in a 
teacher: a savior who can show you how to cope with life. But the Zen 
teacher says, “I don’t have any answers.’ Nobody believes that because he 
seems to be so confident when you look at him. You cannot believe that 
he has no answers, and yet the consistent teaching of Zen is that it has 
nothing to say and nothing to teach. 


A great Chinese master of the Tang dynasty, called Linji in Chinese, 
or Rinzai in Japanese, said, “Zen is like using a yellow leaf to stop a child 
crying. A child is crying for gold and the father takes an autumn leaf that 
is yellow and calls it gold” He also said that it is like using an empty fist 
to deceive a child. You have a closed fist and you say to the child, “What 
have I got here?” And the child says, “Let me see!” You put your fist 
behind your back, and the child becomes more and more excited to 
know what the devil is inside that fist, and fights and fights and finally is 
practically in tears, and then suddenly you open the fist and there is 


nothing inside. 

This is how it is for the person who is under the impression that life is 
a problem to be solved. The secret is dressed up in a big way: to know it 
is to be a buddha; it is to know the answer, to solve the problem, to get 
the message, to get the word, to be in control of fate and the world. Who 
wouldn't want that? 


All these powers are projected on the Zen master: he is a buddha, a 
master of life. But if he is a master of life, the reason for that is that he 
has discovered the unreality of the whole problem of life. There is not life 
on the one hand and you on the other. You and life are the same. But you 
cannot tell people that and just by telling it get them to see it. 


People who know that the earth is flat cannot be reasoned with. It is 
absolutely impossible to reason with people who believe that the Bible is 
the literal word of God. In the same way, we tend to know that we are 
each a separate “poor little me,’ and that we are in need of salvation or 
something. We know this is so, and if somebody says, “You are not really 
separate from life; your feeling of separateness is an illusion,’ that is all 
very nice—in theory—but we do not feel it. 


So what will you do with a person who is convinced that the earth is 
flat? There is no way of reasoning with him. If it is for some reason 
important that he discover that the earth is round, you have got to play a 
game or trick on him. You tell him, “Great. The earth is flat. Let’s go and 
look over the edge; wouldn't that be fun? Of course, if we are going to 
look over the edge of the earth, we must be very careful that we do not 
go around in circles or we will never get to the edge. So we must go 
along consistently westward, along a certain line of latitude. Then we will 
come to the edge of the earth” In other words, in order to convince a 
flat-earther that the world is round, you have to make him act 
consistently on his own proposition by making him go consistently 
westward in search of the edge of the world. When at last, by going 
consistently westward, he comes back to the place where he started, he 
will have been convinced that the earth is at least cylindrical, and he may 
then take it on faith that if he goes north along a line of longitude, he will 
again eventually return to his starting place. What you must do is make 
him persist in his folly. That is the whole method of Zen: to make people 
become consistent, perfect egotists, and so explode the illusion of the 
separate ego. 


When you finally convince the Zen master that you are stupid 
enough to be accepted as a student—by persisting in defining yourself as 


someone with a problem that he can solve for you, even through he has 
warned you well in advance that he has nothing to teach—he will then 
say, “I will now ask you a question.” 


There are many ways of asking this question, but they all boil down 
to one common question, which is, “Who are you? You say you have a 
problem. You say you would like to get out of the sufferings of life and 
get one up on the universe. I want to know who is asking this question. 
Show me you.” 


The master may put the question like this: “Before your father and 
mother conceived you, what was your original nature?” And they add, “I 
want to be shown. I do not want a lot of ideas from you about who you 
are. I do not want to know who you are in terms of a social role, college 
degrees, professional qualifications, your name, your family. All that is 
the past. I want to see the genuine you as you are right now” 


This is like saying to a person, “Don’t be self-conscious. I want you, 
right this minute, to be completely sincere” Nothing is better calculated 
to make a person incapable of sincerity. It is as when a child’s relatives 
come, aunts and uncles, and the parents say, “Darling, come on now and 
show us how you have fun” The poor child is completely nonplussed and 
does not know what to do. You cannot have fun on demand. 


The context in which a Zen master interviews his students is very 
formal; there he sits, sort of an enthroned tiger, definitely an authority 
figure. He is the last person you can be spontaneous with, because you 
feel that he knows you through and through. 


There is a story about a man who has a fight with a bear, and the bear 
is a mind reader and always knows what moves the man is going to 
make. So the man can never conquer the bear unless he makes a move 
that he does not think about first. You get the same feeling about a Zen 
master: that he is absolutely aware of everything phony about you, that 
he can read you like a book. In such a situation, you cannot find a way of 
being genuine. 


Think about it this way: if we arrange a kind of group psychotherapy 
session in which a little game is being played, and the gimmick in this 
game is that when anybody says or does anything, everyone else will 
challenge its sincerity, then anything you do will make you anxious and 
self-conscious. 


Thinking about thinking, and being aware of being aware, is what is 
called in Japanese “the observing self” Watching yourself all the time, 


you become aware of your own hopelessness. The price that human 
beings pay for self-consciousness is anxiety and guilt. Anxiety asks, 
“When I left the house, did I turn off the stove? I remember turning it 
off, but can I trust my memory? Maybe I’d better go back and look.” “All 
right, I just went back and looked, but did I really see? Did I look 
properly? You know how the unconscious can alter your senses. I better 
go and look again” You have trapped yourself in a vicious circle. You will 
never get away from the house. This risk of being trapped like this in a 
kind of feedback loop of consciousness is the penalty we pay for the gift 
of being able to know that we know. 


The Zen trick is to put you into this situation in a very obvious way, 
to make you think about thinking about thinking about thinking. Or else 
—and this amounts to the same thing—to force you to make a very 
strong effort not to think. The latter of these techniques is zazen: sitting, 
letting your senses operate, being responsive to whatever may be around, 
but not thinking about it. Of course, this is still thinking. If 1 am thinking 
about not thinking, how will I stop thinking about not thinking? It is as 
though somebody came to you and put molasses in one of your hands 
and feathers in the other and slapped the two hands together, rubbed 
them around, then said, “Now pick off the feathers”” 


The Zen teacher is well aware that he has played a trick on you, and 
now he is going to see how you will respond to that trick, what 
foolishness you will come up with, and then he will help you act 
consistently on that foolishness. His trick has simply been to do, as if in 
an experiment, what society does to us all the time. The high cultures of 
the world, whether of the East or the West, play a game on every new 
child. They do not know they are playing this game, because their 
forefathers played it on them, and they are its victims. The game is called 
the double bind: you are required to do something that will be acceptable 
only if you do it voluntarily. You must love me; you must go to sleep; you 
must be natural; you must be free. Listen to that: you must be free. 


The society into which a child is born defines that child. We learn 
who we are by the way other people react to us. When they tell us, “You 
are an independent agent; you are responsible; you are a freely acting 
individual,’ we take these statements to be commandments, and we seek 
to obey them because we cannot help it. A child has no way of criticizing 
this situation or of seeing. that there is something phony about it. 
Society defines the child as an independent agent and convinces him to 
believe in that, even though it is inaccurate. The child would not believe 


it if he were actually independent. The community has trouble getting 
children to behave as they want them to. Then they feel that there must 
be something innately ornery about children. They must be born in a 
state of original sin. And of course they are—in effect—because they 
have been defined by society in a self-contradictory way. 


It is self-contradictory when a community says to a person, “You 
must be free,’ or when members of a family say to each other, “You must 
love me; it’s your duty.” What a bunch of rot! If you say to your wife, 
“Darling, do you really love me?” and she replies, “I’m trying my very 
best to do so,’ that will not be the answer you wanted. You wanted her to 
say, “Darling, I can't help loving you. I love you so much I could eat you” 
You do not want her to have to try to love you, and yet that is the burden 
you lay on people when you demand their love. In almost every marriage 
ceremony it is said that you must love your spouse. In Christianity it is 
said, “Thou shalt love the Lord, thy God,’ and “Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself” These are all double binds. Anybody who lives under 
the dominance of a double bind is living in a state of chronic frustration. 
He is devoting his life to solving a problem that is meaningless and 
nonsensical precisely because it has no solution. 


The double bind that is the deepest of all is, You must go on living. 
Living is a spontaneous process, and an art, and to say to life, “You must 
happen,’ is exactly the same as saying to any creative artist, “You must 
come through with the goods; tonight you must give a superb 
performance and, furthermore, you must be completely unself-conscious 
while you're doing it” This is being done to us all the time. The purpose 
of Zen is to make this double bind visible, so that you can see how stupid 
it is. The Zen teacher will be well aware of everything he is doing and 
what tricks he is playing on you, but he will play them anyway, because 
behind it all he has the compassionate intent of getting you into such a 
fierce double bind that you will see how stupid it is and let go of it. That 
is what he is doing when he commands, “Be genuine. Show me the real 


” 


you. 


A friend who was studying Zen was given a koan like this to work on, 
and as he was going for his interview, walking through the garden that 
connected the sodo, the monks’ meditation hall and quarters, with the 
master’s room, he saw a big bullfrog. Bullfrogs in Japan are rather tame; 
people do not eat them. He swept it up and dropped it into the sleeve of 
his kimono, and when he got in front of the teacher to answer the koan, 
to spontaneously produce his genuine self, he produced the bullfrog. The 


teacher looked at it, shook his head, and said, “No, too intellectual” 


This is to say, “Your answer is too contrived, too studied—that is not 
you.” Do you see the bind that’s inherent in trying to be genuine? There is 
nothing you can do to be genuine. The more you do, the phonier you 
become. At the same time, you cannot give up trying to be genuine. The 
moment you do that, your abandonment of trying is itself an insidious 
form of trying. 


There is a very interesting Hindu teacher by the name of 
Krishnamurti whom many of you may know about. He tells people that 
all of their religious inquiry, their yoga practices, their reading religious 
books, and so on, are nothing but the perpetuation of egocentricity on a 
very refined and highbrow level. Therefore he encourages disciples who 
studiously avoid reading any kind of philosophical or edifying book. 
They are reduced to reading mystery stories and they become devoted 
nondisciples. What a clever bind that is! It is the same as the Zen 
technique. 


The way of Buddhism is to let go of yourself, to see that you live in a 
universe in which nothing can be grasped, and therefore to stop 
grasping. It is very simple, but here is the problem. You say to a teacher, 
“Teach me not to grasp.” He will say, “Why do you want to know?” You 
will answer, “Non-attachment is good Buddhist doctrine” And he will 
show you that wanting to stop grasping is a new form of grasping. You 
feel that you can get one up on the world by being unattached to it. Just 
breathing is painful when somebody you love dies, so maybe by being 
unattached to that person I can avoid grief. Maybe when life comes and 
bangs on me, by not having an ego I can avoid life’s pain. That is why I 
want a non-ego state. It is a phony desire, though, just a new way of 
safeguarding and protecting the ego. This is an example of the manner in 
which the statements of Buddhism are not final teachings but are rather 
the opening strategies of a dialogue. 


Going back to fundamental, primitive Buddhism, people said to the 
Buddha, “I want to escape from suffering” That is a perfectly honest 
statement. All right, realize that suffering is caused by desire and try not 
to desire. The student goes away and tries to eliminate desire by 
controlling his mind and practicing yoga, and comes back to the teacher 
and says, “This is pretty difficult but I have managed to get rid of at least 
some desires.” The teacher says to him, “But you are still desiring to get 
rid of desire. What about that?” Then the student sees that if he strives to 
stop desiring to get rid of desire, then he has got to stop desiring to get 


rid of not desiring to desire. Suddenly he finds himself once more in a 
vicious circle. He realizes there is nothing he can do about it and nothing 
he cannot do about it. 


This predicament in Zen is called a mosquito trying to bite an iron 
bull, a situation of such psychic extremity that nothing can be done 
about it. What does this situation mean? When you find yourself in that 
kind of trap, what is the meaning of the trap? It is very simple. When 
there is nothing you can do about a given situation, and even doing 
nothing is doing something, that means that the ego, as something 
separate from the rest of the world, does not exist. Of course it cannot 
do anything, and equally it cannot not do something. It is completely 
phony. The fiction of there being a separate ego—either to force its 
actions on the world or to have the actions of the world forced on it—has 
been exposed. 


The ego does not exist except as a figment of the imagination, or as a 
player in the game of pretending that everybody is responsible, 
independent, and separate. That is a great game, but it is only a game. 
The whole object of the Zen dialogue between the teacher and the 
student is to carry the foolish game of being a separate ego to its logical 
conclusion, to its reductio ad absurdum, so that, finally, as Blake said, 
“The fool who persists in his folly will become wise’ 


WISDOM OF 
THE MOUNTAINS 


CHAPTER FIVE 


Ne chapter concerns a subject somewhat alien to anything we 


understand in the West. Certain forms of Mahayana Buddhism—when 
seen from the outside—seem to us totally irrational and superstitious. 
This applies particularly to a subschool of Mahayana Buddhism that has 
several names: Vajrayana, Tantrayana, or Mantrayana. 


The word yana means a way or a vehicle. As I mentioned earlier, 
Buddhism is frequently likened to a raft that is used for crossing a river, 
or a brick used to knock on a door. The brick is a yana, and so is the raft. 
They are instruments, expedients, means, techniques, methods. The 
Buddha’s doctrine is called in Sanskrit the dharma, and dharma has a 
whole multiplicity of meanings, but one of them is “method” It is 
sometimes translated “law” in English, but this is not an adequate 
translation. 


The whole idea of a yana is related to the idea of upayas, which are 
“skillful means.” We would call them pedagogical devices or tricks, 
depending on the purpose for which they are being used. In politics 
upaya means cunning, but in religion or philosophy it means the skill of 
a teacher at conveying a lesson to a student. The essence of upaya is 
surprise. When you have hiccups, it is indeed surprising, because you 
did not intend it. Upaya and surprise are deeply connected with the 
whole inner meaning of Buddhism. Life has to surprise itself, because if 
it didn’t you wouldn't know of your own existence. You only know 
existence to the degree that there is a balance between knowing and not 
knowing. So there must always be something in you that is like spiritual 
hiccups, that happens unbeknownst to you, and takes you by surprise. 


An upaya is the teacher’s method of arousing the surprise of 
enlightenment in the student, and he uses a yana, that is to say, a vehicle 


or a course. We say we give a course in philosophy or semantics or 
chemistry. The great course in Buddhism is the Mahayana, which 
includes ever so many different upayas or methods ° instruction. By 
contrast, the Hinayana, the little course, has only a few upayas because 
they are very tough-minded in the Hinayana. They stick to the notion 
that all enlightenment depends on each individual’s effort. The Buddha is 
supposed to have said, just before he died, “Be you lamps unto 
yourselves; be you a refuge unto yourselves. Take to yourselves no other 
refuge.’ 


In one Japanese system of classification, Buddhist schools are called 
either jiriki or tariki. Ji means “self” Riki means “power.” There are ways 
of salvation or liberation by your own power—jiriki—and ways by the 
power of another: tariki. Tariki is liberation through what Christians 
would call grace rather than works. It is fascinating to see how the 
problem of faith and works, or grace and works, turns up in Buddhism 
just as it does in Christianity. 


In the history of Christianity there was a huge argument around 400 
A.D. between a Welshman or Celt named Pelagius and Saint Augustine of 
Hippo. Pelagius was an optimistic Britisher, the type who believes in 
muddling through, playing the game, and putting your nose to the 
grindstone. He believed that one could, by one’s own will and effort, 
obey the commandments of God. He argued that God would not have 
given us any commandments we could not obey. But Saint Augustine 
said that Pelagius had missed the point entirely. If he had read Saint Paul 
properly—especially the Epistle to the Romans—he would have found 
that God did not give us commandments in order that we should obey 
them, but rather to prove that we could not. As Saint Paul put it, God 
gave us impossible commandments in order to convict us of sin. The law, 
in other words, was a gimmick, an upaya. Nobody was ever expected to 
obey a law such as—from the Ten Commandments—“Thou shalt love 
the Lord thy God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your 
mind.’ Nobody can do that. Therefore even the greatest saints are always 
beating their breasts and confessing that they are abysmal sinners 
because they cannot live up to the commandments. This is why Saint 
Paul taught that the law is a pedagogue designed to lead us to Christ. 
Pedagogue has the same meaning as upaya. 

The Buddhists had come to a similar conclusion. In his original 
teaching the Buddha was apparently tough-minded. He said, “Listen, you 
had better discipline yourselves. Get to work and cut out women, drink, 


and possessions, and start meditating and controlling your minds.’ 
Everybody tried this, and of course most of them failed. A few people 
succeeded, but then they dried up. They found that their success was a 
kind of Pyrrhic victory. What you gain by stopping your humanity and 
stopping your emotions is not worth the price you pay. It is like cutting 
off your head to cure a headache. They realized that will and obedience 
weren't the way to liberation and that the Buddha had suggested they 
were only so that they could discover that fact. 


The new schools of Buddhism said that you must be liberated by 
tariki, or grace, the power of something in you that is not your ego. It is 
the same power that makes your heart beat. Your heart does not beat at 
the will of your ego. To use Jungian language to talk about grace, we say 
that when the unconscious is worked on, watered and nourished, 
eventually it—not the ego—will integrate the two aspects or powers of 
the self, and you will acknowledge that both the conscious and the 
unconscious—the power of the ego joined with the power of the natural 
organism or the psyche—are part of you. 


Similarly, in every art one may experience artistic exhaustion, the 
exhaustion of the will, where everything has been tried and nothing will 
work. To achieve the perfection or completion of the art, something that 
cannot be willed has to happen of itself. We variously call this something 
grace or inspiration. It is tariki. Everybody always wants to know how to 
make it happen, but if we knew how to make it happen, it wouldn't be 
grace. It’s because we don't know how to make it happen that it can 
transcend the limits of the will. Just because we can’t know how to make 
it happen doesn’t mean we should give up and go home and forget the 
whole thing, though. There is another alternative. We can cultivate our 
faith. 


Faith means that we know grace will happen, only we don’t know 
when, and we’ve got to wait. But we mustn't work too hard at waiting, 
because that will be ego effort, and the ego will stop the grace from 
happening. The thing is to learn to wait softly, in a state of openness. 
How does one do that? There are all sorts of upayas or means that help 
one to do this, and one of them is this practice variously called the 
Vajrayana, which means the diamond vehicle, the Tantrayana, which 
means the web vehicle, and the Mantrayana, which means the sound 
vehicle, in the sense of the vehicle of incantation. 


The last of these—Mantrayana—is the most perplexing from our 
point of view. There is an age-old belief in the idea that certain formulas 


or spells, said in the right way, will produce results. All of this descends, 
philosophically—so far as Asia is concerned—from the Hindu 
Upanishadic idea that the world is the creation of sound. The Hindus say 
that in the beginning was vac, which is exactly the same thing as saying, 
“In the beginning was the word,’ as in the Gospel of John. But vac doesn’t 
mean logos as it does in Saint John, it means vibration. It is 
fundamentally the Sanskrit word om. When you say om you begin at the 
back of your throat with O, and you finish at your lips, so you take in the 
whole range of world-creating sound. Om is the holiest of all names. You 
can chant om, you know, and really stir things up. 


All Hindus and Buddhists alike use this word to induce a meditative 
state. It is very easy to concentrate on sound. It is much more difficult to 
keep your eyes still. But sound is very easy to concentrate on, and that is 
the whole point of a mantra: it is a method for digging sound. I hope you 
know what I mean by “to dig” It means to get right down into. When you 
dig sound you realize that the flow or vibration of sound is a way in 
which you experience basic existence, being here. You can learn 
everything from sound, because it is not a constant. It comes and goes. It 
is on and off. You only hear it because it is vibrating. The lesson is that 
life is on and off, black and white, life and death, inside and outside, 
knowing and not knowing: they’re all vibrations. It’s easy to explain that 
in words, but to feel and understand it in your bones you have to learn 
how to listen to a sound. It was to teach that skill that this system of 
chanting sounds was invented. 


Vajrayana Buddhism sprang up in about the ninth century A.D. It 
spread from north India into Tibet, Mongolia, China, and Japan, but it is 
especially characteristic of Tibetan Buddhism. 


There are various ways of understanding the words and formulas 
used for mantras. They are understood by the ignorant as being 
shortcuts. Instead of having to say a whole sutra, the sutra can be 
summed up in formulas such as “om mani padme hum? That’s one way 
of understanding mantras. You are poor and ignorant, and out of infinite 
compassion the bodhisattvas have arranged to get you to nirvana. 
Instead of going through all the heroic efforts and meditation practices 
of those saints and sages, you can just say “om mani padme hum’ In fact, 
you do not even need to say it. You can have it printed on paper and 
enclosed in a silver box on the end of a stick, and all you have to do is 
swing the thing around. So the popular idea of the vehicle of sound—the 
Mantrayana—is that it is a shortcut. 


The next highest idea of Mantrayana is the one I have been 
emphasizing, that you use these formulas and sounds as concentration 
objects, and through that concentration learn the lessons of life. But 
there’s also a third interpretation, which might be called the esoteric 
interpretation. I believe it was originated by Vasubandhu, who lived 
sometime around 400 A.D. He said the whole point of mantras is that 
they do not mean anything at all. The word om is completely 
meaningless, and all the various kinds of incantations are totally 
senseless. The purpose of repeating such nonsense is to liberate oneself 
from the notion that the universe means anything at all. 


So much for the path to grace called the Mantrayana. We turn now 
to the Tantra. 


All the forms of Buddhism that are associated with the Vajrayana are 
called Tantric. The word Tantra means “web structure,’ warp and woof. 
Tantra, in the Hindu context, is a discipline that is sometimes called the 
fifth Veda. There are four Vedas that are basic holy scriptures of 
Hinduism. The fifth Veda is the esoteric one. According to the four 
Vedas, in order to be liberated you have to give up physical life. You must 
not eat meat. You must not have sexual intercourse. You must not take 
alcohol or any kind of consciousness-changing substance. There are 
various other things; I forget them all. But in Tantra the whole idea is 
that liberation comes through contact with forbidden things. It comes 
through belonging to the world, participating in it. Sometimes this is 
called the left-hand path. 


In a Hindu story, Brahma was asked, “Who will gain to communion 
with you first, he who loves you or he who hates you?” And Brahma 
replied, “He who hates me, because he will think of me more often” 


In other words, you can attain to liberation by complete altruism, 
and also by total selfishness. If you are completely and consistently 
selfish—if you push selfishness to an extreme—you will discover that 
your self is the other, that you do not really experience yourself at all 
except in terms of others. That is the point of the left-hand path, to push 
oneself to an extreme. However, the left-hand path is a very dangerous 
way of going about things, because nobody approves of it. 


In my distant past my father and I once witnessed a stage comedy. A 
man was asleep in a highly Victorian bedroom filled with all kinds of 
fancy furniture. The alarm clock went off and he woke up in a total rage. 
He immediately picked up his shoe and smashed the alarm clock. He got 
out of bed in a fury. He ripped the sheets to pieces, overturned the bed, 


found a hammer somewhere and started breaking up all the crockery 
and the windows until the place was totally demolished, except that in 
one corner there remained one of those enormous stand-up lamps. It’s 
the only unbroken thing in the room. The man becomes furious when he 
sees it just standing there innocently. He rushes across the room and 
picks it up over his head and flings it to the floor. And it bounces. It 
doesn’t break. It was made of rubber. 


That’s the surprise I was talking about earlier. Satori. Sudden 
awakening. It bounced. This is the whole thing about Buddhism. We all 
think we are going to crash. We must think that, because otherwise it 
wouldn't be a surprise when we bounce. 


In other words, if you press your selfishness, follow that left-hand 
path, explore all the sensations you can imagine—all the delights of 
pleasure, all the ecstasies, all the drunks, all the orgasms—what will you 
want, finally, after all that? You will say, “I want to bounce. I want to be 
let out of myself” When you are selfish and you are let out of yourself, 
that selfishness becomes altruism. “He that would save his life shall lose 
it. He that loses his life’—or loosens it—“shall find it” Whether we take 
the right-hand path or the other, we all arrive at the same destination. 


In the same way, the painful path of meditative discipline or 
concentration—where the disciple is being watched over and threatened 
by somebody with a stick—will lead to the same goal. There are certain 
kinds of people who ought to take that path. They do not know they exist 
unless they hurt, and therefore the painful path is the right way for them. 
We should not condemn them or the path. 


On the opposite extreme from the painful path is the mantra game. 
People who play this game say, “It’s so simple to do. It’s a shortcut’ And 
they get into it, singing “om mani padme hum,’ for instance. Or, like the 
Pure Land Buddhists in Japan, they chant, “Namu Amida Butsu, Namu 
Amida Butsu, Namu Amida Butsu, Namu Amida Butsu, Namu Amida 
Butsu,’ until it eventually becomes, “Namanda, namanda, namanda, 
namanda, namanda,’ and suddenly the chant is chanting them. What is 
the difference between chant and chanter, self and other, self-power and 
other-power, jiriki and tariki? It is all one. You pretend that it isn’t 
because you have to. I say “have to,’ but really you do it in order to create 
the sensation of existence. 

Very vivid Tibetan paintings have a curious way of creating a state of 
mind, if you really start looking at them, that I can only call psychedelic. 
As you get into the detail, you will find there is nothing else quite like 


them. If you look closely at one, instead of its becoming fuzzy and fading 
out, it becomes clearer and more alive. You suddenly discover that what 
you thought was a blur was sixteen thousand maggots with bright eyes, 
and every eye a deep jewel. Go down into those jewels, and you will find 
inside them cross-legged buddhas with aureoles around them and 
necklaces of human heads. And when you start looking at those heads, 
by Jove, you see another buddha sitting there in every eye. 


The state of consciousness these artists are trying to represent with 
their myriad details is the dharma-dhatu, the realm of dharma or reality, 
which is also described as Indra’s net, which I discussed previously. 
Again, this is the net of jewels in which every jewel reflects all the other 
jewels, and therefore naturally contains the reflections of the reflections 
of all the other jewels, and so on, forever. This is an image of the 
interrelatedness, or “mutual penetration,’ of everything in the universe. 
Tibetan paintings are designed to get you into the mood to understand 
this interrelatedness. They are totally fascinating. 


The possibility of seeing down into something goes on forever and 
ever. When you work with mantras, you can learn to hear similar infinite 
depths in sound. Just as you could say that a visual field is rich in detail 
like these paintings are—like a piece of beautiful Hindu silk weaving that 
is rich with gold and flowers that you see detail in—you can hear sound 
in the same way. That is what Hindu music is playing with, and when you 
get down into that, I would truly call it listening in to the universe. And if 
you listen to sound, or look at form that way, you discover its secrets. 


This technique is another way of investigating life. It is comparable to 
our scientific investigation with microscopes and chemical analysis, and 
so on, which looks out into matter, and the physical world. The method 
of investigating sound and paintings goes in the opposite direction, into 
the nature of feeling, into the center of awareness, into the self. These 
Tibetan drawings are representations of the interior world from various 
points of view. They are drawings of our common interior world, looked 
at under the influence of the traditions of a culture that is not ours, 
which, therefore, strikes us as being a little strange. They are showing us 
a vision of the universe that we haven't seen before. Indeed we haven't, 
because the way we see is influenced and limited by the views of our 
culture. What you call ordinary is what you are used to. Therefore, by 
studying other people’s art forms, we are taught to see things that we do 
not ordinarily notice. When you become used to Chinese or Tibetan 
painting, for instance, you will say, “Of course. That is also the way the 


world is.” 


A thing looks exotic when you look at it from somebody else’s point 
of view, but eventually you get used to it. If you move into a state of 
consciousness such as I’ve been trying to describe, that is not your usual 
state of consciousness, you will say, “It’s kind of weird” If you are not 
prepared for that you might become frightened and say, “Am I going 
mad? Am I going out of my mind?” Well, yes, you are. You are going out 
of your ordinary mind-set into another aspect of mind, and that always 
feels strange at first. That’s why people have difficulty in meditation. 
When they start progressing they often say, “I’m going to go out of my 
mind” There are famous stories about people who thought about the 
nature of thought and were never heard from again. ‘There is a certain 
fear of a loss of one’s own ego, and of one’s regular world, where familiar 
gestures make you feel at home. We all have in us levels of vibration that 
we are not familiar with, which we are therefore afraid of, and it is these 
levels we reach when we get out of our ordinary state of mind. 


Vajrayana Buddhism is a rather adventurous, not to say dangerous, 
exploration of man’s inner consciousness. The results of that exploration 
are depicted artistically in an elaborate system of symbols. To a 
Westerner accustomed to Christian symbolism, these symbolic 
representations of innerness will look like representations of heaven, 
with potentates on thrones receiving homage and all that sort of politics. 


Let us suppose that we look through a microscope at the cross 
section of a spinal column, or at an area of the brain. We would see 
certain designs and patterns, and they would be based on the physical 
body. These patterns are equivalent to the symbols to be found in 
Tibetan paintings and drawings. But they are each moving in a different 
direction. One is based on the material or formal body, and the other is 
based on the subtle body. 


The word rupa in Sanskrit means the formal body. It is applied to the 
material world, the world of form, the world seen in the way in which we 
are accustomed to seeing it. You have a formal body, which is how you 
appear to any other objective observer, and you have a subtle body, 
which is the way you feel you are to yourself. If you’ve been on a drinking 
spree and you wake up with a headache, and your head feels as big as a 
room, that is the shape of your subtle body at that moment. 

There is a wonderful cartoon in which a comic-book character is 
watching a plane doing stunts, and his neck grows longer and longer as 
his head follows the plane, until his neck is tied in knots. That is an 


illustration of the shape of that character’s subtle body. 


So when you look through a microscope at a cross section of the 
spine, you will see a design that refers to the gross body. And when you 
look in the other direction and trace the senses back until you get to the 
manovijnana—the central sense behind each separate sense—you find 
that that process will produce an incredibly detailed experience. And 
then, if you drew pictures to represent what you had found, you would 
end up with a cross section or design of the subtle body. We in the West 
would draw pictures that were different from the pictures drawn by the 
Tibetans, if we genuinely made this inquiry ourselves, because we have 
different traditions. Goodness only knows what we would draw. Probably 
we would make things like the stained glass windows in Chartres 
Cathedral, and crucifixes, too, because if you investigate sensation and 
go down into it and feel it getting more and more intense—more, more, 
more, until you don’t think you can endure any longer—that’s Jesus on 
the cross. So cover it with jewels and make it gorgeous. 


All these activities are investigations into the basic sensation of being 
alive. People are curious about the basic questions that come from being 
alive: Where are we; what's it all about? One of the only ways to answer 
these questions—to find out what you mean by meaning, by asking a 
question, by being conscious, by being here—is to meditate. However, 
meditation does not mean thinking out an answer in an intellectual way. 
It means to look more closely at the subject of your question. You could 
do that with a microscope, with chemical analysis, and so on. That way is 
valid. But it has to be balanced by the internal way of going down into 
one’s own sensation, one’s own consciousness. Now this is not 
something you are “supposed to do” It is not a chore or your solemn 
duty. It is simply delightful to look with total fascination and joy and love 
at whatever it is that you and everybody else are made of. 


Yet this “looking” is a different spirit of religion from that to which 
we are normally accustomed. It is not a patriarchal attitude, which says, 
“Go read your Bible! Get down on your knees and repent.’ Instead, it 
says, “Psst. I’ve got something to show you. Look in here. Watch. Take a 
look.’ This is the attitude, and I don't know how to suggest it except by 
contrasting the two different approaches. 


This is as near as I can get to describing the inner meaning of Tantra. 
It is an attitude that is common to both Hinduism and Buddhism. It 
means the web, the warp and woof, the yes and the no. It is the 
comprehension of the unity of opposites, of good and bad, of life and 


death, of love and hate, of all extremes in the whole spectrum of our 
emotions and our sensations. 


This is not a teaching for children. You must have some maturity to 
understand this lesson. A child hearing this teaching would cease paying 
respect to rules or constraints because a child would see only that 
anything goes. There is no way of doing wrong if you are everything 
there is, forever and ever. You can die, forget everything altogether; what 
would it matter? There is always light on the other side of the darkness. 
You can always begin anew. This would be a child’s reaction to this 
teaching. But the adult would understand that even after everything was 
new again, the same patterns would unfold. Everything would be once 
again exactly as it was before, just as the physical forces in things repeat 
their fundamental laws and patterns. As it is in the outer world, so it is in 
the inner. 


Buddhist enlightenment consists simply in knowing the secret of the 
unity of opposites—the unity of the inner and outer worlds—and in 
understanding that secret as an adult rather than as a child. It means, 
really, to finally grow up. To misunderstand this teaching is to fall into a 
trap. Just as in our own culture there is an attitude among many of our 
religious people of being against life, there is in Buddhism the trap of 
following the teachings without understanding them. As Saraha, a 
Tantric teacher who lived about 1000 A.D., said in critique of both the 
Hindu and Buddhist orthodoxy, “The Brahmans who do not know the 
truth recite the four Vedas in vain. With earth and water and kusha grass 
they make preparations. Seated at home they kindle fire. From the 
senseless offerings they make they burn their eyes with the pungent 
smoke. In lordly garb, with one staff or three, they think themselves wise 
with their Brahmanical law. Vainly is the world enslaved by their vanity. 
They do not know that the dharma is the same as the non-dharma. With 
ashes these masters smear their bodies. On their heads they wear matted 
hair. Seated within the house they kindle lamps. Seated in the corner 
they tinkle bells. They adopt a posture and fix their eyes, whispering in 
ears and deceiving folk, teaching widows and bald-headed nuns, and 
taking their fees. 


“The Jain monks mock the way with their appearance, with their long 
nails and their filthy clothes. Or else naked and with disheveled hair they 
enslave themselves with their doctrine of liberation. If by nakedness one 
is released, then dogs and jackals must be so. If from absence of hair 
there comes perfection, then the hips of maidens must be so. If from 


having a tail there comes release, then for the peacock and yak it must be 
so. If wisdom consists in eating just what one finds, then for elephants 
and horses it must be so. For these Jain monks there is no release. 
Deprived of the truth of happiness, they do but afflict their own bodies’ 


Saraha continues, “Then there are the novices and bhikshus’”— 
meaning Buddhist monks—“following the teachings of the old school of 
Theravada Buddhism, renouncing the world to be monks. Some can be 
seen reading the scriptures. Some are withering away while 
concentrating on thought. Others have recourse to the Mahayana, the 
doctrine which expounds the original text, they say. Others just meditate 
on mandala circles. Others strive to define the fourth stage of bliss. With 
such investigating they fall from the way. Some would envisage it as 
space, others endow it with the nature of voidness, and thus they are 
generally in disagreement. But whoever seeks nirvana while deprived of 
the innate by attachment to any of these vehicles, these methods, can in 
no way acquire the absolute truth. Whoever is intent on method, how 
may he gain release? Will one gain release abiding in meditation? What 
is the use of lamps or offerings? What is to be done by reliance on 
mantras? What is the use of austerities or of going on pilgrimages? Is 
release achieved by bathing in water? No. Abandon such false 
attachments and renounce such illusions:” 


And that is the wisdom of the mountains. 


TRANSCENDING DUALITY 


CHAPTER SIX 


| to begin this subject with a discussion of male-female 


symbolism in Tantric yoga, and then move on to other aspects of the 
Mahayana. 


You will find that in the Tantric art forms, every buddha or aspect of 
buddha has a feminine counterpart. Not only do they have feminine 
counterparts, but they also have different forms depending on the level 
at which they are being manifested. For instance, there are the five 
dhyani buddhas, who represent the blossom of a rose; one in the middle 
and the remaining four surrounding it. Each has a corresponding 
bodhisattva form, and each bodhisattva has, in turn, a corresponding 
heruka form, which is a rough, weird, and kind of far-out character, often 
depicted as having a bull’s head. But all of these are forms of the original 
five buddhas. Whether they are in the form of a bodhisattva or a heruka, 
they are all reducible to the original group of dhyani buddhas. 


Now, all of these figures have female counterparts, and these male/ 
female pairs are always represented as touching at all points, in the 
complete embrace of sexual intercourse. It is understood that this 
embrace will last forever and ever, and will never end, and that this idea 
or image is a way of representing the resonant nature of life. The 
fundamental point of Tantric yoga is self-knowledge. Without resonance 
nothing happens. Suppose we had a room in which all the walls, and the 
floor, and the ceiling were soundproofed. You would hardly be able to 
hear anyone talk, because the voice benefits from resonance. Resonance 
is why people enjoy singing in the bathtub. It resonates with their voice, 
and they suddenly discover that they have a good voice. That is why 
violins, cellos, or bass fiddles have hollow wooden bodies: to make their 
sounds resonate, to play them back to themselves. 


Perhaps this is the reason we are all so fascinated with taking 
photographs, writing things down, and, above all, remembering. These 


are all forms of resonance. A person who had total amnesia, who did not 
remember anything, would not be capable of self-knowledge. And 
perhaps there are some forms of life that do not know they are there. I do 
not know whether the particular cells constituting my body know that 
they exist. Maybe they do. Maybe they have some wonderful system of 
resonance that I know nothing about and they are all worried about what 
I am going to do with them, and are having conferences and meetings 
and making policy decisions and so on about this person in charge. It 
might well be that when we die our cells suddenly say, “God is dead” 
They have a theological controversy and say, “We will just have to fend 
for ourselves from now on? It may be that we have some kind of system 
like that, but certainly to know that, I don’t know. In any case, to know 
you exist you need an echo. 


So I invented the following limerick: 


There was a young man who said, “Though 
It seems that I know that I know. 

What I would like to see 

Is the I that knows me 

When I know that I know that I know” 


We are absolutely fascinated with the whole idea of remembering 
and recording. When there is a gathering of people, they say, “This is 
great. It’s a pity somebody didn’t bring a camera” But in recording a 
thing there is both a gain and a loss. That’s why some people say things 
should be photographed, while others prefer to look at them and then let 
them go. I had some experience of this phenomenon while touring in 
Japan. My students brought cameras and were constantly photographing 
things, and I had a camera as well and was also constantly 
photographing, but at the same time I felt that so long as I had a camera 
with me I would be distracted from actuality by it. I had a little box with 
which I went around grabbing life. Of course, it was great to come back 
and look at the photographs, but there is something about a photograph 
that is inferior to the actual experience that is being photographed. There 
is something immensely fascinating about photography and painting. 
They are forms of reproduction, which is also true of sexuality. They are 
like sexual reproduction in that they say you are here, you are alive, and 
they resonate with life. One school of religion says, “Let it all go. Don’t be 
attached. Live in the moment’ Krishnamurti used to say, “Stop trying to 


remember everything’ 


You may need a kind of factual memory for your name and address 
and telephone number and things like that, but do not linger over 
memories, treasuring them, thinking, “I’m going to keep my girlfriend’s 
lock of hair and take it out every now and then and look at it and it will 
make me feel wonderful.” That is a clinging to memory, which holds you 
to the past and to death. 


The other school of thought, quite opposite to this, goes along with 
the title of one of Henry Miller’s books, Remember to Remember. This 
school says, “Hold on to it all. Get involved. Keep your girlfriend’s hair; 
keep all the photographs.” You know how in some houses the piano is 
completely covered with photographs and reminiscences. I went to visit 
Gloria Swanson once, and had never before seen such a house full of 
memories. Everything in all directions was of Gloria Swanson, 
photographed on this occasion, signed on that occasion, and receiving 
various presentations. I also once went to visit the wife of a former 
archbishop of Canterbury, and the whole house was memorials, a 
complete clutter of tombstone furniture with little brass plates on it, 
“Presented on the occasion” of this, that, and the other. Now, you might 
say, “That person isn’t really living. They are stuck in the past.’ But on the 
other hand, what is life without memory, resonance, echo? 


I scarcely need to point out the duality of all this. If you are a wise 
man you do not take sides in this issue, you occupy both sides. That is 
the meaning of the unity of samsara and nirvana. On the one hand, you 
let go of everything and live in the eternal now because that is all there 
is. Memory is an illusion; it is all gone. Everything that has made an 
impression on you is gone. That is the meaning of maya, or illusion. 
There is only the eternal now, the present moment, and there never will 
be anything else. All remembering occurs in the present; memory exists 
in the eternal now. 


On the other hand, what fun to drag life out and make it echo and get 
involved with it, and to fall in love and become attached. 


R. H. Blyth once wrote me a letter in which he said, “What are you 
doing these days? As for me, I am abandoning all kinds of satori and 
enlightenment and am trying to become as deeply attached to as many 
people and as many things as possible” 

It is a balancing trick, like riding a bicycle. You find yourself falling 
over one way and you turn in that direction and stay up. In the same way, 
when you find yourself becoming too attached to life, you correct that 


excessive attachment with the realization that nothing exists except the 
eternal now. And then, when you feel you are safe again, because the 
eternal now is the only thing that exists, you go off and get involved with 
some kind of social, political, amorous, familial, scholarly, or artistic 
enterprise. The two always go together. 


This is the meaning of the sexual symbolism in Tantric yoga. The 
male knows he exists only if there is a female, an echo. And the female 
knows of her existence only when there is a male. Nobody ever came 
into existence without parents. There is simply no other way into this 
universe. 


I want to illustrate this idea of simultaneous attachment and 
detachment, involution and evolution. Involution is how you get 
involved; evolution is how you get out. Tantric yoga represents all of this 
in the most extraordinary symbolism based not only on the sexual 
functioning of the human body but also on the whole nervous system as 
well. In yoga philosophy there is the idea of the psychic anatomy, and 
this psychic anatomy belongs to the subtle body. Do not expect to find 
this subtle body in the physical organism. It is not an addition to the 
physical organism or a kind of ghost that goes around with it. The 
physical body is the body as seen by others. The subtle body is the way 
you feel yourself to be. 


The anatomy of the subtle body consists of the processes of 
involution and evolution. These processes are visualized as a spinal tree 
with two paths crossing back and forth in front of it. The familiar image 
of two serpents on a rod, the caduceus carried by Mercury, is another 
representation of this same idea. Alchemically, mercury—the mirror 
substance—is the void, the pure clear light. It is the same thing as the 
Buddhist diamond. The tree or canal of the subtle body is called the 
sushuna. One of the two routes crossing in front of it is called the ida. 
The other is the pingala. In one channel something is going down, and 
on the other something is coming up. At the base of the spinal column, 
according to the chakra system of Tantric yoga, sits the kundalini, the 
serpent power. The symbol of the serpent power is an inverted triangle 
with a phallus, upright and erect, with a sleeping serpent coiled all the 
way around it. That is involution: to be absolutely involved. The sex 
symbol is used because, symbolically, sex stands for complete 
involvement. 


Once you have experienced complete involvement, the trick is to get 
out. The process of yoga is represented as awakening the serpent that is 


sleeping the sleep of maya. Captivated by illusion, it thinks that the 
world really exists. To put it another way, the male has been captivated 
by the female echo of himself, and the female has been captivated by the 
male echo of herself. To say it a third way, you have been caught by 
memory; you think the objects of memory are all really here. You do not 
realize that there is only an eternal now. In other words, you are 
involved. You have become one-sided in the direction of involvement. 
Now, if you go out to any one end of the spectrum, you will forget you 
are there. You will enter a kind of nonexistence. You cannot really 
nonexist because you will always come back eventually, but if you go too 
far to one extreme, you will not know you are here. Therefore you must 
evolve. The process of evolving is symbolized by the idea that you can 
draw the involved energy located in the kundalini, which is the sex 
center, and send it back up the spinal tree to the top, from whence it 
came. 


The practice of sexual yoga employs a male and a female partner who 
are husband and wife or are in some kind of spiritual marriage. The male 
sits in the normal meditation posture. The female sits on top of him, 
wrapping her legs around his waist and her arms around his neck. He 
holds her around her waist. In this position they arouse the sexual force. 
The theory is that instead of dissipating this energy in the ordinary way 
—through orgasm—they send it up the spinal tree, back into the brain. 
Do not take this literally. It is symbolism. To take this symbolism literally 
would be to turn it into a superstition. It would be exactly the kind of 
superstition that comes from thinking that heaven is somewhere up in 
the sky and there really are streets of gold and angels wandering around 
in nighties, playing harps. All of these images are ways of talking about 
our inner anatomy, our psychic anatomy. The kingdom of heaven is 
within you. When Jesus ascended into heaven, he went right into the 
middle of himself and disappeared. 


The image of the pearly gates of heaven makes people think that the 
gates of heaven are literally gates covered with pearls. In fact, the image 
means nothing of the kind. It is actually meant to convey the idea that 
the gates of heaven are like pearls, with all the connotations associated 
with a pearl’s spherical shape and luster. It is because of these same 
connotations that, in Hinduism, the idea of many incarnations is likened 
to beads strung together on a thread. The thread is called the sutra 
atman. Sutra is “thread”; atman is “self? The sutra atman is the thread of 
self on which all the beads of reincarnation hang. The self is so thin, 
though, that it is like no-self. Which brings us back to the idea of raising 


the kundalini—the snake, or serpent power—up the tree. To raise the 
serpent you have to let go of the hang-ups of involvement and realize 
that there are no possessions, everything is falling away, and all 
memories are just a holding-on-to of illusions. When you evolve to the 
point of thoroughly understanding that, then you can become involved 
again. 

In this Tantric symbolism you have a marvelous picture of the world 
alternating between systole and diastole, attachment and detachment. 
This takes us right back to the idea of the bodhisattva who is liberated, 
who has let go and is no longer attached, and has given up memory. The 
meaning behind the idea of giving up the man or woman who is your 
resonator is that, when you give them up, you will find that you are free: 
there is only the eternal now. 


Of course, the bodhisattva, instead of staying detached, goes back 
into the world. There are all sorts of funny symbolic stories about 
bodhisattvas appearing in the world as beggars and whores, using every 
conceivable kind of device in order to liberate other beings. 


This idea of systole/diastole, attachment/detachment, takes us all the 
way back to the original Hindu image of the world as the pralaya and the 
manavantara. The manavantara is the period in which Brahma 
manifests himself as multiple beings for 4,320,000 years. The pralaya is 
the period in which he withdraws and everything disappears. This 
alternation between pralaya and manavantara goes on forever and ever, 
and not only in our universe, but also in many other dimensions of space 
and time. The Buddhist idea of giving up attachment to the world and 
yet remaining in it is the same idea of the manavantara/pralaya 
alternation re-created in another form. 


You may feel that this cycle is pretty monotonous, and, in fact, 
monotony is one of the basic feelings underlying Buddhism. “Must we go 
around again? Enough of this. Let’s go to sleep. Time must have a stop.” 
But when you stop you forget that it all ever happened, and this 
forgetfulness is marvelous, because then the world can start over again 
without your knowing that it has all happened before, and you are never 
bored. This is the cure for being tired of things. There are going to be all 
sorts of problems, but you won't know you've had any problems before, 
so having problems again will not bore you until you accumulate 
memories once more. When you have had enough of these problems 
that it becomes a bore dealing with them, you get rid of yourself again. It 
is called death, a beautiful arrangement for keeping everything young 


and new and for keeping the universe running without getting tired of 
itself. 


These are the two fundamental notions of being, and they are 
represented by the dualities of male and female, light and dark, now and 
memory. Memory, remember, creates the future as well as the past. You 
would not know you were going to have anything happen tomorrow 
unless you remembered that something had happened yesterday. You 
figure that because the sun rose yesterday, and the day before yesterday, 
it will rise again tomorrow. If you did not remember the past, you would 
not know that there will be a tomorrow. Because there is no tomorrow. 
Tomorrow is an illusion produced by memory, and so is yesterday. They 
simply do not exist. Where is tomorrow? Bring me tomorrow’s 
newspaper. 


You may feel, as you think these things over, that you are almost on 
the verge of going mad. I sometimes feel that way when I get involved in 
a contemplative state. The thing to do is not to worry. Let go and swing 
with it, because you will always bounce back. What gives you the sense 
of impending madness is that you think you are not in control and that 
someone or something else has taken over. Well, of course something 
has to take over. When you have driven long enough in the car, you say 
to your wife, “Will you drive for a while, please?” You want the relief that 
comes when something else takes over for you. But that “something else” 
is always secretly you, and you need not fear it. The nature of being is 
constructed in this extraordinarily fascinating way. It constantly renews 
itself by eternally forgetting itself. This is a perfectly marvelous 
arrangement. It is a funny thing how we all alternate in this way between 
remembering and not remembering. We remember things long enough 
to know that we are here. We would not know it if we didn’t remember. 
But when memory weighs on us too much and we are too much here, we 
seek liberation in the realization that all memory is an illusion, there is 
no future and equally no past, there is nothing except the present 
moment. But when you are liberated, you like to come back and play the 
memory game again. Liberation is a cleaning process. You wipe off the 
blackboard and start writing again, then you wipe it off, and then you 
start writing again. This is the process whereby life keeps going. 


I have been listening to recorded sutra chanting from Koya-san, 
Mount Koya, which is the ultimate center and inner sanctuary of the 
Japanese practice of the Vajrayana branch of Mahayana Buddhism. The 
monks who were chanting are a bunch of boys just like American college 


boys who play football, and some of them do not have the faintest idea 
what they are doing. Some of them are there only because their fathers 
have sent them there. Perhaps their fathers own temples and they have to 
carry on their fathers’ tradition, because the family business must go on, 
and so some of them have no idea what this chanting is all about. You 
and I could get into the swing of it, dance to it, go very far out on it, as it 
was originally intended for us to do. But for many of the monks of 
Mount Koya, these chants are just a chore, a thing they have to get up at 
five o'clock in the morning to do. They have to memorize all this, get it 
exactly right, and they do, but they have completely forgotten why they 
do it and the substance underlying it. 


The monks on Mount Koya have come to a point in the historical 
development of their way of life where they often remember so much 
about it that nothing in their way of life is any longer new to them. They 
are just going through the motions. This is a version of the same paradox 
I mentioned earlier, that the echo of memory that tells you that you exist 
also entraps you. To the extent that it tells you that you do exist, it is an 
advantage. To the extent that it traps you, it is the price you must pay for 
your existence, and you should be thankful. Somebody gave it to you. 


In the Judaeo-Christian tradition, the Lord God gave it to you, and 
you are supposed to be thankful and say, “Anything bad that I did was 
from me. Dear God, anything good that I did was from you.” What a 
marvelous mix-up that is, and there must come a point in all this where 
you have to say to people, “Please come off it.” 


I was aching to know enough Japanese to say to those boys on Mount 
Koya, “Realize what a great thing you have here! Enjoy it! Get together 
and join hands and chant these sutras and really make something 
happen.” 


Now, in talking about alternating between memory and forgetfulness 
I have been talking about the process I call flip-flop-ability, whereby we 
switch from one attitude to another, one situation to another. This pulse 
or switching is the very nature of existence, the beat of your heart, the 
vibration of sounds and light. Everything goes back and forth so that you 
can know you are here. This game of knowing has its own inner 
meaning. To complete my discussion of it I want to talk about one form 
of the Mahayana that I have not discussed at all. This is the Pure Land 
school, which is the most popular form of Mahayana Buddhism in the 
Far East. Everywhere in China and Japan the multitudes follow this 
branch, which venerates as its presiding image Amitabha, one of the 


dhyani buddhas, whose name means “boundless light” He is an aspect of 
Mahavairochana, the great sun Buddha, who was probably derived, 
historically, from Ahura Mazda from Persia, the great sun god of the 
Mazdians and the Parsees. But although Ahura Mazda may have been 
the origin of the sun Buddha, the idea of the Persian sun god has been 
greatly transformed by Buddhism. 


You have all probably seen photographs of the Daibutsu, the Great 
Buddha, at Kamakura, Japan. It is an enormous bronze figure that sits in 
a beautiful park surrounded by pine trees. The original temple around it 
was long ago demolished by a tidal wave, for which thanks be to God. If 
it hadn’t been for that tidal wave, nobody would have ever really seen 
this figure. This huge bronze Buddha is about forty-two feet high. It sits 
surrounded by great activity. School children by the thousands are 
always streaming by on tours; photographers are always taking pictures; 
people are constantly selling various souvenirs; exhibitions of dwarf trees 
are going on all around, and amid all this, there Buddha sits, looking 
down forever. He hushes everything. No matter how much turmoil there 
is in the park, the huge face of this Buddha presides over everything, and 
you cannot ignore it. He subdues you into peace, but not in an 
authoritative way. He does not say, “Shut up!” but is just so peaceful that 
you cannot help but catch the infusion of peace that flows from him. 
This is the Buddha Amida, or Amitabha. He is not the historical 
Shakyamuni Gautama Buddha, who lived in India, but is one of the 
dhyani buddhas who are not manifested in the world. 


The religion connected with this figure is called the Pure Land 
school; in Japanese it is Jodo-shin-shu, the True Sect of the Pure Land. 
This religion has its origins, as always, in India, but under the genius of 
Honen and Shinran, who were medieval Buddhist saints, the Japanese 
developed their own special variety of it. 


It is a very strange religion. It takes as its basis the idea that we are 
now living in the most decadent period of history. This claim comes 
from the Hindu idea that this is the Kali yuga, the end of time, when 
everything is completely fouled up. This period started on February 23, 
3023 B.C. It will last for five thousand years more, at which point 
everything will fall apart and the universe will disappear out of sheer 
failure. In this decadent period nobody can be truly virtuous. People who 
try to be virtuous at this time are merely showing off, are not really pure, 
are just pretending to be virtuous. They give money to charity not 
because they love the people they are giving the money to but because 


they feel they ought to do it. Their motivations are inescapably bad, and 
because of that, nobody can possibly liberate themselves from the chains 
of karma. The more they try to get out of their karma, their conditioning, 
their bondage to their past, the more they get themselves involved in it. 
Therefore all human beings living now—in the Kali yuga, the end time, 
which the Japanese call mappo—are just hopelessly selfish. 


In this predicament you cannot rely on jiriki, your own power, to 
achieve liberation from self. You have to rely on the power of tariki, 
which is the power of something other than you. In the Jodo-shin-shu 
sect, the tariki, the other power, is represented in the form of Amitabha 
—in Japanese, Amida—this great beneficent Buddha figure in the park at 
Kamakura whom everybody loves. He is quite strangely different from 
any kind of authoritarian god figure we have in the West. He sits there 
serenely quiet. He does not preach. All you have to do is say his name in 
homage—“Namu Amida Butsu,’ which means “the name of Amida 
Buddha’—and after death you will be reborn in a special paradise called 
Sukhavati, which is jodo, the pure land, where becoming enlightened is 
easy. It has none of the difficulties surrounding it that we have in our 
ordinary life today. 


Everybody born in the pure land is born inside a lotus. There is a 
huge lotus pond there. Amida sits in front of it with all his attendants, 
and the lotuses come up out of the pond and go pop as a bud breaks 
open, and inside every bud is a new little being, somebody who has said 
the Namu Amida Butsu formula on earth and is now sitting on a lotus 
like a buddha. In the museum at Mount Koya there is a great painting 
depicting what it is like to arrive in this pure land. It shows a huge 
panorama of Amitabha and all his attendants—such as the apsaras, who 
look at you with lovely, longing eyes—and all you have to do to get there 
is say “Namu Amida Butsu.” Just say it. You don’t even have to believe 
that it will work. 


That is the religion of most Japanese Buddhists, believe it or not. If 
you really feel that you will go to Sukhavati for having said “Namu Amida 
Butsu,” then you will be grateful and try to help other people while you 
are here, and be a bodhisattva. The whole point, though, is that you 
cannot do this by your own effort, and the moment you think you can, 
you become a phony. You must go completely the other way. You must 
acknowledge that you have no power or capability of being virtuous or 
unselfish. 


This kind of religion developed a peculiar kind of saint they call the 


myoko-nin: myo meaning “wonderful”; ko meaning “fine”; nin meaning 
“person.” Myoko-nin are very special characters. 


Among stories told about them is one of a traveling man who came 
to a temple during the course of a night. He walked in, took the sacred 
cushions on which the priests sit, arranged them in front of the altar, and 
went to sleep. In the morning the priest came in and said, “What’s going 
on here?” The myoko-nin looked at him and answered, “You must be a 
stranger here. You don't belong to the family.” 


The myoko-nin knew that the great thing in life comes not from one’s 
own doing but from the side of experience that we think belongs to the 
other. There are some who believe that it comes from the split in 
experience that you call yourself. Those are the jiriki people. The tariki 
people believe it comes from the other. 


When you penetrate deeply into the doctrines of the Pure Land 
school you will see that only the simple people believe that Amitabha 
Buddha is really sitting on a golden lotus surrounded by all those apsaras 
and so on. The simple priests in the country villages still insist that that is 
what one should believe, but the sophisticated priests do not believe that 
at all. They know that Amitabha is in you. It is that side of you that you 
do not define as being part of you. 


It is in the nature of duality that self and other go together. You do 
not need to cling to yourself and oppose the other. Everything you call 
the other is you too. You will realize this if you take any aspect of duality 
to an extreme. You can, for instance, pursue the idea of total courage, of 
letting go of everything, of being a true Zen monk, abandoning all 
property, living in a barn, sitting up in the middle of the night, in the 
cold, eating rice and pickles, and so on. You can seek liberation in that 
manner, by going to that extreme. But if you do, you will eventually 
arrive at the same place as the person who pursued liberation by going to 
the other extreme, of making no effort whatsoever. 


Liberation comes of itself. The person who seeks to make no effort 
will encounter as many difficulties as the person who seeks to pursue the 
path of total courage, because how can one make no effort? How does 
one get to the point of doing no work at all, of just doing nothing, 
however? Even if all you do is say “Namu Amida Butsu,’ you are still 
doing work. It is easy to do, but it’s still work. To really do nothing, with 
perfection, is as difficult as doing everything. 


ALAN WATTS AUDIO COLLECTIONS 


Original Live Recordings 
from Electronic University 


USING STATE-OF-THE-ART technology, Electronic University has captured 
and enhanced the natural sound from the original recordings of Alan 
Watts’s lectures so that the insights from one of this century’s most 
notable philosophers come through as clearly as the day he spoke them. 


THE TAO OF PHILOSOPHY, VOLUMES I & Il and THE PHILOSOPHIES OF ASIA 
VOLUMES I & Il each consist of three audio cassettes in an attractive 
bookshelf binder. The price for each volume is $29.95. Please add $3.00 
per item for shipping. 

MyTH AND RELIGION, BUDDHISM, ZEN AND WESTERN ZEN, and 
PHILOSOPHY AND SOCIETY each consist of six audio cassettes in an 
attractive bookshelf binder. The list price for each series is $59.95. 
However, you may select any two series for $100. 


Please add $3.00 per set for priority mail, $10.00 per set for overnight 
mail, or $5.00 per set for overseas shipping. Visa, MasterCard, and 
American Express accepted. To order please call or write: 


Electronic University 
Post Office Box 2309 
San Anselmo, CA 94979 
(800) 969-2887 


The Tuttle Story 
“Books to Span 
the East and West” 


Many people are surprised to learn that the world’s largest 
publisher of books on Asia had its humble beginnings in the 
tiny American state of Vermont. The company’s founder, 
Charles E. Tuttle, belonged to a New England family steeped 
in publishing. 

Tuttle’s father was a noted antiquarian dealer in Rutland, 
Vermont. Young Charles honed his knowledge of the trade 
working in the family bookstore, and later in the rare books 
section of Columbia University Library. His passion for 
beautiful books—old and new—never wavered throughout his 


long career as a bookseller and publisher. 


After graduating from Harvard, Tuttle enlisted in the 
military and in 1945 was sent to Tokyo to work on General 
Douglas MacArthur's staff. He was tasked with helping to 
revive the Japanese publishing industry, which had been utterly 
devastated by the war. After his tour of duty was completed, 
he left the military, married a talented and beautiful singer, 
Reiko Chiba, and in 1948 began several successful business 


ventures. 


To his astonishment, Tuttle discovered that postwar 
Tokyo was actually a book-lover’s paradise. He befriended 
dealers in the Kanda district and began supplying rare Japanese 
editions to American libraries. He also imported American 
books to sell to the thousands of Gls stationed in Japan. By 


1949, Tuttle’s business was thriving, and he opened Tokyo's 
very first English-language bookstore in the Takashimaya 
Department Store in Ginza, to great success. Two years later, 
he began publishing books to fulfill the growing interest of 


foreigners in all things Asian. 


Though a westerner, Tuttle was hugely instrumental in 
bringing a knowledge of Japan and Asia to a world hungry for 
information about the East. By the time of his death in 1993, 
he had published over 6,000 books on Asian culture, history 
and art—a legacy honored by Emperor Hirohito in 1983 with 
the “Order of the Sacred Treasure,” the highest honor Japan 


can bestow upon a non-Japanese. 


The Tuttle company today maintains an active backlist of 
some 1,500 titles, many of which have been continuously in 
print since the 1950s and 1960s—a great testament to Charles 
Tuttle’s skill as a publisher. More than 60 years after its 
founding, Tuttle Publishing is more active today than at any 
time in its history, still inspired by Charles Tuttle’s core 
mission—to publish fine books to span the East and West 
and provide a greater understanding of each. 


Other books of interest 


from Tuttle Publishing 
tuttlepublishing.com 


Gm . 
Qy 
SHINTO 


THE KAMI WAY 


BUDDHISM 


PLAIN AND SIMPLE 


THE SECOMD STEP EAST 


ISBN 978-0-8048-4336-2 ISBN 978-4-8053-1272-8 


JPR a wane 


WHEN __ | 
BUDDHISTS 
ATTACK 


= we 


ISBN 978-0-8048-3185-7 ISBN 978-0-8048-3113-0 ISBN 978-4-8053-1230-8 


MOMENT 


DAVID CROSWELLER 


pits i 
BUDDHIST 
WISDOM 
DAILY REFLECTIONS. 
ISBN 978-0-8048-3489-6 


