‘THE . 
PHILOSOPHIES — 
or ASIA 


THE EDITED TRANSCRIPTS 


wats 


X9F WISDOM’ LIBRARY & 


THE 
PHILOSOPHIES 
or ASIA 


THE EDITED TRANSCRIPTS 


ALAN WATTS 
at a seminar aboard SS Vallejo, 1966 


“THE 


PuiLosopHiEs 
or ASIA 


THE EDITED TRANSCRIPTS 


Aby wars 


Charles E. Tuttle Co., Inc. 
Boston ¢ Rutland, Vermont + Tokyo 


First paperback edition published in 1999 by Tuttle Publishing, an imprint of 
Periplus Editions (HK) Ltd., with editorial offices at 153 Milk Street, Boston, 


Massachusetts 02109. 
Copyright © 1995 Mark Watts 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or utilized in 
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, 
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without prior writ- 
ten permission from Tuttle Publishing. 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Watts, Alan, 1915-1973. 
Philosophies of Asia: the complete edited transcripts / by Alan Watts. 
v. <1>cm.—(Love of wisdom library) 
ISBN 0-8048-3198-X 
1. Philosophy. Oriental. 2. Asia—Religion. I. Title. II. 


Series: 

Br21.W378 1995 

181-de20 95-9751 
CIP 

Photo courtesy of Alan Watts Electronic Educational Programs 

Distributed by 

USA SOUTHEAST ASIA 

Tuttle Publishing Berkeley Books Pte. Ltd. 

Distribution Center 5 Little Road #08-o1 

Airport Industrial Park Singapore 536983 

364 Innovation Drive Tel: (65) 280-3320 

North Clarendon, VT 05759-9436 Fax: (65) 280-6290 

Tel: (802) 773-8930 

Fax: (802) 773-6993 

JAPAN CANADA 

Tuttle Shokai Ltd. Raincoast Books 

1-21-13, Seki 8680 Canbie Street 

Tamarku, Kawasaki-shi Vancouver, British Columbia 

Kanagawa-ken 214, Japan V6P 6Mg 

Tel: (044) 833-0225 Tel: (604) 323-7100 

Fax: (044) 822-0413 Fax: (604) 323-2600 


13579108642 03 02 OF 00 99 


Design by Frances Kay 
Cover design by Jeannet Leendertse 
Printed in the United States of America 


Dedicated to the memories of 


Daisetz T. Suzuki and Christmas Humphreys 


The nub of all these Oriental Philosopbies is not an idea, 
not a theory, not even a way of bebaving, but a way of 
experiencing a transformation of everyday consciousness so 
that it becomes quite apparent to us that this is the way things are. 


1 


—Alan Watts 


CONTENTS 


Introduction ix 
I. The Relevance of Oriental Philosophy 1 
II. The Mythology of Hinduism 23 
Ill. Eco-Zen 41 
IV. Swallowing a Ball of Hot Iron 49 
V. Intellectual Yoga 59 
VI. Introduction to Buddhism 73 


VII. The Taoist Way of Karma gi 


INTRODUCTION 


+ 
he following chapters constitute the first 
volume in a collection of literary editions of 
Alan Watts’s classic public lectures. As his 
son, I spent many hours listening to my 
father speak, and I often recorded his talks. Years after 
his death in 1973, I had the opportunity to spend time 
reviewing all of his tapes, and for this book I have select- 
ed some of his most spirited and insightful lectures on 
Oriental philosophy. The Philosophies of Asia is a jour- 
ney into the spirit of Eastern religious thought. It is at 
once an introduction and an overview of the primary 
branches of Oriental philosophy. Most significantly, it is 
a revelation of the common thread of experience that 


Vis 


INTRODUCTION 


weaves its way through thousands of years of traditional 
Asian methods of “teaching the unteachable.” 

Many of us might ask, “So, why is Eastern thought 
important today? What is our connection to such foreign 
and ancient ways of knowing?” Alan Watts answers 
these questions eloquently in “The Relevance of Oriental 
Philosophy.” This is a powerful public lecture, in which 
he deals frankly with religion as it is usually practiced in 
the West and answers important questions about philos- 
ophy in general and religious experiences in particular. 
To Watts the essence of all true religion is the mystical 
experience, or what is sometimes called God conscious- 
ness Or cosmic consciousness. He is, however, critical of 
religious institutions in the West that function primarily 
as “societies of the saved,” whose primary purpose 
seems to be to distinguish its members from those of the 
“not-saved.” 

In the second chapter, “The Mythology Of Hindu- 
ism,” we explore the world-view of one of the earliest 
evolving Eastern religious philosophies— that of the 
ancient Hindus. The cosmology central to religious 
Hinduism is one in which the godhead is understood to 
be “dreaming” each of us. This perspective, although 
radical by Western philosophical standards, is indicative 
of the unity perceived by the awakened individual. Since 
the yogic tradition from which both Buddhism and 
Taoism trace their origins is Indian, a thorough look at 
Eastern thought begins here, with the philosophy and 
mythology of Hinduism. 

“Eco-Zen” is not an esoteric art form but a down- 
to-earth look at the Zen of knowing you are one with 
the world or, as Alan Watts expressed it, feeling the rela- 
tionship of organism/environment. Speaking before a 
large college audience, he went on to point out that 


a 


INTRODUCTION 


“ecological awareness” and “mystical experience” are 
simply two ways of describing the same realization. 

“Swallowing a Ball of Hot Iron” examines a means 
of teaching embodied in the koan method of Zen 
Buddhism. Here the perennial relationship between stu- 
dent and master is explored with great candor. Of 
course, there are many Zen stories, all of which point 
toward the inevitable conclusion that, simply put, you 
are IT. 

“Intellectual Yoga” is a profound and often hum- 
orous look at the mind as a path to enlightenment. This 
is one of Alan Watts’s later public lectures, delivered in 
San Francisco in 1971, where we find the mature 
philosopher performing at ease as he leads us through 
the tangled web of thinking. 

“Introduction to Buddhism” is composed of two 
seminar sessions recorded aboard Alan Watts’s ferryboat 
home. Here he explains the essential methods and pre- 
cepts of Buddhism, the difference between the Southern 
and Northern schools, and the sophistication of 
Buddha’s skills as a psychologist. He then turns to the 
bodbhisattva doctrine, the idea of a fully liberated person 
continuing everyday life “just as it is,” to participate in 
the liberation of all living beings. And finally, he 
explores the direct method of the Pure Land school of 
“instant Buddhism.” 

Finally, we end up with Taoism in “The Taoist 
Way of Karma.” The Taoist ways of dropping out from 
the chain of karma are discussed, as they were recorded 
in Big Sur, California, during the mid-sixties. We come 
to “the easy way in” by following the course and current 
of nature. However, understood this way, nature is not 
something other than man, as in “man and nature,” but 
the quality of being its self, as in “one’s nature.” 


[«] 


INTRODUCTION 


In translating these stirring speeches onto written 
pages, I made every attempt to keep the flavor of the 
original presentation. Certain idiosyncrasies of the spo- 
ken form have been removed, and when Alan’s thoughts 
moved more quickly than his words I filled in the 
blanks—or in the opposite situation, I skipped to the 
point. In one or two places, dated or currently unfavor- 
able asides were deleted (refer to the audio edition for 
full flavor), but never at the expense of his desired effect. 
I trust that you will enjoy reading this first in a series of 
volumes from a collection of original live recordings by 
Alan Watts. 


—Mark Watts, 1995 


THE 
RELEVANCE oF 


ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 


CHAPTER ONE 


hen I was a small boy I used to haunt 
that section of London around the 
British Museum, and one day I came 
across a shop that had a notice over 
the window which said: “Philosophical Instruments.” 
Now even as a boy I knew something about philosophy, 
but I could not imagine what philosophical instruments 
might be. So I went up to the window and there dis- 
played were chronometers, slide rules, scales, and all 
kinds of what we would now call scientific instruments, 
but they were philosophical instruments because science 
used to be called natural philosophy. Aristotle once 
said that “The beginning of philosophy is wonder.” 


L ] 


CHAPTER ONE 


Philosophy is man’s expression of curiosity about every- 
thing and his attempt to make sense of the world pri- 
marily through his intellect; that is to say, his faculty for 
thinking. Thinking, of course, is a word used in many 
ways and is a very vague word for most people. 
However, I use the word thinking in a very precise way. 
By thinking, as distinct from feeling or emoting or sens- 
ing, I mean the manipulation of symbols—whether they 
be words, numbers, or other signs such as triangles, 
squares, circles, astrological signs, or whatever. These 
are symbols, although sometimes symbols are a little bit 
more concrete and less abstract than that, as in the case 
of a mythological symbol, like a dragon. However, all 
these things are symbols, and the manipulation of sym- 
bols to represent events going on in the real world is 
what I call thinking. 

Philosophy in the Western sense generally means 
an exercise of the intellect, and the manipulation of the 
symbols is very largely an exercise of the intellect, but it 
does sometimes go beyond that, as in the specific cases 
of poetry and music. Yet what philosophy has become 
today in the academic world is something that is 
extremely restricted. Philosophy in the United States, 
England, Germany, and France to some extent has fallen 
into the realm of two other disciplines: mathematical 
logic on the one hand, and linguistics on the other. The 
departments of philosophy throughout the academic 
world have bent over backwards to be as scientific as 
possible. As William Earl, who is professor of philoso- 
phy at Northwestern University, said in an essay called 
“Notes on the Death of a Culture,” “An academic 
philosopher today must above all things avoid being 
edifying. He must never stoop to lying awake nights 
considering problems of the nature of the universe and 
the destiny of man, because these have largely been 


THE RELEVANCE OF ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 


dismissed as metaphysical or meaningless questions. A 
scientific philosopher arrives at his office at nine o’clock 
in the morning dressed in a business suit carrying a brief- 
case. He does philosophy until five in the afternoon, at 
which point he goes home to cocktails and dinner and 
dismisses the whole matter from his head.” Professor 
Earl adds, “He would wear a white coat to work if he 
could get away with it.” 

Of course this critique is a little exaggerated, but 
by and large this is what departmental academic philoso- 
phy has become, and Oriental philosophy is simply not 
philosophy in that sense. These things, Hinduism, 
Buddhism, and Taoism, are sometimes also called reli- 
gions. I question the application of that word to them 
because I like to use the word religion rather strictly. 
Now I am not going to be so bold as to venture a defini- 
tion of religion that is supposed to be true for all time. 
All I can do is tell you how I use the word, and I wish to 
use it in an exact sense from its Latin root which really 
means “a bond or rule of life.” Therefore, the most cor- 
rect use of the word religion is when we say of a man or 
woman that he or she has “gone into” religion; that is to 
say, has joined a religious os monastic order and is living 
under a rule of life or is living a life of obedience. 

For if Christianity is a religion, if Judaism is a reli- 
gion, and if Islam is a religion, they are based on the idea 
of man’s obedient response to a divine revelation. Thus 
religion, as we understand it in these three forms of reli- 
gion, consists really of three things we will call the three 
c’s: the creed, the code, and the cult. The creed is the 
divinely revealed map of the universe or the nature of 
things. It is the revelation of the existence of God, of 
Allah, of Yahweh, or as we say, God, by His existence, 
by His will, and in His design of the universe. That is che 
creed. To this we add the second c, the code, and this is 


[2] 


CHAPTER ONE 


the divinely revealed law, or exemplar, which man is 
supposed to follow. In the case of Christianity there is a 
certain variation in this because the principal revelation 
of the code in Christianity, as well as the cult, is not so 
much a law as a person. In Christianity, God is said to 
be supremely revealed in the historic Jesus of Nazareth. 
So the code here becomes really the following of Jesus of 
Nazareth, but not so much an obedience to a law as 
through the power of divine grace. Then, finally, there is 
the cult, and this is the divinely revealed method or way 
of worship by which man relates himself to God through 
prayers, rites, and sacraments. In these particular reli- 
gions these methods are not supposed to be so much 
man’s way of worshipping God, as God’s way of loving 
Himself in which man is involved. So, in the Christian 
religion in the Mass we would say that we worship God 
with God’s own worship, following the saying of that 
great German mystic, Meister Eckhardt: “The love with 
which I love God is the same love wherewith God loves 
me.” So, too, when monks in a monastery recite the 
divine office, the psalms are supposed to be the songs of 
the Holy Spirit, and so in using the psalms the idea is 
that you worship God with God’s own words, and 
thereby become a sort of flute through which the divine 
breath plays. 

Now neither Hinduism, Buddhism, nor Taoism 
can possibly be called religions in this sense, because all 
three of them significantly lack the virtue of obedience. 
They do not concede the godhead as related to mankind 
or to the universe in a monarchical sense. There are vari- 
ous models of the universe which men have used from 
time to time, and the model that lies behind the Judeo- 
Christian tradition, if there really is such a thing, is a 
political model. It borrows the metaphor of the relation 
of an ancient Near Eastern monarch to his subjects, and 


THE RELEVANCE OF ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 


he imposes his authority and his will upon his subjects 
from above by power, whether it be physical power or 
spiritual power. It is thus that in the Anglican Church, 
when the priest at morning prayer addresses the throne 
of grace he says, “Almighty and everlasting God, King of 
Kings, Lord of Lords, the only ruler of princes, Who 
dost from Thy throne behold all the dwellers upon earth, 
most heartily we beseech Thee with Thy favor to behold 
our sovereign majesty, Elizabeth the Queen and all the 
royal family.” 

Now, what are these words? This is the language 
of court flattery, and the title “King of Kings,” as a title 
of God, was borrowed from the Persian emperors. 
“Lord have mercy upon us,” is an image drawn from 
things earthly and applied to things heavenly. God is the 
monarch, and therefore between the monarch and the 
subject there is a certain essential difference of kind, 
what we might call an ontological difference. God is 
God, and all those creatures, whether angels or men or 
other kinds of existence that God has created, are not 
God. There is this vast metaphysical gulf lying between 
these two domains. That gives us, as citizens of a democ- 
racy, some problems. 

As a citizen of the United States you believe that a 
republic is the best form of government. Yet how can 
this be maintained if the government of the universe is a 
monarchy? Surely in that case a monarchy will be the 
best form of government. Many of the conflicts in our 
society arise from the fact that although we are running 
a republic, many of the members of this republic believe 
(or believe that they ought to believe) that the universe is 
a monarchy. Therefore, they are, above all, insistent 
upon obedience to law and order, and if there should be 
democracy in the Kingdom of God, that would seem to 
them the most subversive idea ever conceived. Now | am 


CHAPTER ONE 


exaggerating this standpoint a little bit just for effect. 
There are some subtle modifications which one can 
introduce theologically, but I will not go into them at the 
moment. 

There are at least two other models of the universe 
which have been highly influential in human history. 
One is dramatic, where God is not the skillful maker of 
the world standing above it as its artificer and King, but 
where God is the actor of the world as an actor of a 
stage play—the actor who is playing all the parts at 
once. In essence this is the Hindu model of the universe. 
Everybody is God in a mask, and of course our own 
word “person” is from the Latin, persona: “That 
through which comes sound.” This word was used for 
the masks worn by actors in the Greco-Roman theater, 
which being an open-air theater required a projection of 
the voice. The word person has, however, in the course 
of time, come to mean “the real you.” In Hindu thought, 
every individual as a person is a mask; fundamentally 
this is a mask of the godhead—a mask of a godhead that 
is the actor behind all parts and the player of all games. 
That is indefinable for the same reason that you cannot 
bite your own teeth. You can never get at it for the same 
reason that you cannot look straight into your own eyes: 
It is in the middle of everything, the circle whose center 
is everywhere, and whose circumference is nowhere. 

A third model of the universe, which is characteris- 
tically Chinese, views the world as an organism, and a 
world which is an organism has no boss, and even no 
actor. This is because in any organism there is not really 
a boss or “top organ.” In our culture we are accus- 
tomed, of course, to think of our head as ruling the rest 
of the body, but there could well be an argument about 
this. I am going to put up a case that the stomach is chief 
because the stomach, the sort of alimentary tract with a 


[¢ | 


THE RELEVANCE OF ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 


digesting process in it, is surely anterior to brains. There 
may be some sort of rudimentary nervous system 
attached to a stomach organization, but the more primi- 
tive you are, the more you are a little creature that eats. 
It is a sort of tube, and in go things at one end and out 
the other, and because that wears the tube out the tube 
finds means of reproducing itself to make more tubes so 
that this process of in and out can be kept up. However, 
in the course of evolution, at one end of the tube devel- 
oped a ganglion that eventually developed eyes and ears 
with a brain in it. So the stomach’s point of view is that 
the brain is the servant of the stomach to help it 
scrounge around for food. The other argument is this: 
true, the brain is a later development than the alimentary 
tract, but the alimentary tract is to the brain as John the 
Baptist to Jesus Christ, the forerunner of the “big 
event,” and the reason for all the scrounging around is 
eventually to evolve a brain. Eventually man shall live 
primarily for the concerns of the brain, that is, for art 
and science and all forms of culture, and the stomach 
shall be servant. 

Now cynical people, like dialectical materialists, 
say that this is a lot of hogwash. Really, all history is a 
matter of economics, and that is a matter of the stom- 
ach. It is a big argument, and you cannot decide it 
because you cannot at this stage have a stomach without 
a brain or a brain without a stomach. They go together 
like a back and a front. So, the principle of organism is 
rather like this: an organism is a differentiated system, 
but it has no parts. That is to say, the heart is not a part 
of the body in the sense that a distributor is part of an 
automobile engine. These are not parts in the sense that 
they are screwed in. When the fetus arises in the womb 
there are not a lot of mechanics in there lugging in hearts 
and stomachs and so forth, and fitting them together 


[7] 


CHAPTER ONE 


and screwing them to each other. An organism develops 
like a crystal in solution or a photographic plate in 
chemicals. It develops all over at once, and there isn’t a 
boss in it. It all acts together in a strange way and it is a 
kind of orderly anarchy. 

Fundamentally, this is the Chinese view of the 
world, the principle of organic growth they call tao, pro- 
nounced “dow.” This Chinese word is usually translated 
as “the course of nature,” or “the way,” meaning the 
way it does it, or the process of things. That is again 
really very different from the Western idea of God the 
Ruler. Of the tao Lao-tzu says, “The great Tao flows 
everywhere, both to the left and to the right. It loves and 
nourishes all things, but does not lord it over them. 
When merits are accomplished, it lays no claim to 
them.” And so, the Chinese expression for nature 
becomes a word that we will translate as “of itself so.” It 
is what happens of itself, like when you have hiccoughs. 
You do not plan to have hiccoughs, it just happens. 
When your heart beats, you do not plan it; it happens of 
itself. When you breathe, you cannot pretend that you 
are breathing. Most of the time you are not thinking 
about it, and your lungs breathe of themselves. So the 
whole idea that nature is something happening of itself 
without a governor is the organic theory of the world. 

So, these are the two other theories of nature that 
we are going to consider in the study of Oriental philos- 
ophy: the dramatic theory and the organic theory. I feel 
that ways of life that use these models are so unlike 
Christianity, Judaism, or Islam, that we cannot really use 
the word “religion” to describe these things. Now, what 
is there in Western culture that resembles the concerns of 
Buddhism, Hinduism, and Taoism? The trouble is, on 
the surface, they look alike. In other words, if you go 
into a Hindu temple or a special Japanese Buddhist tem- 


> 


THE RELEVANCE OF ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 


ple you will be pretty convinced you are in church (in 
sort of a Catholic church, at that, because there is 
incense, chants, bowings, gongs, candles, rosaries, and 
all the things that one associates with a theistic, monar- 
chical religion). Yet, that is not what is going on. Even 
though the image of Buddha may be sitting on a throne, 
covered with a canopy, and royal honors being done, 
there is no factor of obedience. Probably the nearest 
thing to these ways of life in the West is, perhaps, psy- 
chotherapy in some form, although not all forms of psy- 
chotherapy. The objective of psychotherapy is, as you 
might say, to change your state of consciousness. If you, 
in other words, are horribly depressed and you are terri- 
fied, or if you are having hallucinations, you see a “head 
shrinker” and he tries to change your state of conscious- 
ness. 

Fundamentally, these Oriental disciplines are con- 
cerned basically with changing your state of conscious- 
ness. However, here we part company because 
psychotherapy is largely focused on the problems of the 
individual as such, the problems particular to this indi- 
vidual or that individual. Instead, these Asian ways of 
life are focused on certain problems peculiar to man as 
such, and to every individual on the understanding that 
the average human being (and the more civilized he is 
the more this is true) is hallucinating. The average 
human being has a delusive sense of his own existence, 
and it is thus that the very word “Buddha,” in 
Buddhism, is from a root in Sanskrit, buddh, which 
means to awaken. 

To awaken from the illusion is then to undergo a 
radical change of consciousness with regard to one’s 
own existence. It is to cease being under the impression 
that you are just “poor little me,” and to realize who 
you really are, or what you really are behind the mask. 


L9 | 


CHAPTER ONE 


But there is a difficulty in this. You can never get to see 
what the basic self is. It is always and forever elusive. 

And so, if I ask you, “Who are you really?” And 
you say, “Well, I am John Doe.” “Oh? Ha-ha! You 
think so? John Doe, tell me: How do you happen to 
have blue eyes?” “Well,” you say, “I do not know. I did 
not make my eyes.” “Oh, you didn’t? Who else?” “Well, 
I have no idea how it is done.” 

“You have to have an idea how it is done to be 
able to do it? After all, you can open and close your 
hand perfectly easily. And you say, ‘I know how to open 
my hand. I know how to close my hand because I can do 
it.” But how do you do it?” 

“I do not know. I am not a physiologist.” 

“A physiologist says he knows how he does it, but 
he cannot do it any better than you can. So, you are 
opening and closing your hand, are you not? Yet you do 
not know how you do it. Maybe you are ‘blue-ing’ your 
eyes, too! You do not know how you do it, because 
when you say ‘I do not know how I do it,’ all you are 
saying is, ‘I do know how to do it, but I cannot put it 
into words!’” 

I cannot, in other words, translate the activity 
called “opening and closing my hand” into an exact sys- 
tem of symbols, that is, into thinking. If you actually 
could translate the opening and closing of your hand 
into an exact system of symbols, it would take forever 
because trying to understand the world purely by think- 
ing about it is as clumsy a process as trying to drink the 
Pacific Ocean out of a one-pint beer mug. You can only 
take it one mug at a time, and in thinking about things 
you can only think one thought at a time. Like writing, 
thinking is a linear process, one thought after another in 
a series. You can only think of one thing at a time, but 
that is too slow for understanding anything at all and 


THE RELEVANCE OF ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 


much too slow to understand everything. Our sensory 
input is much more than any kind of one thing at a time, 
and we respond with a certain aspect of our minds to the 
total sensory input that is coming in, only we are not 
consciously aware of it. Nevertheless, you are doing it, 
but what kind of “you” is this? It certainly is not John 
Doe. It is not that little ego freak. 

There is a lot more to you than you think there is, 
and that is why the Hindu would say that the real you is 
the Self, (but with a capital S), the Self of the universe. 
At that level of one’s existence one is not really separate 
from everything else that is going on. We have some- 
thing here which I will not call philosophy except in the 
most ancient sense of basic curiosity. I prefer to call 
these disciplines ways of liberation. These are ways of 
liberation from maya, and the following of them does 
not depend on believing in anything, in obeying any- 
thing, or on doing any specific rituals (although rituals 
are included for certain purposes because it is a purely 
experimental approach to life). This is something like a 
person who has defective eyesight and is seeing spots 
and all sorts of illusions, and goes to an ophthalmologist 
to correct his vision. Buddhism is, therefore, a corrective 
of psychic vision. It is to be disenthralled by the game of 
maya. It is not, incidentally, to regard the maya as some- 
thing evil, but to regard it as a good thing of which one 
can have too much, and therefore one gets psychic and 
spiritual indigestion—from which we all suffer. 

Now then, I am going to go into the very funda- 
mental guts of Hinduism and certain documents that are 
known as the Upanishads. These documents constitute 
what is called Vedanta, and that is compounded of two 
words, veda anta. Anta means “end,” or completion or 
summation, and Veda is, of course, related to the Latin 
videre, to see. Veda is the fundamental revelation of the 


CHAPTER ONE 


Hindu way of life contained in its earliest scriptural doc- 
uments, which are generally dated in the period between 
1500 and 1200 B.c. The Upanishads have been the sum- 
mation of the Veda from over a long period of time, 
beginning perhaps as early as 800 B.c., although some of 
the Upanishads are much later than that. However, there 
is always a doubt in connection with the dating of any 
Hindu text because unlike the Hebrews, the Hindus have 
absolutely no sense of history. They view time as circu- 
lar, as something that just goes round and round again 
and again, so that what happens today is on the whole 
very much like what happened yesterday, or a hundred 
years ago, or a thousand years ago. They view life as a 
repetitious process of cycles and so there is very little 
internal evidence in Hindu manuscripts to give us dates 
between which we can say it must have been written 
because they were not interested in references to contem- 
porary events. In fact, until relatively recent times, histo- 
ry was little more than keeping chronicles, and the 
Hindus were less interested in keeping chronicles than 
the Chinese. 

In all there is a great deal of vagueness, and this is 
compounded by the fact that many of these scriptures 
were for hundreds of years handed down orally and 
memorized before being committed to writing. So there 
is a great deal of vagueness as to how old the tradition is 
with which we are dealing and it may be earlier or later 
than the scholars generally suppose. However it seems 
there was a migration into the Indian subcontinent by 
peoples from the north who called themselves Aryans, 
which may have occurred somewhere in the neighbor- 
hood of 1500 to 1200 B.c., and they brought with them 
the faded tradition that merged with whatever aboriginal 
religions or ways of life that were existing on the sub- 
continent at that time, and produced the complex which 


THE RELEVANCE OF ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 


today we call Hinduism. I am not going into the Vedas 
because they comprise a complicated piece of symbolical 
interpretation having to do with the rites, the hymns, 
and the myths of the various so-called gods of the Hindu 
pantheon. In the philosophy of the Upanishads these 
gods are seen simply as so many different manifesta- 
tions of one basic principle, which is called brabman, 
derived from the root bra, which means to expand or 
to grow. Brahman is also called atman, or paramat- 
man, the supreme self—the “which that which there is 
no whicher.” 

The basic position of the Upanishads is that the 
self is the one and only reality without another, and that 
all this universe is finally brahman. The universe appears 
to be a multiplicity of different things and different 
events only by reason of maya, which is illusion, magic, 
art, or creative power. Brahman is considered under two 
aspects: one is called nirguna, and the other saguna. The 
word una in each case, meaning quality or attribute, and 
nir, being a negative, nirguna is brahman considered 
without attribute, while saguna is brahman being con- 
sidered as having attributes. In Christian theology there 
are exact equivalents to these terms, which you have 
probably never heard of. The former is called the 
apophatic way of speaking, a Greek term, and the other 
is the catophatic. When a Christian speaks of God as the 
father, he is speaking catophatically, that is to say by 
analogy. No theologian in his right mind thinks that 
God is a cosmic male parent. All a theologian intends to 
say is God is like a father. Even when it is said “God is 
light,” that is still catophatic language. God is like light, 
but he is not light. The apophatic language states what 
God is not, so such terms as “eternal,” which means 
nontemporal, infinite, or without limitation, are in this 
sense negative. When the Hindu speaks most deeply of 


CHAPTER ONE 


the ultimate reality of the universe, he applies the phrase 
neti, neti, meaning approximately “no, no,” or “not this, 
not this.” In other words, reality—basic reality—eludes 
all positive conceptualization whatsoever for the very 
good reason that it is what you are most basically. That 
is why the Hindu describes in the Vedanta doctrine of 
the Upanishads the basic energy of the universe as “the 
unknown.” It is never an object of knowledge, and so it 
is said in the Kena Upanishad that if you think that you 
understand what brahman is, you do not understand. 
However if you do not understand, then you under- 
stand. For the way brahman is known is that brahman is 
unknown to those who know it, and known to those 
who know it not. Now that sounds completely illogical, 
but translated into familiar terms you would say that 
your head is effective only so long as it does not get in 
the way of your eyesight. If you see spots in front 
of your eyes, they interfere with vision. If you hear 
singing and humming in your ears, you are hear- 
ing your ears, and that interferes with hearing. An effec- 
tive ear is inaudible to itself and then it hears everything 
else. That is just another way of saying the same thing, 
and when we translate it into sensory terms it is not all 
paradoxical. 

It is basic to Vedanta that brahman, this intangi- 
ble, nonobjective ground of everything that exists, is 
identical with the ground of you. This is put in the for- 
mula tat tvam asi. Tat is the same as our word “that.” 
Tvam is the same as the Latin tuus, “thou;” asi is “at.” 
We should translate that into a modern American idiom 
as “Yourre it.” This, of course, is a doctrine that is very 
difficult for those brought up in the Judeo-Christian tra- 
ditions to accept, because it is fundamental to Christian 
and Jewish theology that whatever you are, you are sure- 
ly not the Lord God. Therefore, Christians feel that the 


THE RELEVANCE OF ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 


Hindu doctrine—that we are all fundamentally masks of 
God—is pantheism, and that is a dirty word in Christian 
theological circles because of the feeling that if every- 
thing is God then all moral standards are blown to hell. 
It means everything is as good as everything else. Since 
everything that happens is really God, this must include 
the good things and the bad things, and that seems to 
them a very dangerous idea. Actually, when viewed from 
a social perspective, all religious doctrines contain very, 
very dangerous ideas. However, we will not worry about 
that for the moment because what the Hindu means by 
God, when he says Brahman, is not at all the same thing 
as what a Jew means by the Lord Adonai, because to the 
Jew and the Christian it means the boss, to whom divine 
honors are due as above all others. The Hindu, on the 
other hand, does not mean the boss. He does not mean 
the King or the Lord as the political ruler of the uni- 
verse. He means the inmost energy, which, as it were, 
dances this whole universe without the idea of an 
authority of governing some intractable element that 
resists his or its power. 

If a Christian or a person in a Christian culture 
announces that he has discovered that he is God, we put 
him in the loony bin because it is unfashionable to burn 
people for heresy anymore. However, in India if you 
announce that you are the Lord God, they say, “Well, of 
course! How nice that you found out,” because every- 
body is. Why then does a great problem arise? Why does 
it appear that we are not? Why do we think? Why do we 
have the sensory impression that this whole universe 
consists of a vast multiplicity of different things, and we 
do not see it all as one? Consider though, what do you 
think it would be like to see it all as one? I know a lot of 
people who study Oriental philosophy and look into 
attaining these great states of consciousness, which the 


oe 
135 


CHAPTER ONE 


Hindus call nirvana, moksha, and what a Zen Buddhist 
would call liberation or satori (their word for enlighten- 
ment or awakening). Now what would it be like to have 
that? How would you feel if you saw everything as really 
one basic reality? Well, a lot of people think that it 
would be as if all the outlines and differentiations in the 
field of vision suddenly became vague and melted away 
and we saw only a kind of luminous sea of light. 

However, rather advisedly, the Vedanta philoso- 
phy does not seriously use the word “one” of the 
supreme self because the word and idea “one” has its 
opposite “many” on one side, and another opposite, 
“none,” on the other. It is fundamental to Vedanta that 
the supreme self is neither one nor many, but as they 
say, non-dual, and they express that in this word advita. 
A is a negative word like non. Dvita is from dva, same 
as the Latin duo, two. So advita is non-dual. At first this 
is a difficult conception because naturally, a Western 
logician would say, “But the non-dual is the opposite of 
the dual. Therefore, it has an opposite.” This is true, but 
the Hindu is using this term in a special sense. On a flat 
surface I have only two dimensions in which to operate 
so that everything drawn in two dimensions has only 
two dimensions. How, therefore, on a two-dimensional 
level, can I draw in three dimensions? How, in logic, is it 
humanly rational to think in terms of a unity of oppo- 
sites? 

All rational discourse is talk about the classifica- 
tion of experiences, of sensations, of notions, and the 
nature of a class is that it is a box. If a box has an inside, 
it has to have an outside. “Is you is or is you ain’t?” is 
fundamental to all classifications, and we cannot get out 
of it. We cannot talk about a class of all classes and 
make any sense of it. However, on this two-dimensional 
level, we can create, by using a convention of perspec- 


THE RELEVANCE OF ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 


tive, the understanding of a third dimension. If I draw a 
cube, you are trained to see it in three dimensions, but it 
is still in two. However, we have the understanding that 
the slanting lines are going out through the back to 
another square, which is behind the first one, even 
though we are still on two dimensions. The Hindu 
understands this term advita as distinct from the term 
“one” to refer to that dimension. So when you use the 
word advita, you are speaking about something beyond 
duality, as when you use those slanting lines you are 
understood to be indicating a third dimension which 
cannot really be reproduced on a two-dimensional sur- 
face. That is the trick. 

It is almost as if whatever we see to be different is 
an explicit difference on the surface covering an implicit 
unity. Only it is very difficult to talk about what it is 
that unifies black and white. (Of course, in a way the 
eyes do. Sound and silence are unified by the ears). If 
you cannot have one without the other, it is like the 
north and south poles of a magnet. You cannot have a 
one-pole magnet. True, the poles are quite different; one 
is north and the other is south, but it is all one magnet. 
This is what the Hindu is moving into when he is speak- 
ing of the real basis or ground of the universe as being 
non-dual. Take, for example, the fundamental opposition 
that I suppose all of us feel, between self and other—I 
and thou—I and it. There is something that is me; there 
is an area of my experience that I call myself. And there 
is another area of my experience which I call not myself. 
But you will immediately see that neither one could be 
realized without the other. You would not know what 
you meant by self unless you experience something other 
than self. You would not know what you meant by 
other unless you understood self. They go together. They 
arise at the same time. You do not have first self and 


CHAPTER ONE 


then other, or first other and then self; they come togeth- 
er. And this shows the sneaky conspiracy underneath the 
two, like the magnet between the two different poles. So 
it is more or less that sort of what-is-not-classifiable 
(that which lies between all classes). The class of ele- 
phants opposite the class of non-elephants has, as it 
were, the walls of the box joining the two together, just- 
as your skin is an osmotic membrane that joins you to 
the external world by virtue of all the tubes in it, and the 
nerve ends, and the way in which the external energies 
flow through your skin into your insides and vice versa. 
But we do see and feel and sense—or at least we 
think we do—that the world is divided into a great mul- 
tiplicity. A lot of people would think of it as a collection 
of different things, a kind of cosmic flotsam and jetsam 
washed together in this particular area of space, and pre- 
fer to take a pluralistic attitude and not see anything 
underlying. In fact, in contemporary logical philosophy, 
the notion of any basic ground or continuum in which 
all events occur would be considered meaningless for 
obvious reasons. If I say that every body in this uni- 
verse—every star, every planet—is moving in a certain 
direction at a uniform speed, that will be saying nothing 
at all, unless I can point out some other object with 
respect to which they are so moving. But since I said the 
universe, that includes all objects whatsoever. Therefore, 
I cannot make a meaningful statement about the uni- 
form behavior of everything that is going on. So in the 
same way that your eardrum is basic to all that you 
hear, the lens of the eye and retina are basic to all that 
you see. What is the color of the lens of the eye? We say 
it has no color; it is transparent in the same way that a 
mirror has no color of its own, but the mirror is very 
definitely there, colorless as it may be. The eardrum, 
unheard as it may be, is very definitely basic to hearing. 


THE RELEVANCE OF ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 


The eye, transparent as it may be, is very definitely very 
basic to seeing. So therefore, if there were some continu- 
um in which everything that is going on and everything 
that we experience occurs, we would not notice it. We 
would not be able, really, to say very much about it 
except, perhaps, that it was there. It would not make 
any difference to anything, except for the one all-impor- 
tant difference that if it was not there, there would not 
be any differences. 

But, you see, philosophers these days do not like to 
think about things like that. It stretches their heads and 
they would rather preoccupy themselves with more 
pedestrian matters. But still, you cannot help it; if you 
are a human being you wonder about things like that. 
What is it in which everything is happening? What is the 
ground? Well, you say, “Obviously it is not a what 
because a thing that is a what is a classifiable thing.” 
And so, very often the Hindu and the Buddhist will refer 
to the ultimate reality as no thing, not nothing, but no 
special thing, unclassifiable. You cannot put your finger 
on it, but it is you. It is what you basically are, what 
everything basically is, just as the sound of an automo- 
bile horn on the radio is in one way an automobile horn 
but basically it is the vibration of the speaker 
diaphragm. So we are all in the Hindu view “vibrations 
of the entire cosmic diaphragm.” Of course, that is anal- 
ogy, and I am using catophatic language from the point 
of Christianity. 

The best language is to say nothing but to experi- 
ence it. The nub of all these Oriental philosophies is not 
an idea, not a theory, not even a way of behaving, but it 
is basically a way of experiencing a transformation of 
everyday consciousness so that it becomes quite appar- 
ent to us that that is the way things are. When it hap- 
pens to you it is very difficult to explain it. So in exactly 


-— 


| 19 


CHAPTER ONE 


the same way, when somebody has the sort of break- 
through that transforms his consciousness (and it hap- 
pens all over the world, it is not just a Hindu 
phenomenon), somebody suddenly realizes it is all one, 
or technically non-dual, and really all this coming and 
going, all this frantic living and dying—grabbing and 
struggling, fighting and suffering—all this is like a fan- 
tastic phantasmagoria. He sees that, but when he tries to 
explain it he finds his mouth is not big enough because 
he cannot get the words out of their dualistic pattern to 
explain something non-dualistic. 

But why is this so? Why are we under this great, 
magnificent hallucination? Well, the Hindus explain this 
in saguna language as follows. It is a very nice explana- 
tion; a child can understand it. The fact of the matter is 
the world is a game of hide-and-seek. Peek-a-boo! Now 
you see it, now you do not, because very obviously if 
you were the supreme self, what would you do? I mean, 
would you just sit there and be blissfully one for ever 
and ever and ever? No, obviously not. You would play 
games. You would, because the very nature of a no ener- 
gy system is that it has no energy system unless it lets go 
of itself. So you would let go of yourself and you would 
get lost. You would get involved in all sorts of adven- 
tures and you would forget who you were, just as when 
you play a game. And although you are only playing for 
dimes or chips, you get absorbed in the game. 

There is nothing really important to win, nothing 
really important to lose, and yet it becomes fantastically 
interesting, who wins and who loses. And so in the same 
way it is said that the supreme self gets absorbed 
through ever so many different channels which we call 
the different beings in the plot, just like an artist or a 
writer gets completely absorbed in the artistic creation 
that he is doing, or an actor gets absorbed in the part in 


THE RELEVANCE OF ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 


the drama. At first we know it is a drama. We go to a 
play and we say, “It is only a play,” and the proscenium 
arch tells us that what happens behind that arch is not 
for real, just a show. But the great actor is going to make 
you forget it is just a show. He is going to have you sit- 
ting on the edge of your chair; he is going to have you 
crying; he is going to have you trembling because he 
almost persuades you that it is real. What would happen 
if the very best actor was confronted by the very best 
audience? Why, they would be taken in completely, and 
the one would confirm the other. 

So, this is the idea of the universe as drama, that 
the fundamental self, the saguna brahman, plays this 
game, gets involved in being all of us, and does it so 
darn well, so superbly acted, that the thing appears to be 
real. And we are not only sitting on the edge of our 
chair, but we start to get up and throw things. We join 
in the drama and it all becomes whatever is going on 
here, you see? Then, of course, at the end of the drama, 
because all things have to have an end that have a begin- 
ning, the curtain goes down and the actors retire to the 
greenroom. And there the villain and the hero cease to 
be villain and hero, and they are just the actors. And 
then they come out in front of the curtain and they stand 
in a row, and the audience applauds the villain along 
with the hero, the villain as having been a good villain 
and the hero as having been a great hero. The play is 
over and everybody heaves a sigh of relief: “Well, that 
was a great show, wasn’t it?” So the idea of the green- 
room is the same as the nirguna brahman; that behind 
the whole show there are no differentiations of I and 
thou, subject and object, good and evil, light and dark- 
ness, life and death. But within the sphere of the saguna 
brahman all these differentiations appear because that is 
out in front that is on the stage, and no good actor when 


CHAPTER ONE 


on the stage performs his own personality. That is what 
is wrong with movie stars. A person is cast to act a role 
that corresponds to his alleged personality. But a great 
actor can assume any personality, male or female, and 
suddenly convert himself right in front of the audience 
into somebody who takes you in entirely. But in the 
greenroom he is his usual self. So Hinduism has the idea 
that as all the conventions of drama go right along with 
it, that all this world is a big act, lila, the play of the 
supreme self, and is therefore compared to a dream—to 
a passing illusion, and you should not, therefore, take it 
seriously. You may take it sincerely, perhaps, as an actor 
may be sincere in his acting, but not seriously, because 
that means it throws you for a loop (although that, of 
course is involved). We do take it seriously. But, this is 
one of the great questions you have to ask yourself when 
you really get down to the nitty-gritty about your own 
inmost core: Are you serious, or do you know deep 
within you that you are a put-on? 


THE 
MYTHOLOGY oF 


HINDUISM 


CHAPTER TWO 


$ 
want to start out by explaining quite carefully what 
I mean by mythology. The word is very largely 
used to mean fantasy, or something that is definite- 
ly not fact, and it’s used therefore in a pejorative, 
or put-down, sense. So that when you call something a 
mythology or a myth, it means you don’t think much of 
it. But the word is used by philosophers and scholars in 
quite another sense, where to speak in the language of 
myth is to speak in images rather than to speak in what 
you might call plain language, or descriptive language. 
You can sometimes say more things with images than 
you can say with concepts. As a matter of fact, images 
are really at the root of thinking. One of the basic ways 


[3] 


CHAPTER TWO 


in which we think is by analogy. We think that the life 
of human beings might be compared to the seasons of 
the year. Now, there are many important differences 
between a human life and the cycle of the seasons, but 
nevertheless, one talks about the winter of life and the 
spring of life, and so the image becomes something that 
is powerful in our thinking. Furthermore, when we try 
to think philosophically in abstract concepts about the 
nature of the universe, we often do some very weird 
things. It is considered nowadays naive to think of God 
as an old gentleman with a long white beard who sits on 
a golden throne and is surrounded with winged angels. 
We say, “Now, no sensible person could possibly believe 
that God is just like that.” Therefore, if you become 
more sophisticated and you follow Saint Thomas 
Aquinas, you think of God as “necessary being.” If you 
think with Buddhists you think of God as the undifferen- 
tiated void, or as the infinite essence. But actually, how- 
ever rarefied those concepts sound, they are just as 
anthropomorphic, that is to say, just as human and in 
the form of the human mind, as the picture of God as 
the old gentleman with the white beard, or as d’Lord in 
the old television show Green Pastures, wearing a top 
hat and smoking a cigar. 

All ideas about the world, whether they be reli- 
gious, philosophical, or scientific, are translations of the 
physical world and of worlds beyond the physical into 
the terms and shapes of the human mind. There is no 
such thing as a nonanthropomorphic idea. The advan- 
tage of d’Lord in talking about these things is that 
nobody takes it quite seriously, whereas the undifferenti- 
ated aesthetic continuum could be taken seriously. That 
would be a great mistake, because you would think you 
understood what the ultimate reality is. So, I am going 
to use very largely naive mythological terms to discuss 


THE MYTHOLOGY OF HINDUISM 


these matters. If you are a devout Christian, you must 
not be offended by this. You will naturally think that 
you have risen now to a more superior idea of these 
things than these very simple terms derived from the 
imagery of the Bible and the medieval church. I shall dis- 
cuss Hinduism in the same way, and I am going to begin 
with Hinduism to give you a sort of fundamental 
account of what it is all about. 

I imagine some of you were present at the lecture I 
gave in the university on religion and art, in which I dis- 
cussed the view of the world as drama. Now I want to 
go more thoroughly into this, because the Hindu view of 
the universe is fundamentally based on the idea of 
drama, that is to say, of an actor playing parts. The 
basic actor in this drama is called Brahma, and this word 
comes from the Sanskrit root bra, which means “to swell 
or expand.” The Hindu idea of Brahma, the Supreme 
Being, is linked with the idea of the self. In you, deep 
down you feel that there is what you call “I,” and when 
you say “I am,” that in Sanskrit is aham. And every- 
body, when asked what his name is, replies, “I am I. I 
am I, myself.” So, there is the thought that in all life, the 
self is the fundamental thing; it means the center. The 
Brahma is looked upon as the self and the center of the 
whole universe, and the fundamental idea is that there is 
only one self. Each one of us is that self, only it radiates 
like a sun or a star. So, just as the sun has innumerable 
rays, or just as you can focus the whole sun through a 
magnifying glass and concentrate it on one point, or as 
an octopus has many tentacles, or as a sow has many 
tits, so, in these ways, Brahma is wearing all faces that 
exist, and they are all the masks of Brahma. They are 
not only human faces but also animal faces, insect faces, 
vegetable faces, and mineral faces; everything is the 
supreme self playing at being that. 


fas] 


CHAPTER Two 


The fundamental process of reality is, according to 
the Hindu myth, hide-and-seek, or lost and found. That 
is the basis of all games. When you start to play with a 
baby, you take out a book and you hide your face 
behind it. Then you peek out at the baby, and then you 
peek out the other way, and the baby begins to giggle, 
because a baby, being near to the origins of things, 
knows intuitively that hide-and-seek is the basis of it all. 
Children like to sit in a high chair, to have something on 
the tray, and “make it gone.” Then somebody picks it 
up and puts it back, and they make it gone again. 

Now then, that is a very sensible arrangement. It is 
called in Sanskrit lila, and that means “sport” or “play,” 
but the play is hide-and-seek. Now, let’s go a little bit 
into the nature of hide-and-seek. I don’t want to insult 
your intelligence by telling you some of the most elemen- 
tary things that exist, but, really, everything is a question 
of appearing and disappearing. For example, if I sit next 
to the object of my desire and I put my hand on the per- 
son’s knee and leave it there, after a while they will cease 
to notice it. But if I gently pat them on the knee because 
now I’m there and now I’m not, it will be more notice- 
able. So, all reality is a matter of coming and going. It is 
vibration, like a wave of positive and negative electricity. 
It is up and down, and things like wood appear to be 
solid, much in the same way that the blades of a fast- 
moving electric fan appear to be solid. So, the vast agita- 
tion that is going on in the electrical structure of solid 
things is a terrific agitation that will not allow the agita- 
tion called my hand to go through it. 

Other kinds of agitation, like X rays, are so con- 
structed that they can get through. So, everything is basi- 
cally coming and going. Take, for example, sound. If 
you listen to sound and slow the sound down, just as 
when you look with a magnifying glass you find that 


THE MYTHOLOGY OF HINDUISM 


solid things are full of holes,-when you magnify sound 
you find it is full of silences. Sound is sound-silence. 
There is no such thing as pure sound, just as there is no 
such thing as pure something—something always goes 
together with nothing. Solids are always found in spaces, 
and no spaces are found except where there are solids. 
You might imagine there being a space without any solid 
in it, but you will never, never encounter one, because 
you will be there in the form of a solid to find out about 
it. They go together, these things, solid and space. The 
positive and the negative and the “here we are and here 
we aren’t” all go together in the same way, like the back 
and front of a coin. You can’t have a coin that has a 
back and no front. The only thing that gets anywhere 
near that is a Mobius strip, which is a mathematical con- 
struct in which the back and the front are the same, but 
that only shows in a more vivid way how backs and 
fronts go together. So, the whole thing is based on that. 
Now, once we have this game there are two differ- 
ent things, but they are really the same. The Brahma is 
what is basic, but the Brahma manifests itself in what 
are called the dvanva, and that makes the pairs of oppo- 
sites (duality). Dva is the Sanskrit word for “two,” 
which becomes duo in Latin and dual in English. Two is 
the basis, and you cannot go behind two, because one 
has an opposite: the opposite of one is none. Now, what 
is in common between one and none? No one can say— 
you can’t mention it. It is called Brahma, and it is some- 
times called om. Yet you can’t really think of what is in 
common between black and white, because there is obvi- 
ously a conspiracy between black and white; they are 
always found together. Tweedledee and Tweedledum 
agrecd to have a battle, and there is always an agreement 
underlying this difference; that is what we call implicit, 
but the difference is explicit. So, the first step in what 


[I 


CHAPTER TWO 


you might call the hide phase of the game of hide-and- 
seek is to lose sight of the implicit unity between black 
and white, yes and no, and existence and nonexistence. 

Losing sight of the fundamental unity is called 
maya, a word that means many things, but primarily it 
means “creative power,” or “magic,” and also “illu- 
sion”—the illusion that the opposites are really separate 
from each other. Once you think that they are really sep- 
arate from each other you can have a very thrilling 
game. The game is, “Oh dear, black might win,” or “We 
must be quite sure that white wins.” Now, which one 
ought to win? When you look at this page, you would 
say the reality here is the writing; that is what is signifi- 
cant. Yet there are many other patterns that you can find 
in which you are undecided in your mind as to which is 
the figure and which is the background. It could be a 
black design on a white sheet, or it could be a white 
design on a black sheet, and the universe is very much 
like that. Space, or the background of things, is not 
nothing, but people tend to be deceived about this. If I 
draw a circle, most people, when asked what I have 
drawn, will say that I have drawn a circle, or a disk, or a 
ball. Very few people will ever suggest that I have drawn 
a hole in a wall, because people think of the inside first, 
rather than thinking of the outside. But actually these 
two sides go together—you cannot have what is “in 
here” unless you have what is “out there.” 

All artists, architects, and people concerned with 
the organization of space think quite as much about the 
background behind things and containing things as they 
do about the things so contained. It is all significant and 
it is all important, but the game is “Let’s pretend that 
this doesn’t exist.” So, this is the pretending: “Oh, black 
might win,” or “Oh, white might win.” This is the foun- 
dation of all the great games that human beings play—of 


” 


THE MYTHOLOGY OF HINDUISM 


checkers, of chess, and of the simple children’s games of 
hide-and-seek. 

It is, of course, the tradition of chess that white 
gets the first move, because black is the side of the devil. 
All complications and all possibilities of life lie in this 
game of black and white. In the beginning of the game, 
the two pairs are divided, that is to say, dismembered— 
cut, to separate. In the end of the game, when everything 
comes together, they are re-membered. To dismember is 
to hide, or to lose. To remember is to seek and to find. 
In Hindu mythology, Brahma plays this game through 
periods of time called kalpas, and every kalpa is 
4,320,000 years long. For one kalpa he forgets who he is 
and manifests himself as the great actor of all of us. 
Then, for another kalpa, he wakes up; he remembers 
who he is and is at peace. So, the period in which he 
manifests the worlds is called a manavantara, and the 
period in which he withdraws from the game is called a 
pralaya. These go on and on forever and ever, and it 
never becomes boring, because the forgetting period 
makes you forget everything that has happened before. 
For example, although it inherits genes from the most 
distant past, each time a baby is born it confronts the 
world anew and is astonished and surprised at every- 
thing. As you get old, you become heavy with memories, 
like a book that people have written on, as if you were 
to go on writing on a page and eventually the whole 
thing were to become black. Then, you would have to 
take out white chalk and start writing that way. Well, 
that would be like the change between life and death. 

In popular Hinduism, it is believed that each of us 
contains not only the supreme self—the one ultimate 
reality, the Brahma, who looks out from all eyes and 
hears through all ears—but also an individualized self. 
This self reincarnates from life to life in a sort of pro- 


[>9| 


CHAPTER TWo 


gressive or a regressive way, according to your karma— 
the Sanskrit word that means “your doing,” from the 
root kre, “to do.” There is a time, then, in which we 
become involved and get more and more tied up in the 
toils of the world, and are more subject to desire and to 
passions and to getting ourselves hopelessly out on the 
limb. Then, there follows a later time when the individ- 
ual is supposed to withdraw and gradually evolve until 
he becomes a completely enlightened man, a mukti. A 
mukti is a liberated person who has attained the state 
called moksha, or liberation, where he has found him- 
self. He knows who he is. He knows that he, deep down 
in himself (and that you, deep down in yourself) are all 
the one central self, and that this whole apparent differ- 
entiation of the one from the other is an immense and 
glorious illusion. 

Now, this is a dramatic idea. In drama, we have a 
convention of the proscenium arch on the stage and we 
have a convention of onstage and offstage. There is the 
curtain, or backdrop, in front of which the actors 
appear, and behind that there is a dressing room, called 
the greenroom. In the greenroom, they put on and take 
off their masks. In Latin the word for the masks worn by 
the players in classical drama is persona. The Latin word 
per means “through,” and sona means “sound”—that 
through which the sound comes, because the mask had a 
megaphone-shaped mouth that would “throw” the 
sound in an open-air theater. So, dramatis personae, the 
list of the players in a play, is the list of masks that are 
going to be worn. Insofar as we now speak about the 
real self in any human being as the person by inquiring, 
“Are you a real person?” we have inverted the meaning 
of the word. We have made the “mask” word mean “the 
real player underneath,” and that shows how deeply 
involved we are in the illusion. The whole point of a 


THE MYTHOLOGY OF HINDUISM 


play is for the actor to use his skill to persuade the audi- 
ence, despite the fact that the audience knows it’s at the 
play, and to have them sitting on the edge of their chairs, 
weeping or in terror because they think it is real. Of 
course, the Hindu idea is that the greatest of all players, 
the master player behind the whole scene, who is putting 
on the big act called existence, is so good an actor that 
he takes himself in. He is at once the actor and the audi- 
ence, and he is enchanted by his playing. So, the word 
maya, or illusion, also means “to be enchanted.” Do you 
know what to be enchanted is? It is to be listening to a 
chant and to be completely involved in it—or perhaps 
amazed. What is it to be amazed? It is to be caught in a 
maze, or spellbound. And how do you get spellbound 
and what do you spell? You spell words. So, by the ideas 
we have about the world and through our belief in the 
reality of different things and events, we are completely 
carried away and forget altogether who we are. 

There is a story about a great sage, Narada, who 
came to Vishnu. Vishnu is one of the aspects of the god- 
head, Brahma. Brahma is usually the word given to the 
creator aspect, Vishnu to the preserving aspect, and 
Shiva to the destructive aspect. When Narada came to 
Vishnu and said, “What is the secret of your maya?” 
Vishnu took him and threw him into a pool. The 
moment he fell under the water he was born as a 
princess in a very great family, and went through all the 
experiences of childhood as a little girl. She finally mar- 
ried a prince from another kingdom and went to live 
with him in his kingdom. They lived there in tremendous 
prosperity, with palaces and peacocks, but suddenly 
there was a war and their kingdom was attacked and 
utterly destroyed. The prince himself was killed in battle, 
and he was cremated. As a dutiful wife, the princess was 
about to throw herself weeping on o the funeral pyre 


[a 


CHAPTER Two 


and burn herself in an act of suttee or self-sacrifice. But 
suddenly Narada woke to find himself being pulled out 
of the pool by his hair by Vishnu, who said, “For whom 
were you weeping?” So, that is the idea of the whole 
world being a magical illusion, but done so skillfully— 
by whom? By you, basically. Not “you” the empirical 
ego, not “you” who is just a kind of focus of conscious 
attention with memories that are strung together into 
what you call “my everyday self.” Rather, it is the “you” 
that is responsible for growing your hair, coloring your 
eyes, arranging the shape of your bones. The deeply 
responsible “you” is what is responsible for all this. 

So this, then, is in sum the Hindu dramatic idea of 
the cosmos as an endless hide-and-seek game: now you 
see it, now you don’t. It is saying to everybody, “Of 
course you worry and are afraid of disease, death, pain, 
and all that sort of thing. But really, it is all an illusion, 
so there is nothing to be afraid of.” And you think, 
“Well, but my goodness, supposing when I die there just 
won’t be anything? It will be like going to sleep and 
never waking up.” Isn’t that awful, just terrible—noth- 
ing, forever? But that doesn’t matter. When you go into 
that period called death, or forgetting, that’s just so that 
you won’t remember, because if you did always remem- 
ber it, it would be a bore. But you are wiser than you 
know, because you arrange to forget and to die, and 
keep going in and out of the light. But underneath, at the 
basis of all this, between black and white, between life 
and death, is something unmentionable. That’s the real 
you, that’s the secret—only you don’t give away the 
show. All of you are now privy to a secret; you are initi- 
ates. You know this neat little thing, but you may not 
have experienced it. You know about it, but you must 
not give the show away. Don’t run out in the streets sud- 
denly and say to everybody, “I’m God,” because they 
won’t understand you. 


THE MYTHOLOGY OF HINDUISM 


So then, there are people whom we will call far- 
out. They are far out into the illusion, and they are really 
lost; they are deeply committed to the human situation. 
Opposite them are the far-in people, who are in touch 
with the center. 

Now, the very far-out people are to be commend- 
ed, because they are doing the most adventurous thing. 
They are lost—they are the explorers and are way out in 
the jungles. In all societies, in some way or other, the 
far-out people keep in touch with the far-in people. The 
far-in people are there—they may be monks, yogis, 
priests, or philosophers, but they remind the far-out peo- 
ple, “After all, you’re not really lost, but it’s a great thrill 
and very brave of you to think that you are.” So then, 
some of the far-in people act as what is called a guru, 
and the function of a guru is to help you wake up from 
the dream when your time comes. 

In the ordinary life of the primitive Hindu commu- 
nity, there are four castes: the caste of priests, of war- 
riors, of merchants, and of laborers. Every man who 
belongs to the Hindu community belongs to one of the 
four castes, which he is born ‘into. That seems to us 
rather restrictive, because if you were born the son of a 
university professor you might much prefer to be a 
waterskiing instructor, and that would mean a shift in 
caste from what is called the Brabmana because the pro- 
fessor in Hindu life would come under the priestly caste. 
But in a time when there were no schools and everybody 
received his education from his father, the father consid- 
ered it a duty to educate the boys, the mother considered 
it her duty to educate the girls, and there was no choice 
of a boy being something other than his father. He was 
apprenticed to him while very young, and the child, as 
you know, naturally takes an interest in what the par- 
ents are doing and tends to want to do it, too. 

So, it was based on that, and although it seems 


[33 


CHAPTER TWO 


primitive to our way of thinking, that is the way it was. 
When a man attained the age of maturity in the middle 
of his life, and had raised a son old enough to take over 
the family business, he abandoned caste. He became an 
upper outcast, called a sannyasi and he went outside the 
village, back to the forest. So there are two stages of life: 
gribasta, or “householder,” and vanaprastha, or “forest 
dweller.” We came out of the forest and we formed civi- 
lized villages. The hunters settled down and started agri- 
culture. Then they formed into castes, and every man, as 
it were, had a function: tinker, tailor, soldier, sailor, rich 
man, poor man, beggar man, thief—but those are all 
parts, those are big acts. Who are you really, behind 
your mask? 

So, in the middle of life it is considered up to you 
to find out who you are. You are going to die in a few 
years. Before you die, wake up from the illusion so that 
you won’t be afraid of death. When you become 
vanaprastha you go to a guru, and the guru teaches you 
yoga, which is the art of waking up. In other words, to 
remember, as distinct from dismember, is to find out 
again that our separateness is maya, or in “seeming” 
only—it is not the fundamental reality. We are all one. 
Now, how does the guru teach you that? He does it 
mostly by kidding you. He has a funny look in his eye, 
as if to say, “Brahma, old boy, you can’t fool me.” The 
basic question that all gurus ask their students is, “Who 
are you?” The great guru of modern times was Sri 
Ramana Maharshi. Wealthy philosophical ladies from 
the United States used to go to ask him, “Who was I in 
my former incarnation?” because they wanted to find 
out they were Cleopatra, or something like that. He 
would say, “Who asked the question? Who is it that 
wants to know? Find out who you are.” Well, if you 
want to find out who you are, you get into a very funny 
mix-up because it is like trying to bite your teeth. “Who 


THE MYTHOLOGY OF HINDUISM 


is it that wants to know whg I am? If only I could catch 
that thing.” And the guru really says, “But now, let's get 
going on this, let’s concentrate, you see and get that 
thing.” So, he has people meditating on their own 
essence, and all the time he is looking at them with a 
funny look in his eye. They think, “Oh dear, that guru, 
he knows me through and through. He reads all my 
secret and impure thoughts. He realizes my desires and 
how badly I concentrate.” But really, the guru is laugh- 
ing himself silly inside, because he sees that this is the 
Brahma being quite unwilling to wake up, or not really 
ready. Suddenly there comes a shock—the moment when 
you realize the truth about that thumb you were catch- 
ing. You say, “Oh dear, it’s, after all, the same hand,” 
and there is a shock of recognition. Suddenly you wake 
up and exclaim, “Of course!” Now, that moment is 
moksha, or liberation. We have many names for it, but 
no very clear names. In the West we call it mystical 
experience, cosmic consciousness, or something of that 
kind. We find it very difficult to express it in our reli- 
gious language because we would have to say at that 
moment, “I have at last discovered that I am the Lord 
God.” We put people in asylums who discover this, if 
this is the way they express it, because it really is for us 
the one sure sign of being completely out of your head. 
Whereas in India when somebody says “I am the Lord 
God,” they say, “Well, naturally. Congratulations, at 
last you found out.” 

Our idea of the Lord God, as we shall see, is dif- 
ferent from the Hindu idea. You notice that Hindu 
images of the divinities usually have many arms, and 
that is because they are conceived of as sort of cosmic 
centipedes. The centipede does not think how to use 
each leg, just as you don’t think how to use every nerve 
cell in your nervous system. They just seem to use them- 
selves; they work automatically. Well, many things 


CHAPTER TWO 


working automatically together is the Hindu idea of 
omnipotence, whereas our idea is more technical. The 
person in supreme control would have to know how he 
does every single thing. You would ask, “God, how do 
you create rabbits?” as if he doesn’t just pull them out of 
hats like a stage magician but actually knows in every 
detail down to the last molecule or subdivision thereof 
how it is done and could explain it. 

Hindus would say that if you ask God, “How do 
you make a rabbit?” he would say, “That is no problem 
at all—I just become it.” “Well, how do you become it?” 
“Well, you just do it, like you open your hand or close 
it. You just do it. You don’t have to know how in 
words.” What we mean by understanding and explain- 
ing things is being able to put them into words. We do 
that first by analyzing them into many bits. In the same 
way, when you want to measure the properties of a 
curve, which is complicated, in order to say how that 
curve is shaped, you have to reduce it to tiny points and 
measure them. So you put a grid of graph paper across, 
and by telling the position on the graph of where the 
curve is at every point, you get an accurate description 
of what that curve is, or how it is, in scientific terms. 
That is what we mean when we talk about understand- 
ing things, but obviously there is another sense of “to 
understand.” You understand how to walk even if you 
can’t explain it, because you can do it. Can you drive a 
car? Yes. How do you drive a car? If you could put it 
into words, it might be easier to teach people how to do 
it in the first place, but one understands and learns many 
things about driving a car that are never explained in 
words. You just watch somebody else do it, and you do 
the same thing. 

In this way, then, the Hindu and the Western ideas 
of God are somewhat different. So, when the Hindu 
realizes that he is God, and that you are too, he sees the 


THE MYTHOLOGY OF HINDUISM 


dance of God in everybody all around him in every 
direction. He does not assume certain things that a 
Western person might assume if they had the same expe- 
rience. For example, you know the difference between 
what you do voluntarily and what happens to you invol- 
untarily. When I see someone else move at the far end of 
the room, it comes to me with a signal attached to it; 
that experience is involuntary. When I move, it comes to 
me with a voluntary signal attached to it. Nevertheless, 
both experiences are states and changes in my nervous 
system, but we do not ordinarily realize that. When we 
see somebody else doing something, we think that it is 
outside our nervous system. It isn’t at all; it is happening 
in our own brain. Now, if you should discover that it is 
happening inside you, it might just as well come to you 
with a voluntary signal attached to it. You could say, 
“T’ve got the feeling that I’m doing everything that every- 
body else is doing. Everything that I see and that I am 
aware of is my action.” 

Now, if you misunderstood that, you might think 
that you were able to control everything that everybody 
else does, and that you really were God in that kind of 
technical sense of God. You have to be careful what sort 
of interpretations you put on these experiences. It is one 
thing to have an authentic experience of the stars. It is 
quite another thing to be able to describe accurately 
their relative positions. It is one thing to have an experi- 
ence of cosmic consciousness, or liberation, but quite 
another thing to give a philosophically or scientifically 
accurate account of it. Yet this experience is the basis of 
the whole Hindu philosophy. It is as if one comes into 
the world in the beginning having what Freud called the 
“oceanic consciousness” of a baby, but the baby does 
not distinguish, apparently, between experiences of itself 
and experiences of the external world. Therefore, to the 
baby, it is all one. Furthermore, a baby has for a long 


37 


CHAPTER Two 


time been part of its mother and has floated in the ocean 
of the womb. So it has the sense from the beginning of 
what is really to an enlightened person totally obvious— 
that the universe is one single organism. 

Our social way of bringing up children is to make 
them concentrate on the bits and to ignore the totality. 
We point at things, give them names, and say, “Look at 
that.” But children very often ask you what things are, 
and you realize you do not have names for them. They 
point out backgrounds, and the shape of spaces between 
things, and say, “What’s that?” You may brush it aside 
and say, “Well, that’s not important. That doesn’t have 
a name.” You keep pointing out the significant things to 
them, and above all what everybody around the child 
does is to tell the child who he is, and what sort of part 
he is expected to play—what sort of mask he must wear. 
I remember very well as a child that I knew I had several 
different identities, but I knew that I would probably 
have to settle for one of them; the adult world was push- 
ing me toward a choice. I was one person with my par- 
ents at home, another person altogether at my uncle’s 
home, and still quite another person with my own peer 
group. But society was trying to say, “Now make up 
your mind as to who you really are.” So I would imitate 
some other child whom I had admired. I would come 
home and my mother would say, “Alan, that’s not you, 
that’s Peter. Be yourself now.” Otherwise, you are some- 
how phony, and the point is not to.be phony but to be 
real. 

However, this whole big act is phony, but it is a 
marvelous act. A genuine person is one who knows he is 
a big act and does it with complete zip. He is what we 
would call committed, and yet he is freed by becoming 
completely committed and knowing that the world is an 
act. There isn’t anybody doing it. We like to think things 


THE MYTHOLOGY OF HINDUISM 


stand behind processes, arid that things “do” the 
processes, but that is just a convention of grammar. We 
have verbs and nouns, and every noun can obviously be 
described by a verb. We say “the mat.” We can also say 
“the matting.” Likewise, we can say “cating” for “cat.” 
When we want to say, “The cating is sitting,” however, 
we say, “The cat sits,” using a noun and a verb—where- 
as it is all verb; it is all a big act. But remember, you 
mustn’t give the show away. 


Eco-ZEN 


CHAPTER THREE 


$ 


remember a very wise man who used to give lec- 
tures like this, and when he came in he used to be 
silent. He would look at the audience, gaze at 
everyone there for a particularly long time, and 
everybody would begin feeling vaguely embarrassed. 
When he had gazed at them for a long time he would 
say, “WAKE UP, you’re all asleep! And if you don’t 
wake up, I won’t give any lecture.” Now, in what sense 
are we asleep? The Buddhist would say that almost all 
human beings have a phony sense of identity—a delu- 
sion, or a hallucination as to who they are. I am terribly 
interested in this problem of identity. I try to find out 
what people mean when they say the word L I think this 


[43 


CHAPTER THREE 


is one of the most fascinating questions: “Who do you 
think you are?” Now, what seems to develop is this: 
most people think that I is a center of sensitivity some- 
where inside their skin, and the majority of people feel 
that it is in their heads. Civilizations in different periods 
of history have differed about this—Some people feel 
that they exist in the solar plexus. Other people feel that 
they exist in the stomach. But in American culture today, 
and in the Western culture in general, most people feel 
that they exist in their heads. There is, as it were, a little 
man sitting inside the center of the skull who has a tele- 
vision screen in front of him that gives him all messages 
from the eyeballs. He has earphones on that give him all 
messages from the ears, and he has in front of him a 
control panel with various dials and buttons, which 
enable him to influence the arms and legs and to get all 
sorts of information from the nerve ends. And that is 
you. So, we say in popular speech, “I have a body,” not 
“I am a body.” I have one because I am the owner of the 
body in the same way as I own an automobile. I take the 
automobile to a mechanic and, occasionally, in the same 
way, I take my body to the mechanic—the surgeon, the 
dentist, and the doctor—and have it repaired. It belongs 
to me, it goes along with me, and I am in it. 

For example, a child can ask its mother, “Mom, 
who would I have been if my father had been someone 
else?” That seems to be a perfectly simple and logical 
question for a child to ask, because of the presumption 
that your parents gave you your body and you were 
popped into it—maybe at the moment of conception or 
maybe at the moment of birth—from a repository of 
souls in Heaven, and your parents simply provided the 
physical vehicle. So, that age-old idea that is indigenous, 
especially to the Western world, is that I am something 
inside a body, and I am not quite sure whether I am or 


Eco-ZEN 


am not my body; there is some doubt about it. I say, “I 
think, I walk, I talk,” but I don’t say, “I beat my heart,” 
“I shape my bones,” and “I grow my hair.” I feel that 
my heart beating, my hair growing, and my bones shap- 
ing is something that happens to me, and I don’t know 
how it is done. But other things I do, and I feel quite 
surely that everything outside my body is quite definitely 
not me. 

There are two kinds of things outside my body. 
Number one is other people, and they are the same sort 
of thing that I am, but also they are all little men locked 
up inside their skins. They are intelligent, have feelings 
and values, and are capable of love and virtue. Number 
two is the world that is nonhuman—we call it nature, 
and that is stupid. It has no mind, it has emotions 
maybe, like animals, but on the whole it’s a pretty grim 
dog-eat-dog business. When it gets to the geological 
level, it is as dumb as dumb can be. It is a mechanism, 
and there is an awful lot of it. That is what we live in the 
middle of, and the purpose of being human is, we feel, to 
subjugate nature, and to make it obey our will. We 
arrived here, and we don’t feel that we belong in this 
world—it is foreign to us: in the words of the poet A.E. 
Housman, “I, a stranger and afraid, in a world I never 
made.” All around us today we see the signs of man’s 
battle with nature. I am living at the moment in a mar- 
velous house overlooking a lake, and on the other side of 
the lake the whole hill has suddenly been interrupted 
with a ghastly gash. They have made level lots for build- 
ing tract homes of the kind you would build on a flat 
plain. This is called the conquest of nature, and these 
houses will eventually fall down the hill because the 
builders are causing soil erosion and they are being max- 
imally stupid. The proper way to build a house on a hill- 
side is to do it in such a way as to effect the minimum 


| 


CHAPTER THREE 


interference with the nature of the hill. After all, the 
whole point of living in the hills is to live in the hills. 
There is no point in converting the hills into something 
flat and then going and living there. You can do that 
already on the level ground. So, as more people live in 
the hills, the more they spoil the hills, and they are just 
the same as people living on the flat ground. How stupid 
can you get? Well, this is one of the symptoms of our 
phony sense of identity, of our phony feeling that we are 
something lonely, locked up in a bag of skin and con- 
fronted with a world, an external, alien, foreign world 
that is not us. ; 

Now, according to certain of these great ancient 
philosophies, like Buddhism, this sensation of being a 
separate, lonely individual is a hallucination. It is a hal- 
lucination brought about by various causes, the way we 
are brought up being the chief of them, of course. For 
example, the main thing that we're all taught in child- 
hood is that we must do that which will only be appreci- 
ated if we do it voluntarily. “Now darling, a dutiful 
child must love its mother. But now, I don’t want you to 
do it because I say so, but because you really want to.” 
Or “You must be free.” This also is seen in politics— 
“Everybody must vote.” Imagine, you are members of a 
democracy, and you must be members of the democra- 
cy—you are ordered to. You see, this is crazy. Also 
“Thou shalt love the Lord thy God.” Is that a command- 
ment or a joke? However, if you suggest that the Lord is 
joking, most people in our culture are offended, because 
they have a very moronic conception of God as a person 
totally devoid of humor. But the Lord is highly capable 
of joking, because joking is one of the most constructive 
things you can do. So, when you are told who you are, 
and that you must be free, and furthermore that you 
must survive, that becomes a kind of compulsion, and 


Eco-ZEN 


you get mixed up. Of course, it is very simple to get 
mixed up if you think you must do something that will 
only be required of you if you do it freely. 

These are the sort of influences, then, that cause 
human beings all over the world to feel isolated—to feel 
that they are centers of awareness locked up in bags of 
skin. Now, this sensation of our identity can be shown 
and demonstrated to be false by some of the disciplines 
of our own science. When we describe a human being or 
any other living organism from a scientific point of view, 
all that means is that we are describing it carefully. We 
are going to describe very carefully what a human being 
is and what a human being does. We find that as we go 
on with that description, we can’t describe the human 
being without describing the environment. We cannot 
say what a human being is doing without also saying 
what the world around him is doing. 

Just imagine for a moment that you couldn’t see 
anything except me. You couldn’t see the curtain behind 
me, or the microphone. You could only see me, and that 
is all you could see. What would you be looking at? You 
wouldn’t see me at all, because you wouldn’t see my 
edges, and my edges are rather important for seeing me. 
My edges would be identical with the edge of your eye- 
sight, with that vague oval curve which is the field of 
vision. What you would be looking at would be my 
necktie, my nose, my eyes, and so on, but you wouldn’t 
see my edges. You would be confronted with a very 
strange monster, and you wouldn’t know it was a 
human being. To see me you need to see my back- 
ground, and therein lies a clue of which we are mostly 
ignorant. In Buddhist theory, the cause of our phony 
sense of identity is called avidya, meaning “ignorance,” 
although it is better to pronounce it “ignorance.” 
Having a deluded sense of identity is the result of ignor- 


[45 


CHAPTER THREE 


ing certain things. So, when you look at me, I cause you 
to ignore my background, because I concentrate atten- 
tion on me, just like a conjurer or stage magician misdi- 
rects your attention in order to perform his tricks. He 
talks to you about his fingers and how empty they are, 
and he can pull something out of his pocket in plain 
sight and you don’t notice it—and so magic happens. 
That’s ignorance—selective attention—focusing your 
consciousness on one thing to the exclusion of many 
other things. In this way we concentrate on the things— 
the figures—and we ignore the background. So, we come 
to think that the figure exists independently of the back- 
ground, but actually they go together. They go together 
just as inseparably as backs go with fronts, as positives 
go with negatives, as ups go with downs, and as life goes 
with death. You cannot separate it. So there is a sort of 
secret conspiracy between the figure and the back- 
ground: They are really one, but they look different. 
They need each other, just as male needs female, and 
vice versa. But we are, ordinarily, completely unaware of 
this. 

So then, when a scientist starts carefully paying 
attention to the behavior of people and things, he dis- 
covers that they go together, and that the behavior of the 
organism is inseparable from the behavior of its environ- 
ment. So, if I am to describe what I am doing, am I just 
waving my legs back and forth? No, I am walking. ‘In 
order to speak about walking, you have to speak about 
the space in which I am walking—about the floor, about 
the direction, left or right, in relation to what kind of 
room, stage, and situation. Obviously, if there isn’t a 
ground underneath me, I cannot very well walk, so the 
description of what I am doing involves the description 
of the world. And so, the biologist comes to say that 
what he is describing is no longer merely the organism 


Eco-ZEN 


and its behavior. He is describing a field, which he now 
calls the organism/environment, and that field is what 
the individual actually is. Now, this is very clearly recog- 
nized in all sorts of sciences, but the average individual, 
and indeed the average scientist, does not feel in a way 
that corresponds to his theory. He still feels as if he were 
a center of sensitivity locked up inside a bag of skin. 

The object of Buddhist discipline, or methods of 
psychological training, is, as it were, to turn that feeling 
inside out—to bring about a state of affairs in which the 
individual feels himself to be everything that there is. 
The whole cosmos is focused, expressing itself here, and 
you are the whole cosmos expressing itself there, and 
there, and there, and there, and so on. In other words, 
the reality of my self fundamentally is not something 
inside my skin but everything, and I mean everything, 
outside my skin, but doing what is my skin and what is 
inside it. In the same way, when the ocean has a wave on 
it, the wave is not separate from the ocean. Every wave 
on the ocean is the whole ocean waving. The ocean 
waves, and it says, “Yoo-hoo, I’m here. I can wave in 
many different ways—I can wave this way and that 
way.” So, the ocean of being waves every one of us, and 
we are its waves, but the wave is fundamentally the 
ocean. Now, in that way, your sense of identity would 
be turned inside out. You wouldn’t forget who you 
were—your name and address, your telephone number, 
your social security number, and what sort of role you 
are supposed to occupy in society. But you would know 
that this particular role that you play and this particular 
personality that you are is superficial, and the real you is 
all that there is. 


SWALLOWING 


A BALL or HOT IRON 


CHAPTER FOUR 


he inversion, or turning upside down, of the 
sense of identity, of the state of conscious- 
ness that the average person has, is the 
objective of Buddhistic disciplines. Now, 
perhaps I can make this clearer to you by going into a 
little detail as to how these disciplines work. The method 
of teaching something in Buddhism is rather different 
from methods of teaching that we use in the Western 
world. In the Western world, a good teacher is regarded 
as someone who makes the subject matter easy for the 
student, a person who explains things cleverly and clear- 
ly so you can take a course in mathematics without 
tears. In the Oriental world, they have an almost exactly 


CHAPTER FOUR 


Opposite conception, and that is that a good teacher is a 
person who makes you find out something for yourself. 
In other words, learn to swim by throwing the baby into 
the water. There is a story used in Zen about how a bur- 
glar taught his child how to burgle. He took him one 
night on a burgling expedition, locked him up in a chest 
in the house that he was burgling, and left him. The 
poor little boy was all alone locked up in the chest, and 
he began to think, “How on earth am I going to get 
out?” So he suddenly called out, “Fire, fire,” and every- 
body began running all over the place. They heard this 
shriek coming from inside the chest and they unlocked 
it, and he rushed out and shot out into the garden. 
Everybody was in hot pursuit, calling out, “Thief, thief,” 
and as he went by a well he picked up a rock and 
dropped it into the well. Everybody thought the poor fel- 
low had jumped into the well and committed suicide, 
and so he got away. He returned home and his father 
said, “Congratulations, you have learned the art.” 
William Blake once said, “A fool who persists in 
his folly will become wise.” The method of teaching 
used by these great Eastern teachers is to make fools per- 
sist in their folly, but very rigorously, very consistently, 
and very hard. Now, having given you the analogy and 
image, let’s go to the specific situation. Supposing you 
want to study Buddhism under a Zen master—what will 
happen to you? Well, first of all, let’s ask why you 
would want to do this anyway. I can make the situation 
fairly universal. It might not be a Zen master that you go 
to—it might be a Methodist minister, a Catholic priest, 
or a psychoanalyst. But what’s the matter with you? 
Why do you go? Surely the reason that we all would be 
seekers is that we feel some disquiet about ourselves. 
Many of us want to get rid of ourselves. We cannot 
stand ourselves and so we watch television, go to the 


SWALLOWING A BALL OF HOT IRON 


movies, read mystery stories, and join churches in order 
to forget ourselves and to merge with something greater 
than ourselves. We want to get away from this ridicu- 
lous thing locked up in a bag of skin. You may say, “I 
have a problem. I hurt, I suffer, and I’m neurotic,” or 
whatever it is. You go to the teacher and say, “My prob- 
lem’s me. Change me.” 

Now, if you go to a Zen teacher, he will say, 
“Well, I have nothing to teach. There is no problen— 
everything’s perfectly clear.” You think that one over, 
and you say, “He’s probably being cagey. He’s testing 
me out to see if I really want to be his student. I know, 
according to everybody else who’s been through this, 
that in order to get this man to take me on I must per- 
sist.” Do you know the saying, “Anybody who goes to a 
psychiatrist ought to have his head examined?” There is 
a double take in that saying. 

So, in the same way, anybody who goes with a 
spiritual problem to a Zen master defines himself as a 
nut, and the teacher does everything possible to make 
him as nutty as possible. The teacher says, “Quite hon- 
estly, I haven’t anything to tell you. I don’t teach any- 
thing—I have no doctrine. I have nothing whatsoever to 
sell you.” So the student thinks, “My, this is very deep,” 
because this nothing that he is talking about, this noth- 
ing that he teaches, is what they call in Buddhism sunya- 
ta. Sunyata is Sanskrit for “nothingness,” and it is 
supposed to be the ultimate reality. But if you know any- 
thing about these doctrines, this does not mean just 
“nothing there at all” or just “blank,” but it means “no- 
thing-ness.” It is the transcendental reality behind all 
separate and individual things, and that is something 
very deep and profound. So, he knows that when the 
teacher said, “I have nothing to teach,” he meant this 
very esoteric no-thing. Well, he might also say then, “If 


CHAPTER FOUR 


you have nothing to teach, what are all these students 
doing around here?” And the teacher says, “They are 
not doing anything. They are just a lot of stupid people 
who live here.” 

He knows again this “stupid” does not mean just 
straight stupid, but the higher stupidity of people who 
are humble and do not have intellectual pride. Finally, 
the student, having gone out of his way to define himself 
as a damn fool in need of help, has absolutely worked 
himself into this situation. He has defined himself as a 
nut, and then the teacher accepts him. The teacher says, 
“Now, I am going to ask you a question. I want to know 
who you are before your mother and father conceived 
you. That is to say, you have come to me with a prob- 
lem, and you have said, ‘I have a problem. I want to get 
one up on this universe.’ Now, who is it that wants to 
get one up? Who are you? Who is this thing called your 
ego, your soul, your I, your identity, for whom your par- 
ents provided a body? Show me that. Furthermore, I’m 
from Missouri and I don’t want any words and I want to 
be shown.” 

The student opens his mouth to answer, but the 
teacher says, “Uh-uh, not yet; you’re not ready.” Then 
he takes him back and introduces him to the chief stu- 
dent of all the so-called Zen monks who live there 
together, and the chief student says, “Now, what we do 
here is we have a discipline, but the main part of the dis- 
cipline is meditation. We all sit cross-legged in a row and 
learn how to breathe and be still: in other words, to do 
nothing. Now, you mustn’t go to sleep and you mustn’t 
fall into a trance. You have to stay wide awake, not 
think anything, but perfectly do nothing.” During medi- 
tation, there is a monk walking up and down all the time 
with a long flat stick, and if you go to sleep or fall into a 
trance, he hits you on the back. So instead of becoming 


SWALLOWING A BALL OF HOT IRON 


dreamy, you stay quite clear, and wide awake, but still 
doing nothing. The idea is that out of the state of pro- 
foundly doing nothing, you will be able to tell the 
teacher who you really are. 

In other words, the question “Who are you before 
your father and mother conceived you?” is a request for 
an act of perfect sincerity and spontaneity. It is as if I 
were to ask, “Look now, will you be absolutely genuine 
with me? No deception please. I want you to do some- 
thing that expresses you without the slightest deception. 
No more role-acting, no more playing games with me; I 
want to see you!” Now, imagine, could you really be 
that honest with somebody else, especially a spiritual 
teacher, because you know he looks right through you 
and sees all your secret thoughts. He knows the very sec- 
ond you have been a little bit phony, and that bugs you. 
The same is true of a psychiatrist. You might be sitting 
in there discussing your problems with him and absent- 
mindedly you start to pick your nose. The psychiatrist 
suddenly says to you, “Is your finger comfortable there? 
Do you like that?” And you know your Freudian slip is 
showing. What do fingers symbolize, and what do nos- 
trils symbolize? Uh-oh. You quickly put your hand 
down and say, “Oh no, it is nothing, I was just picking 
my nose.” But the analyst says, “Oh really? Then why 
are you justifying it? Why are you trying to explain it 
away?” He has you every way you turn. Well, that is the 
art of psychoanalysis, and in Zen it is the same thing. 

When you are challenged to be perfectly genuine, 
it is like saying to a child, “Now darling, come out here 
and play, and don’t be self-conscious.” In other words | 
could say to you, “If any of you come here tonight at 
exactly midnight, and put your hands on this stage, you 
can have granted any wish you want to, provided you 


ame} 


[33] 


CHAPTER FOUR 


don’t think of a green elephant.” Of course, everybody 
will come, and they will put their hands here, and they 
will be very careful not to think about a green elephant. 
The point is that if we transfer this concept to the 
dimension of spirituality, where the highest ideal is to be 
unselfish and to let go of one’s self, it is again trying to 
be unselfish for selfish reasons. You cannot be unselfish 
by a decision of the will any more than you can decide 
not to think of a green elephant. There is a story about 
Confucius, who one day met Lao-tzu, a great Chinese 
philosopher. Lao-tzu said, “Sir, what is your system?” 
And Confucius said, “It is charity, love of one’s neigh- 
bor, and elimination of self-interest.” Lao-tzu replied, 
“Stuff and nonsense. Your elimination of self is a posi- 
tive manifestation of self. Look at the universe. The stars 
keep their order, the trees and plants grow upward with- 
out exception, and the waters flow. Be like this.” 

These are all examples of the tricks the master 
might be playing on you. You came to him with the idea 
in your mind that you are a separate, independent, iso- 
lated individual, and he is simply saying, “Show me this 
individual.” I had a friend who was studying Zen in 
Japan, and he became pretty desperate to produce the 
answer of who he really is. On his way to an interview 
with the master to give an answer to the problem, he 
noticed a very common sight in Japan, a big bullfrog sit- 
ting around in the garden. He swooped this bullfrog up 
in his hand and dropped it in the sleeve of his kimono. 
Then he went to the master to give the answer of who he 
was. He suddenly produced the bullfrog, and the master 
said, “Mmmmn,, too intellectual.” In other words, this 
answer is too contrived. It is too much like Zen. “You 
have been reading too many books. It is not the genuine 
thing,” the master said. So, after a while, what happens 
is the student finds that there is absolutely no way of 


SWALLOWING A BALL OF HOT IRON 


being his true self. Not only is there no way of doing it, 
there is also no way of doing it by not doing it. 

To make this clearer, allow me to put it into 
Christian terms: “Thou shalt love the Lord, thy God.” 
What are you going to do about that? If you try very 
hard to love God you may ask yourself, “Why am | 
doing this?” You will find out you are doing it because 
you want to be right. After all, the Lord is the master of 
the universe, and if you don’t love him, you’re going to 
be in a pretty sad state. So, you realize you are loving 
him just because you are afraid of what will happen to 
you if you don’t. And then you think, “That is pretty 
lousy love, isn’t it? That’s a bad motivation. I wish I 
could change that. I wish I could love the Lord out of a 
genuine heart.” But, why do you want to change? You 
realize that the reason you want to have a different kind 
of motive is that you have the same motive. So, you say 
“Oh for heaven’s sake, God, I’m a mess. Will you please 
help me out?” Then he reminds you, “Why are you 
doing that? Now, you are just giving up, aren’t you? 
You are asking someone else to take over your prob- 
lem.” Suddenly you find you are stuck. 

What is called the Zen problem, or koan, is 
likened to a person who has swallowed a ball of red-hot 
iron. He cannot gulp it down and he cannot spit it out. 
Or it is like a mosquito biting an iron bull. It is the 
nature of a mosquito to bite and it is the nature of an 
iron bull to be unbiteable. Both go on doing what is 
their nature, and so, nothing can happen. Soon you real- 
ize you are absolutely up against it. There is absolutely 
no answer to this problem, and no way out. Now, what 
does that mean? If I cannot do the right thing by doing, 
and I cannot do the right thing by not doing, what does 
it mean? It means, of course, that I who essayed to do all 
this is a hallucination. There is no independent self to be 


CHAPTER FOUR 


produced. There is no way at all of showing it, because 
it is not there. When you recover from the illusion and 
you suddenly wake up, you think, “Whew, what a 
relief.” That is called satori. When this kind of experi- 
ence happens, you discover that what you are is no 
longer this sort of isolated center of action and experi- 
ence locked up in your skin. The teacher has asked you 
to produce that thing, to show it to him genuine and 
naked, and you couldn’t find it. So, it isn’t there, and 
when you see clearly that it isn’t there, you have a new 
sense of identity. You realize that what you are is the 
whole world of nature, doing this. Now, that is difficult 
for many Western people, because it suggests a kind of 
fatalism. It suggests that the individual is nothing more 
than the puppet of cosmic forces. However, when your 
own inner sense of identity changes from being the sepa- 
rate individual to being what the entire cosmos is doing 
at this place, you become not a puppet but more truly 
and more expressively an individual than ever. This is 
the same paradox that the Christian knows in the form, 
“Whosoever would save his soul shall lose it.” 

Now, I think that this is something of very great 
importance to the Western world today. We have devel- 
oped an immensely powerful technology. We have 
stronger means of changing the physical universe than 
have ever existed before. How are we going to use it? A 
Chinese proverb says that if the wrong man uses the 
right means, the right means work in the wrong way. Let 
us assume that our technological knowledge is the right 
means. What kind of people are going to use this knowl- 
edge? Are they going to be people who hate nature and 
feel alienated from it, or people who love the physical 
world and feel that the physical world is their own per- 
sonal body? The whole physical universe, right out to 
the galaxies, is simply one’s extended body. Now, at the 
moment, the general attitude of our technologists who 


SWALLOWING A BALL OF HOT IRON 


are exploring space is represented in the phrase “the 
conquest of space.” They are building enormous, shell- 
like, phallic objects that blast into the sky. This is down- 
right ridiculous, because no one is going to get anywhere 
in a rocket. It takes a terribly long time to even get to the 
moon, and it is going to take longer than anybody can 
live to get outside the solar system, just to begin with. 
The proper way to study space is not with rockets but 
with radio astronomy. Instead of exploding with a tough 
fist at the sky, become more sensitive and develop sub- 
tler senses, and everything will come to you. Be more 
open and be more receptive, and eventually you will 
develop an instrument that will examine a piece of rock 
on Mars with greater care than you could if you were 
holding it in your own hand. Let it come to you. 

The whole attitude of using technology as a 
method of fighting the world will succeed only in 
destroying the world, as we are doing. We use absurd 
and uninformed and shortsighted methods of getting rid 
of insect pests, forcing our fruit and tomatoes to grow, 
stripping our hills of trees and so on, thinking that this is 
some kind of progress. Actually, it is turning everything 
into a junk heap. It is said that Americans, who are in 
the forefront of technological progress, are materialists. 
Nothing is further from the truth. American culture is 
dedicated to the hatred of material and to its transfor- 
mation into junk. Look at our cities. Do they look as 
though they were made by people who love material? 
Everything is made out of ticky-tacky, which is a combi- 
nation of plaster of paris, papier-maché and plastic glue, 
and it comes in any flavor. The important lesson is that 
technology and its powers must be handled by true 
materialists. True materialists are people who love mate- 
rial—who cherish wood and stone and wheat and eggs 
and animals and, above all, the earth—and treat it with 
a reverence that is due one’s own body. 

rs] 


INTELLECTUAL 
YOGA 


CHAPTER FIVE 


1 
he word yoga, as most of you doubtless 
know, is the same as our word yoke and the 
Latin word jungere, meaning “to join.” Join, 
junction, yoke, and union—all these words 
are basically from the same root. So, likewise, when 
Jesus said, “My yoke is easy,” he was really saying, “My 
yoga is easy.” The word, therefore, basically denotes the 
state that would be the opposite of what our psycholo- 
gists call alienation, or what Buddhists call sakyadrishti, 
the view of separateness or the feeling of separateness— 
the feeling of being cut off from being. Most civilized 
people do in fact feel that way, because they have a kind 
of myopic attention focused on their own boundaries 


CHAPTER FIVE 


and what is inside those boundaries. They identify them- 
selves with the inside and do not realize that you cannot 
have an inside without an outside. That would seem to 
be extremely elementary logic, wouldn’t it? We could 
have no sense of being ourselves and of having a person- 
al identity without the contrast of something that is not 
ourselves—that is to say, other. 

However, the fact that we do not realize that self 
and other go together is the root of an enormous and 
terrifying anxiety, because what will happen when the 
inside disappears? What will happen when the so-called 
I comes to an end, as it seems to? Of course, if it didn’t, 
and if things did not keep moving and changing, appear- 
ing and dissolving, the universe would be a colossal 
bore. Therefore, you are only aware that things are all 
right for the moment. I hope most of the people in this 
gathering have a sort of genial sense inside of them that 
for the time being things are going on more or less okay. 
Some of you may be very miserable, and then your prob- 
lem may be just a little different, but it is essentially the 
same one. But you must realize that the sense of life 
being fairly all right is inconceivable and unfeelable 
unless there is way, way, way in the back of your mind 
the glimmer of a possibility that something absolutely, 
unspeakably awful might happen. It does not have to 
happen. Of course, you will die one day, but there 
always has to be the vague apprehension, the hin- 
tegedanka, that the awful awfuls are possible. It gives 
spice to life. Now, these observations are in line with 
what I am going to discuss: the intellectual approach to 
yoga. 

There are certain basic principal forms of yoga. 
Most people are familiar with hatha yoga, which is a 
psychophysical exercise system, and this is the one you 
see demonstrated most on television, because it has visu- 


INTELLECTUAL YOGA 


al value. You can see all these-exercises of lotus positions 
and people curling their legs around their necks and 
doing all sorts of marvelous exercises. The most honest 
yoga teacher I know is a woman who teaches hatha yoga 
and does not pretend to be any other kind of guru. She 
does it very well. 

Then there is bhakti yoga. Bhakti means “devo- 
” and I suppose in general you might say that 
Christianity is a form of bhakti yoga, because it is yoga 
practiced through extreme reverence and love for some 
being felt more or less external to oneself who is the rep- 
resentative of the divine. 


tion,” 


Then there is karma yoga. Karma means “action,” 
and incidentally, that is all it means. It does not mean 
the law of cause and effect. When we say that something 
that happens to you is your karma, all we are saying is 
that it is your own doing. Nobody is in charge of karma 
except you. Karma yoga is the way of action, of using 
one’s everyday life, one’s trade, or an athletic discipline 
(like sailing or surfing or track running) as your way of 
yoga, and as your way of discovering who you are. 

Then there is raja yoga. That is the royal yoga, and 
that is sometimes also called &undalini yoga. It involves 
very complicated psychic exercises having to do with 
awakening the serpent power that is supposed to lie at 
the base of one’s spiritual spine and raise it up through 
certain chakras or centers until it enters into the brain. 
There is a very profound symbolism involved in that, but 
I] am not going into that. 

Mantra yoga is the practice of chanting or hum- 
ming, either out loud or silently, certain sounds that 
become supports for contemplation, for what is in 
Sanskrit called jnana. Jnana is the state in which one is 
clearly awake and aware of the world as it is, as distinct 
from the world as it is described. In other words, in the 


a 


CHAPTER FIVE 


state of jnana, you stop thinking. You stop talking to 
yourself and figuring to yourself and symbolizing to 
yourself what is going on. You simply are aware of what 
is and nobody can say what it is, because as Korzybski 
well said, “The real world is unspeakable.” There’s a 
lovely double take in that. But that’s jnana, that’s zazen, 
where one practices to sit absolutely wide awake with 
eyes open, without thinking. 

That is a very curious state, incidentally. I knew a 
professor of mathematics at Northwestern University 
who one day said, “You know, it’s amazing how many 
things there are that aren’t so.” He was talking about 
old wives’ tales and scientific superstitions, but when 
you practice jnana, you are amazed how many things 
there are that aren’t so. 

When you stop talking to yourself and you are 
simply aware of what is—that is to say, of what you feel 
and what you sense—even that is saying too much. You 
suddenly find that the past and the future have com- 
pletely disappeared. So also has disappeared the so- 
called differentiation between the knower and the 
known, the subject and the object, the feeler and the 
feeling, the thinker and the thought. They just aren’t 
there because you have to talk to yourself to maintain 
those things. They are purely conceptual. They are ideas, 
phantoms, and ghosts. So, when you allow thinking to 
stop, all that goes away, and you find you’re in an eter- 
nal here and now. There is no way you are supposed to 
be, and there is nothing you are supposed to do. There is 
no where you are supposed to go, because in order to 
think that you’re supposed to do something you have to 
think. 

It is incredibly important to un-think at least once 
a day for the very preservation of the intellectual life, 
because if you do nothing but think, as you’re advised 


INTELLECTUAL YOGA 


by IBM and by most of the academic teachers and gurus, 
you have nothing to think about except thoughts. You 
become like a university library that grows by itself 
through a process that in biology is called mitosis. 
Mitosis is the progressive division of cells into sub-cells, 
into sub-cells; so a great university library is very often a 
place where people bury themselves and write books 
about the books that are in there. They write books 
about books about books and the library swells, and it is 
like an enormous mass of yeast rising and rising, and 
that is all that is going on. It is a very amusing game. I 
love to bury my nose in ancient Oriental texts—it is fun, 
like playing poker or chess or doing pure mathematics. 
The trouble is that it gets increasingly unrelated to life, 
because the thinking is all words about words. 

If we stop that temporarily and get our mind clear 
of thoughts, we become, as Jesus said, “again as chil- 
dren” and get a direct view of the world, which is very 
useful once you are an adult. There is not much you can 
do with it when you are a baby, because everybody 
pushes you around; they pick you up and sit you there. 
You can’t do much except practice contemplation, and 
you can’t tell anyone what ir is like. But when, as an 
adult, you can recapture the baby’s point of view, you 
will know what all child psychologists have always 
wanted to know—how it is that a baby feels. The baby, 
according to Freud at least, has the oceanic experience, 
that is to say, a feeling of complete inseparability from 
what’s going on. The baby is unable to distinguish 
between the universe and his or her action upon the uni- 
verse. Most of us, if we got into that state of conscious- 
ness, might be inclined to feel extremely frightened and 
begin to ask, “Who’s in charge? I mean, who controls 
what happens next?” We would ask that, because we are 
used to the idea that the process of nature consists of 


63) 


CHAPTER FIVE 


controllers and controllees, things that do and things 
that are done to. This is purely mythological, as you find 
out when you observe the world without thinking, with 
a purely silent mind. 

Now then, jnana yoga is the approach that is 
designed for intellectuals. There is an intellectual way to 
get to this kind of understanding. A lot of people say to 
me, “You know, I understand what you are talking 
about intellectually, but I don’t really feel it. I don’t real- 
ize it.” I am apt to reply, “I wonder whether you do 
understand it intellectually, because if you did you 
would also feel it.” 

The intellect, or what I prefer to call the intelli- 
gence, is not a sort of watertight compartment of the 
mind that goes clickety, clickety all by itself and has no 
influence on what happens in all other spheres of one’s 
being. We all know that you can be hypnotized by 
words. Certain words arouse immediately certain feel- 
ings, and by using certain words one can change people’s 
emotions very easily and very rapidly. They are incanta- 
tions, and the intellect is not something off over there. 
However, the word intellect has become a kind of catch- 
word that represents the intellectual porcupinism of the 
academic world. 

A certain professor at Harvard at the time Tim 
Leary was making experiments there said, “No knowl- 
edge is academically respectable which cannot be put 
into words.” Alas for the department of physical educa- 
tion. Alas for the department of music and fine arts. 
That is very important, because one of the greatest intel- 
lects of modern times was Ludwig Wittgenstein. And as 
you read the end of his Tractatus, which was his great 
book, he shows you that what you always thought were 
the major problems of life and philosophy were mean- 
ingless questions. Those problems are solved not by, as it 


INTELLECTUAL YOGA 


were, giving an answer to them but by getting rid of the 
problem through seeing intellectually that it is meaning- 
less. Then you are relieved of the problem. You need no 
longer lie awake nights wondering what is the meaning 
of life, and what it is all about, simply because it isn’t 
about anything. It’s about itself, and so he ends up say- 
ing, “Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one 
must be silent.” 

A new successor to Wittgenstein, an Englishman 
named Spencer-Brown, has written a book called Laws 
of Form, and if any of you are mathematically minded 
I would firmly recommend it. He makes this comment 
about Wittgenstein: “True, there are certain things of 
which one cannot speak. For example, you cannot 
describe music.” That is why most of the reports of 
music critics in the newspapers seem completely 
absurd. They are trying to convey in words how a cer- 
tain artist performed, and they borrow words from all 
other kinds of art and try to make some show of being 
clever about it. 

But there is no way in which the music critic, in 
words, can make you hear the sound of the concert. By 
writing certain instructions om paper telling you certain 
things to do, those sounds can be reproduced though, so 
musical notation is essentially a set of instructions telling 
you certain things to do, and if you do them, you will 
gain an experience that is ineffable and beyond words. 
Spencer-Brown points out that all mathematics is basi- 
cally a set of instructions, like “describe a circle, drop a 
perpendicular.” So, if you follow certain instructions, 
then you will understand certain things that cannot be 
described, and that, of course, is what yoga is all about. 

All mystical writing, really, is instructions. It is not 
an attempt to describe the universe, to describe God, 
to describe ultimate reality. Every mystic knows that 


[6s 


CHAPTER FIVE 


cannot possibly be done. The very word mysticism is 
from the Greek root muin, which means “silence.” 
Mum’s the word; shut up. I should talk, but that’s it. Be 
quiet. Then you will understand because the instructions 
are to listen. Listen, or even look. Stop, look, and lis- 
ten—that is yoga—and see what is going on. Only don’t 
say, because that will spoil it. Somebody came to a Zen 
master and said, “The mountains and hills and the sky— 
are not all these the body of Buddha?” And the master 
said, “Yes, but it’s a pity to say so.” 

For those of you who are mathematically hip, by 
reading Spencer-Brown’s book Laws of Form, you can 
go through an intellectual process that is very close 
indeed to jnana yoga. As a matter of fact, I was so 
impressed with it that I went over to England especially 
to see this fellow. He is quite remarkable, a youngish 
man adept at all sorts of things. 

In the book, he starts out with the instruction to 
draw a distinction, any distinction you want, between 
something and nothing, between the inside and the out- 
side, or what have you. Then he takes you through a 
process of reasoning in which he shows you that once 
you have made that step, all the laws of mathematics, 
physics, biology, and electronics follow inevitably. He 
draws them out and he gets you into the most complicat- 
ed electronic circuitry systems that necessarily follow 
from your having drawn a distinction. Once you have 
done that, the universe as we know it is inevitable. 

After that he says, “I haven’t told you anything 
you didn’t already know. At every step when you saw 
that one of my theorems was correct, you said, ‘Oh, of 
course.” Why? Because you knew it already.” And then 
at the end of it, where he has shown you, as it were, the 
nature of your own mind, he raises the question, “Was 
this trip really necessary?” 


INTELLECTUAL YOGA 


So now he takes us in the reentry and says, “You 
see, what has happened through all this mathematical 
process, and also in the course of your own complicated 
lives where you have been trying to find out something 
that you already knew, is the universe has taken one 
turn.” That is the meaning of universe; it has taken a 
turn on itself to look at itself. Well, when anything looks 
at itself it escapes itself, as the snake swallowing its tail, 
as the dog chasing its tail, as we try to grab this hand 
with that. It gets some of it, but it doesn’t get it, and so 
he makes the amazing remark, “Naturally, as our tele- 
scopes become more powerful, the universe must expand 
in order to escape them.” Now, you will say this is sub- 
jective idealism in a new disguise. This is Bishop 
Berkeley all over again saying that we create the universe 
out of our own minds. Well, unfortunately it is true, if 
you take mind to mean “physical brain” and “physical 
nervous system.” If you listen to Karl Pribram’s lectures 
at Stanford, you will find him saying the same thing in 
neurological terms. It is the structure of your nervous 
system that causes you to see the world that you see. Or 
read J. Z. Young’s book Doubt and Certainty in Science, 
where all this is very clearly explained. It is the same old 
problem in new language, only it is a more complicated 
language, a more sophisticated, up-to-date, scientifically 
respectable language. It is the same old thing, but that is 
yoga. Yoga, or union, means that you do it. In a sense, 
you are God, tat tvam asi, as the Upanishads say, “You 
are making it.” 

So many spiritual teachers and gurus will look at 
their disciples and say, “I am God. I have realized.” But 
the important thing is that you are realized. Whether | 
am or not is of no consequence to you whatsoever. | 
could get up and say “I am realized,” and put on a tur- 
ban and yellow robe and say “Come and have darshan, 


CHAPTER FIVE 


I’m guru, and you need the grace of guru in order to 
realize,” and it would be a wonderful hoax. It would be 
like picking your pockets and selling you your own 
watch. But the point is, you are realized. Now, what are 
we saying when we say that? We are obviously saying 
something very important, but alas and alack, there is no 
way of defining it, nor going any further into words 
about it. When a philosopher hears such a statement as 
tat tvam asi, “You are it,” or “There is only the eternal 
now,” the philosopher says, “Yes, but I don’t see why 
you are so excited about it. What do you mean by that?” 

Yet he asks that question because he wants to con- 
tinue in a word game; he doesn’t want to go on into an 
experiential dimension. He wants to go on arguing, 
because that is his trip, and all these great mystical state- 
ments mean nothing whatsoever. They are ultimate 
statements, just as the trees, clouds, mountains, and stars 
have no meaning, because they are not words. Words 
have meaning because they’re symbols, because they 
point to something other than themselves. 

But the stars, like music, have no meaning. Only 
bad music has any meaning. Classical music never has a 
meaning, and to understand it you must simply listen to 
it and observe its beautiful patterns and go into its com- 
plexity. 

When your mind, that is to say, your verbal sys- 
tems, gets to the end of its tether and it arrives at the 
meaningless state, this is the critical point. The method 
of jnana yoga is to exercise one’s intellect to its limits so 
that you get to the point where you have no further 
questions to ask. You can do this in philosophical study 
if you have the right kind of teacher who shows you that 
all philosophical opinions whatsoever are false, or at 
least, if not false, extremely partial. You can see how the 
nominalists cancel out the realists, how the determinists 


INTELLECTUAL YOGA 


cancel out the free willists, how the behaviorists cancel 
out the vitalists, and then how the logical positivists can- 
cel out almost everybody. Then someone comes in and 
says, “Yes, but the logical positivists have concealed 
metaphysics,” which indeed they do, and then you get in 
an awful tangle and there is nothing for you to believe. 

If you get seriously involved in the study of theolo- 
gy and comparative religion, exactly the same thing can 
happen to you. You cannot even be an atheist anymore; 
that is also shown to be a purely mythological position. 
So you feel a kind of intellectual vertigo that is as in a 
Zen Buddhist poem, “Above, not a tile to cover the 
head. Below, not an inch of ground to stand on.” Where 
are you then? 

Of course, you are where you always were. You 
have discovered that you are it, and that is very uncom- 
fortable because you can’t grab it. I have discovered that 
whatever it is that I am is not something inside my 
head—it is just as much out there as it is in here. But 
whatever it is, I cannot get hold of it, and that gives you 
the heebie-jeebies. You get butterflies in the stomach, 
anxiety traumas, and all kinds of things. This was all 
explained by Shankara, the great Hindu commentator 
on the Upanishads and a great master of the non-dualis- 
tic doctrine of the universe, when he said, “That which 
knows, which is in all beings the knower, is never an 
object of its own knowledge.” Therefore, to everyone 
who is in quest of the supreme kick, the great experi- 
ence, the vision of God, whatever you want to call it— 
liberation—when you think that you are not it, any old 
guru can sell you on a method to find it. That may not 
be a bad thing for him to do, because a clever guru is a 
person who leads you on. “Here kitty, kitty, kitty, kitry. 
I’ve got something very good to show you. Yes. You just 
wait. Oh, but you've gor to go through a lot of stages 


| 69 


CHAPTER FIVE 


yet.” You say “Ah, ah, ah, ah. Can I get that? Oh, I want 
to get that.” And all the time it’s you. 

I was talking to a Zen master the other day, and 
he said, “Mmmmm. You should be my disciple.” I 
looked at him and said, “Who was Buddha’s teacher?” 
He looked at me in a very odd way, and he burst into 
laughter and gave me a piece of clover. So long as you 
can be persuaded that there is something more that you 
ought to be than you are, you have divided yourself 
from reality, from the universe, from God, or whatever 
you want to call that, the tat in tat tvam asi. You will 
find constantly, if you are interested in anything like 
this—in psychoanalysis, in Gestalt therapy, in sensitivity 
training, in any kind of yoga or what have you—that 
there will be that funny sensation of what I will call 
“spiritual greed” that can be aroused by somebody indi- 
cating to you, “Mmmn,, there are still higher stages for 
you to attain. You should meet my guru.” So, you might 
say, “Now, to be truly realized you have to get to the 
point where you’re not seeking anymore.” Then you 
begin to think, “We will now be non-seekers,” like disci- 
ples of Krishnamurti, who because he says he doesn’t 
read any spiritual books can’t read anything but mystery 
stories, and become spiritually unspiritual. Well, you 
find that, too, is what is called in Zen “legs on a snake.” 
It is irrelevant. You don’t need not to seek, because you 
don’t need anything. It is like crawling into a hole and 
pulling the hole in after you. 

The great master of this technique was a Buddhist 
scholar who lived about 200 a.D. called Nagarjuna. He 
invented a whole dialectic, and he created madhyamaka, 
where the leader of the students would simply destroy all 
their ideas, absolutely abolish their philosophical 
notions, and they’d get the heebie-jeebies. He didn’t have 
the heebie-jeebies. He seemed perfectly relaxed in not 


INTELLECTUAL YOGA 


having any particular point of view. They said, 
“Teacher, how can you stand it? We have to have some- 
thing to hang on to.” “Who does? Who are you?” And 
eventually you discover, of course, that it is not neces- 
sary to hang on to or rely on anything. There is nothing 
to rely on, because you’re it. It is like asking the ques- 
tion, “Where is the universe?” By that I mean the whole 
universe—whereabouts is it in space? Everything in it is 
falling around everything else, but there’s no concrete 
floor underneath for the thing to crash on. You can 
think of infinite space if you like—you don’t have to 
think of curved space, the space that goes out and out 
and out forever and ever and has no end: What is that? 
Of course, it is you. What else could it be? The universe 
is delightfully arranged so that as it looks at itself, in 
order not to be one-sided and prejudiced, it looks at 
itself from an uncountable number of points of view. We 
thus avoid solipsism, as if I were to have the notion that 
it is only me that is really here, and you are all in my 
dream. Of course, that point of view cannot really be 
disputed except by imagining a conference of solipsists 
arguing as to which one of them was the one that was 
really there. 

Now, if you understand what I am saying by using 
your intelligence, and then take the next step and say, “I 
understood it now, but I didn’t feel it,” then next I raise 
the question, “Why do you want to feel it?” You say, “I 
want something more,” but that is again spiritual greed, 
and you can only say that because you didn’t understand 
it. There is nothing to pursue, because you are it. You 
always were it, and to put it in Christian terms or Jewish 
terms, if you don’t know that you are God from the 
beginning, what happens is that you try to become God 
by force. Therefore you become violent and obstreper- 
ous and this, that, and the other. All our violence, all our 


[J 


CHAPTER FIVE 


competitiveness, all our terrific anxiety to survive is 
because we didn’t know from the beginning that we 
were it. 

Well, then you would say, “If only we did know 
from the beginning,” as in fact you did when you were a 
baby. But then everybody says, “Well, nothing will ever 
happen.” But it did happen, didn’t it? And some of it is 
pretty messy. Some people say, “Well, take the Hindus. 
It is basic to Hindu religion that we are all God in dis- 
guise, and that the world is an illusion.” All that is a sort 
of half-truth, but if that is the case—if really awakened 
Hindus by the knowledge of their union with the god- 
head would simply become inert, why then Hindu 
music, the most incredibly complex, marvelous tech- 
nique? When they sit and play, they laugh at each other. 
They are enjoying themselves enormously with very 
complicated musical games. But when you go to the 
symphony everybody is dressed in evening dress and 
with the most serious expressions. When the orchestra 
gets up, the audience sits down, and it is like a kind of 
church. There is none of that terrific zest, where the 
drummer, the tabla player, laughs at the sarod player as 
they compete with each other in all kinds of marvelous 
improvisations. So, if you do find out, by any chance, 
who you really are, instead of becoming merely lazy, you 
start laughing. And laughing leads to dancing, and danc- 
ing needs music, and we can play with each other for a 
change. 


INTRODUCTION 
to BUDDHISM 


CHAPTER SIX 


‘ 
he idea of a yana, or vehicle, comes from the 
basic notion or image of Buddhism as a raft 
for crossing a river. This shore is ordinary 
everyday consciousness such as we have, 

mainly the consciousness of being an ego or a sensitive 

mind locked up inside a mortal body—the consciousness 
of being you in particular and nobody else. The other 
shore is release, or nirvana, a word that means literally 

“blow out,” as one says, whew, in heaving a sigh of 

relief. Nirvana is never, never to be interpreted as a state 

of extinction or a kind of consciousness in which you are 
absorbed into an infinitely formless, luminous ocean that 
could best be described as purple Jell-O, but kind of 


CHAPTER SIX 


spiritual. Horrors! It is not meant to be that at all. 
Nirvana has many senses, but the primary meaning of it 
is that it is this everyday life, just as we have it now, but 
seen and felt in a completely different way. Buddhism is 
called in general a dharma, and this word is often mis- 
translated as “the law.” It is better translated as “the 
” and still better translated as “the method.” 
The dharma was formulated originally by the Buddha, 
who was the son of a north Indian raja living very close 
to Nepal who was thriving shortly after 600 B.c. The 
word buddha is a title. The proper name of this individ- 
ual was Gautama Siddhartha, and the word buddha 
means “the awakened one,” from the Sanskrit root 
buddh, which means “to wake” or “to know.” So, we 
could say buddha means “the man who woke up.” The 
Buddha was a very skillful psychologist, and he is in a 
way the first psychotherapist in history, a man of 
tremendous understanding of the wiles and the devious- 
ness of the human mind. 

Buddhism is made to be easily understood. 
Everything is numbered so that you can remember it, 
and the bases of Buddhism are what are called the four 
noble truths. The first one is the truth about suffering, 
the second is the truth about the cause of suffering, the 
third is the truth about the ceasing of suffering, and the 
fourth is the truth about the way to the ceasing of suffer- 
ing. So let’s go back to the beginning—suffering. The 
Sanskrit word is dubkha. It means suffering in the widest 
possible sense, but “chronic suffering” or “chronic frus- 


doctrine,’ 


tration” is probably as good a translation as any. 
Buddhism says the life of mankind and of animals— 
indeed also of angels, if you believe in angels—is charac- 
terized by chronic frustration. And so, that constitutes a 
problem. If any one of you says, “I have a problem”— 
well, I don’t suppose you would be here if you didn’t in 


INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHISM 


some way have a problem—that is duhkha. Now, the 
next thing is the cause of it. The cause of it is called 
trishna. Trishna is a Sanskrit word that is the root of our 
word thirst, but means more exactly “craving,” “clutch- 
ing,” or “desiring.” Because of craving or clutching we 
create suffering, but in turn, this second truth is that 
behind trishna there lies another thing called igno- 
rance—avidya, or “nonvisioned.” Vid in Sanskrit is the 
root of the Latin videre and of our vision. And a in front 
of the word means “non.” So, avidya is not-seeing, igno- 
rance, or better, igrorance, because our mind as it func- 
tions consciously is a method of attending to different 
and particular areas of experience, one after another, 
one at a time. 

When you focus your consciousness on a particu- 
lar area, you ignore everything else. That is why to know 
is at the same time to ignore, and because of that, there 
arises trishna, or craving. Why? Because if you ignore 
what you really know, you come to imagine that you are 
separate from the rest of the universe, and that you are 
alone, and therefore you begin to crave or to thirst. You 
develop an anxiety to survive, because you think if you 
are separate, if you are not the whole works, you’re 
going to die. Actually, you’re not going to die at all. You 
are simply going to stop doing one thing and start doing 
something else. 

When you die in the ordinary way, you just stop 
doing this thing, in this case called Alan Watts, but you 
do something else later. And there is nothing to worry 
about at all. Only when you are entirely locked up in the 
illusion that you are only this do you begin to be fright- 
ened and anxious, and that creates thirst. So, if you can 
get rid of ignorance (ignorance) and widen your mind 
out so as to see the other side of the picture, then you 
can stop craving. That does not mean to say you won't 


Fas 


CHAPTER SIX 


enjoy your dinner anymore, and that it won’t be nice to 
make love, or anything like that. It doesn’t mean that at 
all. It means that enjoying your dinner and making love, 
and generally enjoying the senses and all of experience, 
only become an obstacle to you if you cling to them in 
order to save yourself. However, if you do not need to 
save yourself, you can enjoy life just as much as ever: 
you don’t have to be a puritan. 

So, then, that is the state of letting go, instead of 
clinging to everything. Supposing you are in business 
and you have to make money to keep a family support- 
ed—that is the thing to do, but don’t let it get you down. 
Do it, in what the Hindus call nishkama karma. 
Nishkama means “passionless” and karma means 
“activity.” That means doing all the things that one 
would do in life, one’s business, one’s occupation, but 
doing it without taking it seriously. Do it as a game, and 
then everybody who depends on you will like it much 
better. If you take it seriously, they will be feeling guilty, 
because they will say, “Oh dear, Papa absolutely knocks 
himself out to work for us,” and they become miserable. 
They go on, and they live their lives out of a sense of 
duty, which is a dreadful thing to do. So, that is nirvana, 
to live in a let-go way. 

The fourth noble truth describes the way or the 
method of realizing nirvana, called the noble eightfold 
path. The eightfold path is a series of eight human activi- 
ties, such as understanding or view, effort, vocation or 
occupation, speaking, conduct, and so forth, and they 
are all prefaced by the Sanskrit word samyak, which is 
very difficult to translate. Most people translate it as 
“right” in the sense of correct, but this is an incomplete 
translation. The root sam in Sanskrit is the same as our 
word sum through the Latin summa. The sum of things 
means completion, but it also conveys the sense of bal- 


INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHISM 


anced or “middle-wayed.” Buddhism is called the 
Middle Way, and we'll find out a great deal about that 
later. 

Every Buddhist who belongs to the Theravada [or 
Hinayana] school in the south expresses the fact that he 
is a Buddhist by reciting a certain formula called tisarana 
and pancha-sila. I am talking Pali now, not Sanskrit. 
Tisarana means the three refuges, and pancha-sila means 
“the five precepts.” 


Buddham saddanam gacchame 
Dharmam saddanam gacchame 
Sangam saddanam gacchame 


That means “I take refuge in Buddha; | take refuge 
in the method, the dharma; I take refuge in the sangha” 
(which means the fraternity of the followers of Buddha). 
He then goes on to take the five precepts: “I promise to 
abstain from taking life,” “I promise to abstain from 
taking what is not given,” “I promise to abstain from 
exploiting my passions,” “I promise to abstain from 
false speech,” and “I promise to abstain from getting 
intoxicated” by a list of various boozes. 

Now, every Buddhist in the Southern school says, 
“Mahayanists have a different formula.” This is the 
method, and the method, the dharma, is therefore 
a moral law, but it isn’t just like the Ten Command- 
ments—it is quite different. You do not take the five 
precepts in obedience to a royal edict. You take them 
upon yourself, and there is a very special reason for 
doing so. How can you fulfill the precept not to take 
life? Every day you eat. Even if you’re a vegetarian, you 
must take life. This is absolutely fundamental to an 
understanding of Buddhism. Buddhism is a method—it 
is not a doctrine. Buddhism is a dialogue, and what it 
states at the beginning is not necessarily what it would 


CHAPTER SIX 


state at the end. The method of Buddhism is, first of all, 
a relationship between a teacher and a student. The stu- 
dent creates the teacher by raising a problem and going 
to someone about it. 

Now, if he chooses wisely, he will find out if there 
is a buddha around to use as the teacher, and then he 
says to the buddha, “My problem is that I suffer, and I 
want to escape from suffering.” So, the buddha replies, 
“Suffering is caused by desire, by trishna, by craving. If 
you can stop desiring then you will solve your problem. 
Go away and try to stop desiring.” He then gives him 
some methods of how to practice meditation and to 
make his mind calm in order to see if he can stop desir- 
ing. The student goes away and practices this. Then he 
comes back to the teacher and says, “But I can’t stop 
desiring not to desire. What am I to do about that?” So 
the teacher says, “Try, then, to stop desiring not to 
desire.” 

Now, you can see where this is going to end up. 
He might put it in this way: “All right, if you can’t com- 
pletely stop desiring, do a middle way. That is to say, 
stop desiring as much as you can stop desiring, and 
don’t desire to stop any more desire than you can stop.” 
Do you see where that’s going to go? He keeps coming 
back because what the teacher has done in saying “Stop 
desiring” is he has given his student what in Zen 
Buddhism is called a koan. This is a Japanese word that 
means “a meditation problem,” or more strictly, the 
same thing that case means in law, because koans are 
usually based on anecdotes and incidents of the old mas- 
ters—cases and precedents. But the function of a koan is 
a challenge for meditation. Who is it that desires not to 
desire? Who is it that wants to escape from suffering? 

Here we get into a methodological difference 
between Hinduism and Buddhism on the question of 


INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHISM 


“Who are you?” The Hindu says, “Your self is called the 
atman, the self. Now, strive to know the self. Realize I 
am not my body, because I can be aware of my body. I 
am not my thoughts, because I can be aware of my 
thoughts. I am not my feelings for the same reason. I am 
not my mind, because I can be aware of it. Therefore, I 
really am other than and above, transcending all these 
finite aspects of me.” 

Now, the Buddhist has a critique of that. He says, 
“Why do you try to escape from yourself as a body?” 
The reason is your body falls apart and you want to 
escape from it. “Why do you want to disidentify yourself 
from your emotions?” The reason is that your emotions 
are uncomfortable and you want to escape from them. 
You don’t want to have to be afraid. You don’t want to 
have to be in grief or anger, and even love is too much— 
it involves you in suffering, because if you love someone 
you are a hostage to fortune. So, the Buddha says the 
reason why you believe you are the atman, the eternal 
self, which in turn is the brahman, the self of the whole 
universe, is that you don’t want to lose your damn ego. 
If you can fix your ego and put it in the safe-deposit box 
of the Lord, you think you’ve still got yourself, but you 
haven’t really let go. So, the Buddha said there isn’t any 
atman: he taught the doctrine of anatman, or nonself. 
Your ego is unreal, and as a matter of fact, there is noth- 
ing you can cling to—no refuge, really. Just let go. There 
is no salvation, no safety, nothing anywhere, and you see 
how clever that was. What he was really saying is that 
any atman you could cling to or think about or believe 
in wouldn’t be the real one. 

This is the accurate sense of the original docu- 
ments of the Buddha’s teaching. If you carefully go 
through it, that is what he is saying. He is not saying 
that there isn’t the atman or the brahman, he's saying 


79 ' 


CHAPTER SIX 


anyone you could conceive wouldn’t be it. Anyone you 
believed in would be the wrong one, because believing is 
still clinging. There is no salvation through believing, 
there is only salvation through knowledge, and even 
then the highest knowledge is nonknowledge. 

Here he agrees with the Hindus, who say in the 
Kena Upanishad, “If you think that you know Brahman, 
you do not know him. But if you know that you do not 
know the Brahman, you truly know.” Why? It is very 
simple. If you really are it, you don’t need to believe in 
it, and you don’t need to know it, just as your eyes don’t 
need to look at themselves. That is the difference of 
method in Buddhism. Now, understand “method” here. 
The method is a dialogue, and the so-called teachings of 
Buddhism are the first opening gambits in the dialogue. 
When they say you cannot understand Buddhism out of 
books, the reason is that the books only give you the 
opening gambits. Then, having read the book, you have 
to go on with the method. Now, you can go on with the 
method without a formal teacher. That is to say, you can 
conduct the dialogue with yourself or with life. You 
have to explore and experiment on such things as 
“Could one possibly not desire?” “Could one possibly 
concentrate the mind perfectly?” “Could one possibly do 
this, that, and the other?” And you have to work with it 
so that you understand the later things that come after 
trying these experiments. These later things are the heart 
of Buddhism. 

So then, shortly after the Buddha’s time, the prac- 
tice of Buddhism continued as a tremendous ongoing 
dialogue among the various followers, and eventually 
they established great universities, such as there was at 
Nalanda in northern India. A discourse was going on 
there, and if you looked at it superficially, you might 
think it was nothing but an extremely intellectual bull 


INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHISM 


session where philosophers were outwitting each other. 
Actually, the process that was going on was this: the 
teacher or guru in every case was examining students as 
to their beliefs and theories and was destroying their 
beliefs by showing that any belief that you would pro- 
pose, any idea about yourself or about the universe that 
you want to cling to and make something of—use for a 
crutch, a prop, or a security—could be demolished by 
the teacher. This is how the dialogue works, until you 
are left without a thing to hang on to. Any religion you 
might propose, even atheism, would be torn up. They 
would destroy agnosticism and any kind of belief. They 
were experts in demolition, so they finally got you to the 
point where you had nothing left to hang on to. Well, at 
that point you are free, because you’re it. Once you are 
hanging on to things, you put “it” somewhere else, 
something “I” can grab. Even when you think, as an 
idea, “Then I’m it,” you are still hanging on to that, and 
so they are going to knock that one down. 

So, when you are left without anything at all, 
you’ve seen the point. That’s the method of the dialogue, 
essentially. That is the dharma, and all Buddhists make 
jokes about this. Buddha says in The Diamond Sutra, 
“When I attained complete, perfect, unsurpassed awak- 
ening, I didn’t attain anything.” Because to use a 
metaphor that is used in the scriptures, it’s like using an 
empty fist to deceive a child. You say to a child, “What 
have I got here?” The child gets interested immediately 
and wants to find out, and you hide it. The child climbs 
all over you and can’t get at your fist. Finally, you do let 
him get it, and there’s nothing in it. Now, that is the 
method again. “Teacher, you have the great secret, and | 
know you have it. There must be such a secret some- 
where somebody knows.” And that secret is, “How do | 
get one up on the universe?” I don’t know that I'm it, so 


Ter 


CHAPTER SIX 


I’m trying to conquer it. So the teacher says, “Keep try- 
ing,” and he gets you going and going and going and 
going—which shows you that in the end there is nothing 
to get, there never was any need to get anything and 
never was any need to realize anything, because you’re 
it. And the fact that you think you’re not is part of the 
game. So don’t worry. 

Many of the problems that are now being dis- 
cussed by modern logicians are, unbeknownst to them, 
already in the ancient Indian books: problems of seman- 
tics, of meaning, and of the nature of time and memory. 
All these were discussed with very, very meticulous 
scholarly sophistication, so it is my opinion that this was 
a very fertile period of human history, and that the phi- 
losophy in which it eventually emerged—the philosophy 
of Mahayana Buddhism—is as yet the most mature and 
really intelligent theory of human life and of the cosmos 
that man has ever devised. It is characteristic of this 
point of view that it adheres to the Middle Way, but the 
Middle Way does not mean moderation. It means the 
bringing together of opposites, of what we might call in 
our world spirit and matter, mind and body, mysticism 
and sensuality, unity and multiplicity, conformity and 
individualism. All these things are marvelously wedded 
together in the world view of Mahayana. 

Fundamental to Mahayana Buddhism is the idea 
of what is called the bodhisattva. A bodhisattva is a per- 
son who has as his essence (sattva), bodhi (awakening). 
It is usually used to mean a potential buddha, someone 
who is, as it were, just about to become a buddha. That 
was the original sense, and part of the Pali canon is a 
book called the Jatakamala, the tales of the Buddha’s 
previous lives—how he behaved when he was an animal 
and as a man long before he became Buddha. In all these 
stories, he is represented as sacrificing himself for the 


INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHISM 


benefit of other beings, but since he had not yet become 
a fully fledged buddha, he is called in these stories a bod- 
hisattva. That really means “a potential buddha,” but 
the point is that as a potential buddha, as a bodhisattva, 
he is always involved in situations where he is feeding 
himself to the hungry tigers and so on. 

Now, in the course of time, the term bodhisattva 
underwent a transformation. A bodhisattva matures and 
becomes a buddha, and what does that mean popularly? 
It means that whoever is fully awakened to the way 
things are is delivered from any necessity to be involved 
in the world anymore. In other words, you can go on to 
a transcendent level of being where time is abolished, 
where all times are now, where there are no problems, 
where there is perpetual eternal peace—nirvana in the 
sense of the word parinirvana, meaning beyond nirvana, 
super nirvana. So, if you are fed up with this thing and 
you don’t want to play the game of hide-and-seek any- 
more, you can go into the parinirvana state and be in 
total serenity. 

However, and again I am talking in the language 
of popular Buddhism, a person who stands on the 
threshold of that peace can turn:back and say, “I won’t 
be a buddha, I’ll be a bodhisattva. I won’t make the final 
attainment, because I would like to go back into the 
world of manifestation (called samsara) and work for 
their liberation.” So, then, when a Mahayana Buddhist 
does his formula for puja, he says, “Sentient beings are 
numberless, I take a vow to save them. Deluding pas- 
sions are inexhaustible, | take a vow to destroy them. 
The gates of the method, the dharma, are manifold, I 
take a vow to enter them. The Buddha way is supreme, | 
take a vow to complete it.” Of course all this is impossi- 
ble. Numberless sentient beings, because they are num- 
berless, can never be delivered. Deluding passions which 


83 


CHAPTER SIX 


are inexhaustible can never be eradicated. So, this then is 
their formula. 

The bodhisattva who returns into the world and 
becomes involved again is in fact regarded as a superior 
kind of being to the one who gets out of it. The person 
who gets out of the rat race and enters into eternal peace 
is called pratyeka-buddha, which means “private bud- 
dha,” a buddha who does not teach or help others, and 
in Mahayana Buddhism that is almost a term of abuse. 
Pratyeka-buddha is a class with unbelievers, heretics, 
infidels, and fools, but the great thing is the bodhisattva. 

All beings are thought of in popular Buddhism as 
constantly reincarnating again and again into the round 
of existence, helplessly, because they still desire. They 
are, therefore, drawn back into the cycle. The bodhisatt- 
va goes back into the cycle with his eyes wide open, vol- 
untarily, and allows himself to be sucked in. This is 
normally interpreted as an act of supreme compassion, 
and bodhisattvas can assume any guise. They can get 
furiously angry if necessary in order to discourage evil 
beings, and could even assume the role of a prostitute 
and live that way so as to deliver beings at that level of 
life. They could become an animal, an insect, a maggot, 
or anything else, and all deliberately and in full con- 
sciousness to carry on the work of the deliverance of all 
beings. Now, that is the way the popular mind under- 
stands it. 

Therefore, the bodhisattvas are all revered, respect- 
ed, worshiped, and looked upon as we look upon God in 
the West—as saviors, as the Christian looks upon Jesus. 
Underneath this myth there is a profound philosophical 
idea going back to the Hindu philosophy of advaita and 
non-duality—namely, that the apparent dualism of “I” 
and “thou,” of the knower and the known, the subject 
and the object, is unreal. So, also, the apparent duality 


INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHISM 


between maya, the world illusion, and reality is unreal. 
The apparent duality or difference between the enlight- 
ened and the ignorant person is unreal. So, the apparent 
duality of bondage and deliverance, or liberation, is 
unreal. The perfectly wise man is the one who realizes 
vividly that the ideal place is the place where you are. 
This is an impossible thing to put in words. The nearest I 
could get to it would be to say that if you could see this 
moment that you need nothing beyond this moment— 
now, sitting here, irrespective of anything I might be say- 
ing to you, of any ideas you might have rattling around 
in your brains—here and now is the absolute “which in 
which there is no whicher.” Only, we prevent ourselves 
from seeing this because we are always saying, “Well, 
there ought to be something more. Aren’t I missing 
something somehow?” But nobody sees it. 

Now then, the most far-out form of Mahayana 
Buddhism is called the Pure Land school, Jodo-shin-shu. 
Jodo means “pure land” and shin-shu means “true sect.” 
This is based on the idea that there was in immeasurably 
past ages a great bodhisattva called Amitabha, and he 
made a vow that he would never become a buddha 
unless any being who repeated his name would automat- 
ically at death be born into the Pure Land over which he 
presides—that is, a kind of paradise. He did become a 
buddha, and so the vow works. All you have to do is 
repeat the name of Amitabha, and this will assure that 
without any further effort on your part you will be 
reborn into his western paradise when you die, and in 
that paradise, becoming a buddha is a cinch. There are 
no problems there. The western paradise is a level of 
consciousness, but it is represented in fact as a glorious 
place. You can see the pictures of it in Koya-san, won- 
derful pictures where the Buddha Amitabha is actually a 
Persian figure related to Ahura Mazda, which means 


[ 85 


CHAPTER SIX 


“boundless light.” The Daibutsu of Kamakura, that 
enormous bronze buddha in the open air, is Amitabha. 

So, there he sits surrounded with his court, and 
this court is full of upasaras, beautiful girls playing lutes. 
And as you were born into the paradise, what happens 
when you die is you discover yourself inside a lotus, and 
the lotus goes pop, and there you find yourself sitting, 
coming out of the water, and here on the clouds in front 
of you are the upasaras sitting, strumming their lutes, 
with the most sensuous, beautiful faces. 

Now, to get this, all you have to do is say the 
name of Amitabha. The formula is Namu Amida butsu, 
and you can say this very fast, “Namu Amida butsu, 
Namu Amida butsu, Numanda, Numanda, Numanda.” 
When said many, many times, you are quite sure it is 
going to happen. 

Actually, you only have to say it once, and you 
mustn’t make any effort to gain this reward, because 
that would be spiritual pride. Your karma, your bad 
deeds, your awful past, is so bad that anything good you 
try to do is done with a selfish motive, and therefore 
doesn’t effect your deliverance. Therefore, the only way 
to get deliverance is to put faith in the power of this 
Amitabha Buddha and to accept it as a free gift, and to 
take it by doing the most absurd things—by saying 
“Namu Amida butsu.” Don’t even worry whether you 
have to have faith in this, because trying to have faith is 
also spiritual pride. It doesn’t matter whether you have 
faith or whether you don’t, the thing works anyway, so 
just say “Namu Amida butsu.” Now, that is the most 
popular form of Buddhism in Asia. 

The two most vast temples in Kyoto, the initiant 
Higashi Honganji temples, represent this sect, and every- 
body loves Amitabha. Amida, as they call him in 
Japan—boundless light, infinite Buddha of Compassion, 


INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHISM 


is sitting there with this angelic’ expression on his face: 
“It’s all right, boys, just say my name, it’s all you have to 
do.” So when we add together prayer wheels, Namu 
Amida butsu (the Japanese call it Nembutsu) as the 
means of remembering Buddha, and all these things 
where you just have to say an abbreviated prayer and 
the work is done for you, wouldn’t we Westerners, espe- 
cially if we are Protestants, say, “Oh, what a scoundrelly 
thing that is, what an awful degradation of religion, 
what an avoidance of the moral challenge and the effort 
and everything that is required. Is this what the bod- 
hisattva doctrine of infinite compassion deteriorates 
into?” 

Now, there is a profound aspect to all that. Just as 
there is desperation and despair, nirvana desperation 
and despair of the horrors, so there are two ways of 
looking at this “nothing to do, no effort to make” idea, 
depending completely on the savior. For, who is 
Amitabha? Popularly, Amitabha is somebody else. He is 
some great compassionate being who looks after you. 
Esoterically, Amitabha is your own nature; Amitabha is 
your real self, the inmost boundless light that is the root 
and ground of your own conscidusness. You don’t need 
to do anything to be that. You are that, and saying 
Nembutsu is simply a symbolical way of pointing out 
that you don’t have to become this, because you are it. 

And Nembutsu, therefore, in its deeper side builds 
up a special kind of sage, which they called »yoko-nin. 
Myoko-nin in Japanese means “a marvelous fine man,” 
but the myoko-nin is a special type of personality who 
corresponds in the West to the holy fool in Russian spiri- 
tuality, or to something like the Franciscan in Catholic 
spirituality. 

I will tell you some myoko-nin stories because that 
is the best way to indicate their character. One day a 


87 | 


CHAPTER SIX 


myoko-nin was traveling and he stopped in a Buddhist 
temple overnight. He went up to the sanctuary where 
they have big cushions for the priests to sit on, and he 
arranged the cushions in a pile on the floor and went to 
sleep on them. In the morning the priest came in and 
saw the tramp sleeping and said, “What are you doing 
here desecrating the sanctuary by sleeping on the cush- 
ions and so on, right in front of the altar?” And the 
myoko-nin looked at him in astonishment and said, 
“Why, you must be a stranger here, you can’t belong to 
the family.” 

In Japanese when you want to say that a thing is 
just the way it is, you call it sonomama. There is a haiku 
poem that says, “Weeds in the rice field, cut them down, 
sonomama, fertilizer.” Cut the weeds, leave them exactly 
where they are, and they become fertilizer, or sonoma- 
ma. And sonomama means “reality,” “just the way it 
is,” “just like that.” Now, there is a parallel expression, 
konomama. Konomama means “I, just as I am.” Just lit- 
tle me, like that, with no frills, no pretense, except that I 
naturally have some pretense. That is part of konoma- 
ma. The myoko-nin is the man who realizes that “I, 
konomama—just as I am—am Buddha, delivered by 
Amitabha because Amitabha is my real nature.” If you 
really know that, that makes you a myoko-nin, but be 
aware of the fact that you could entirely miss the point 
and become a monkey instead by saying, “I’m all right 
just as I am, and therefore I’m going to rub it in—I’m 
going to be going around parading my unregenerate 
nature, because this is Buddha, too.” The fellow who 
does that doesn’t really know that it’s okay. He’s doing 
too much, and he is coming on too strong. The other 
people, who are always beating themselves, are making 
the opposite error. The Middle Way, right down the cen- 
ter, is where you don’t have to do a thing to justify your- 


INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHISM 


self, and you don’t have to justify not justifying yourself. 
So, there is something quite fascinating and tricky in this 
doctrine of the great bodhisattva Amitabha, who saves 
you just as you are, who delivers you from bondage just 
as you are. You only have to say “Namu Amida butsu.” 
It is fascinating, but that is the principle of 
Mahayana, and your acceptance of yourself as you are is 
the same thing as coming to live now, as you are. Now is 
as you are, in the moment, but you can’t come to now, 
and you can’t accept yourself on purpose, because the 
moment you do that you’re doing something unneces- 
sary. You are doing a little bit more. That is what they 
call in Zen putting legs on a snake or a beard on a 
eunuch. You’ve overdone it. How can you neither do 
something about it nor do nothing about it as if that was 
something you had to do? This is the same problem as 
originally posed in Buddhism: How do you cease from 
desiring? When I try to cease from desiring, I am desir- 
ing not to desire. Do you see this? All of this is what is 
called upaya, or skillful device, to slow you down so that 
you can really be here. By seeing that there is nowhere 
else you can be, you don’t have to come to now. Where 
else can you be? It isn’t a task: or a contest—what the 
Greeks called agone. There is nowhere else to be, so they 
say, “Nirvana is no other than samsara.” This shore is 
really the same as the other shore. As the Lankavatara- 
sutra says, “If you look to try to get nirvana in order to 


escape suffering and being reborn, that’s not nirvana at 
all.” 


THE 
TAOIST WAY 


or KARMA 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


he philosophy of the Tao is one of the two 
great principle components of Chinese 
thought. There are, of course, quite a num- 
ber of forms of Chinese philosophy, but 
there are two great currents that have thoroughly mold- 
ed the culture of China—Taoism and Confucianism— 
and they play a curious game with each other. Let me 
start by saying something about Confucianism originat- 
ing with K’ung Fu-tzu or Confucius, who lived a little 
after 630 B.c. He is often supposed to have been a con- 
temporary of Lao-tzu, who is the supposed founder of 
the Taoist way. It seems more likely, however, that Lao- 
tzu lived later than 400 B.c., according to most modern 


scholars. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


Confucianism is not a religion, it is a social ritual 
and a way of ordering society—so much so that the first 
great Catholic missionary to China, Matteo Ricci, who 
was a Jesuit, found it perfectly consistent with his 
Catholicism to participate in Confucian rituals. He saw 
them as something of a kind of national character, as 
one might pay respect to the flag or something like that 
in our own times. He found that Confucianism involved 
no conflict with Catholicism and no commitment to any 
belief or dogma that would be at variance with the 
Catholic faith. So, Confucianism is an. order of society 
and involves ideas of human relations, including the gov- 
ernment and the family. This order is based on the prin- 
ciple of what is called in Chinese ren, which is an 
extraordinarily interesting word. The word ren is often 
translated as “benevolence,” but that is not a good 
translation at all. This word means “human-hearted- 
ness” (that’s the nearest we can get to it in English), and 
it was regarded by Confucius as the highest of all 
virtues, but one that he always refused to define. It is 
above righteousness, justice, propriety, and other great 
Confucian virtues, and it involves the principle that 
human nature is a fundamentally good arrangement, 
including not only our virtuous side but also our pas- 
sionate side—our appetites and our waywardness. The 
Hebrews have a term that they call the yetzer ha-ra, 
which means “the wayward inclination,” or what I like 
to call the element of irreducible rascality that God put 
into all human beings because it was a good thing. It 
was good for humans to have these two elements in 
them. So, a truly human-hearted person is a gentleman 
with a slight touch of rascality, just as one has to have 
salt in a stew. 

Confucius said the goody-goodies are the thieves 
of virtue, meaning that to try to be wholly righteous is to 


THE TAO®OT WAY OF KARMA 


go beyond humanity and to be something that isn’t 
homan. So, this gives the Confucmn approach to life, 
justice, and all those sorts of things a kind of queer 
homor, a sort of “boys will be boys” attimde, which is 
nevertheless a very mature way of handling homan prob- 
lems. 

lt was, of course, for this reason that the Japanese 
Baddhist priests (especially Zen priests) who visited 
Chima to study Buddhism introduced Canfucranssm mrp 
Japan. Despite cereain limitadons that Confucianism 
has—and it always needs the Taoist philosophy as a 
qumurrtaboc—a has been one of the most successful 
pinlosophies in all hestory for cegnianan of governmen- 
tal and family relationships. Confucansm prescnhes all 
kinds of formal relationships—dinguiste, ceremonial, 
musical, in ciquenr, and in all che spheres of morals— 
and for this reason has always been cwitted by the 
Taoists for being unnararal Bot you need these rwo 
components, and they play agaist each other beautifully 
in Chinese soccty. 

Roughly speaking, the Canfucxan way of life is for 
people mvolved in the world. The Taotst way of life is 
for people who get disentangiéd. Now, as we know in 
our own modem ames, there are various ways of griing 
disentangjed from the regular lifestyle of the United 
Seres. If you want to go chrough the regular lifestyle of 
the Uuitrd Saares, you go to high school and college, and 
then you go ito a profession or a business. You own a 
standard house, raise a family, have a car or two, and do 
all char jazz Bat a lot of people don’t want co live that 
way, and there are lots of other ways of living bendes 
chat. 

So, you could say char those of us who go along 
with the pattern correspoad to the Canfuoam Those 
who are bohemians, bums, beamiks, or whatever, and 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


don’t correspond with the pattern, are more like the 
Taoists. Actually, in Chinese history, Taoism is a way of 
life for older people. Lao-tzu, the name given to the 
founder of Taoism, means “the old boy,” and the legend 
is that when he was born he already had a white beard. 

So, it is sort of like this: When you have con- 
tributed to society, contributed children and brought 
them up, and have assumed a certain role in social life, 
you then say, “Now it’s time for me to find out what it’s 
all about. Who am I ultimately, behind my outward per- 
sonality? What is the secret source of things?” The later 
half of life is the preeminently excellent time to find this 
out. It is something to do when you have finished with 
the family business. I am not saying that is a sort of 
unavoidable strict rule. Of course, one can study the Tao 
when very young, because it contains all kinds of secrets 
as to the performance of every kind of art, craft, busi- 
ness, or any occupation whatsoever. In China, in a way, 
it plays the role of a kind of safety valve for the more 
restrictive way of life that Confucianism prescribes. 
There is a sort of type in China who is known as “the 
Old Robe.” He is a sort of intellectual bum, often found 
among scholars, who is admired very much and is a type 
of character that had an enormous influence on the 
development of the ideals of Zen Buddhist life. He is one 
who goes with nature rather than against nature. 

First of all, I am going to address ideas that come 
strictly out of Lao-tzu’s book, the Tao Te Ching. Of 
course, the basis of the whole philosophy is the concep- 
tion of Tao. This word has many meanings, and the 
book of Lao-tzu starts out by saying that the Tao that 
can be spoken is not the eternal Tao. You cannot give 
all the meanings, because the word tao means both 
“the way or course of nature or of everything” and 
“to speak.” So, the actual opening phrase of the book, 


THE TAOIST WAY OF KARMA 


following this word tao, is a character that means “can 
” or something like “able.” So, according 
to its second meaning it is “the way that can be spoken, 
described, or uttered.” But it also means the way that 
can be “wayed,” although you would have to invent that 
word. The way that can be traveled, perhaps, is not the 
eternal way. In other words, there is no way of following 


be,” or “can,” 


the Tao; there is no recipe for it. I cannot give you any 
do-it-yourself instructions as to how it is done. It is like 
when Louis Armstrong was asked, “What is jazz?” He 
said, “If you have to ask, you don’t know.” Now that’s 
awkward, isn’t it? But we can gather what it is by 
absorbing certain atmospheres and attitudes connected 
with those who follow it. We can also gather what it is 
from the art, poetry, expressions, anecdotes, and stories 
that illustrate the philosophy of the way. 

So, this word then, tao, the “way or the course of 
things,” is not, as some Christian missionaries translated 
it, the Logos, taking as their point of departure the open- 
ing passage of Saint John’s Gospel, “In the beginning 
was the word.” If you look this up in a Chinese transla- 
tion of the Bible, it usually says, “In the beginning was 
the Tao. And the Tao was with God, and the Tao was 
God. The same was in the beginning with God. All 
things were made by it and without it was not anything 
made that was made.” So, they have substituted “Tao,” 
and that would have a very funny effect on a Chinese 
philosopher, because the idea of things being made by 
the Tao is absurd. The Tao is not a manufacturer, and it 
is not a governor. It does not rule, as it were, in the posi- 
tion of a king. Although the book Tao Te Ching is writ- 
ten for many purposes, one of its important purposes is 
as a manual of guidance for a ruler. What it tells him is, 
essentially, “Rule by not ruling. Don’t lord it over the 
people.” And so, Lao-tzu says, “The great Tao flows 


eed 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


everywhere, both to the left and to the right. It loves and 
nourishes all things, but does not lord it over them, and 
when good things are accomplished, it lays no claim to 
them.” In other words, the Tao doesn’t stand up and 
say, “I have made all of you. I have filled this earth with 
its beauty and glory. Fall down before me and worship.” 
The Tao, having done everything, always escapes and is 
not around to receive any thanks or acknowledgment, 
because it loves obscurity. As Lao-tzu said, “The Tao is 
like water. It always seeks the lowest level, which human 
beings abhor.” So, it is a very mysterious idea. 

Tao, then, is not really equivalent with any 
Western or Hindu idea of God, because God is always 
associated with being the Lord. Even in India, the 
Brahman is often called the Supreme Lord, although that 
is aterm more strictly applicable to Ishvara, the manifes- 
tation of Brahman in the form of a personal God. But 
the Lord Krishna’s song is the Bhagavad Gita, the “Song 
of the Lord,” and there is always the idea of the king 
and the ruler attached. This is not so in the Chinese Tao 
philosophy. The Tao is not something different from 
nature, ourselves, and our surrounding trees, waters, and 
air. The Tao is the way all that behaves. So, the basic 
Chinese idea of the universe is really that it is an organ- 
ism. As we shall see when we get on to the Chuang-tzu 
(which was written by Chuang-tzu), who is the sort of 
elaborator of Lao-tzu, he sees everything operating 
together so that you cannot find the controlling center 
anywhere, because there isn’t any. The world is a system 
of interrelated components, none of which can survive 
without the other, just as in the case of bees and flowers. 
You will never find bees in a place where there are not 
flowers, and you will never find flowers in a place where 
there are not bees or other insects that do the equivalent 
job. What that tells us, secretly, is that although bees 


THE TAOIST WAY OF KARMA 


and flowers look different from each other, they are 
inseparable. To use a very important Taoist expression, 
they arise mutually. “To be” and “not to be” mutually 
arise. This character is based on the picture of a plant, 
something that grows out of the ground. So, you could 
say, positive and negative, to be and not to be, yes and 
no, and light and dark arise mutually and come into 
being. There is no cause and effect; that is not the rela- 
tionship at all. It is like the egg and the hen. The bees 
and the flowers coexist in the same way as high and low, 
back and front, long and short, loud and soft—all those 
experiences are experienceable only in terms of their 
polar opposite. 

The Chinese idea of nature is that all the various 
species arise mutually because they interdepend, and this 
total system of interdependence is the Tao. It involves 
certain other things that go along with Tao, but this 
mutual arising is the key idea to the whole thing. If you 
want to understand Chinese and Oriental thought in 
general, it is the most important thing to grasp, because 
we think so much in terms of cause and effect. We think 
of the universe today in Aristotelian and Newtonian 
ways. According to that philosbphy the world is separat- 
ed. It is like a huge amalgamation of billiard balls, and 
they don’t move until struck by another or by a cue. So, 
everything is going tock, tock, tock, all over the place; 
one thing starts off another in a mechanical way. Of 
course, from the standpoint of twentieth-century science, 
we know perfectly well now that this is not the way it 
works. We know enough about relationships to see that 
the mechanical model that Newton devised was all right 
for certain purposes, but it breaks down now, because 
we understand relativity and we see how things go 
together in a kind of connected net, rather than in a 
chain of billiard balls banging each other around. 


[ 97 | 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


So, then, we move to a second term that is 
extremely important. The expression tzu-jan is the term 
that we translate as “nature” in Chinese, but this term 
expresses a whole point of view. It does not say nature, 
natura, which means, in a way, “a class of things.” It 
means, literally, “self so” or “what is so of itself.” It is 
what happens of itself, and thus, spontaneity. Early on 
in the Tao Te Ching, Lao-tzu says, “The Tao’s method is 
to be so of itself.” Now, we might translate that as 
“automatic” were it not that the word automatic has a 
mechanical flavor. Tzu-jan, or shizen in Japanese, means 
“spontaneous”: it happens as your heart beats. You 
don’t do anything about it, don’t force your heart to 
beat, and you don’t make it beat—it does it by itself. 
Now, figure a world in which everything happens by 
itself—it doesn’t have to be controlled, it is allowed. 
Whereas you might say the idea of God involves the con- 
trol of everything going on, the idea of the Tao is of the 
ruler who abdicates and trusts all the people to conduct 
their own affairs, to let it all “happen.” This doesn’t 
mean that there is not a unified organism and that every- 
thing is in chaos. It means that the more liberty and the 
more love you give, and the more you allow things in 
yourself and in your surroundings to take place, the 
more order you will have. 

It is generally believed in India that when a person 
sets out on the way of liberation, his first problem is to 
become free from his past karma. The word karma liter- 
ally means “action” or “doing” in Sanskrit, so that 
when we say something that happens to you is your 
karma, it is like saying in English, “It is your own 
doing.” In popular Indian belief, karma is a sort of built- 
in moral law or a law of retribution, such that all the 
bad things and all the good things you do have conse- 
quences that you have to inherit. So long as karmic 


THE TAOIST Way OF KARMA 


energy remains stored up, you have to work it out, and 
what the sage endeavors to do is a kind of action, which 
in Sanskrit is called nishkama karma. Nishkama means 
“without passion” or “without attachment,” and karma 
means “action.” So, whatever action he does, he 
renounces the fruits of the action, so that he acts in a 
way that does not generate future karma. Future karma 
continues you in the wheel of becoming, samsara, the 
“round,” and keeps you being reincarnated. 

Now, when you start to get out of the chain of 
karma, all the creditors that you have start presenting 
themselves for payment. In other words, a person who 
begins to study yoga may feel that he will suddenly get 
sick or that his children will die, or that he will lose his 
money, or that all sorts of catastrophes will occur 
because the karmic debt is being cleared up. There is no 
hurry to be “cleared up” if you’re just living along like 
anybody, but if you embark on the spiritual life, a cer- 
tain hurry occurs. Therefore, since this is known, it is 
rather discouraging to start these things. The Christian 
way of saying the same thing is that if you plan to 
change your life (shall we say to turn over a new leaf?) 
you mustn’t let the devil know, because he will oppose 
you with all his might if he suddenly discovers that 
you’re going to escape from his power. So, for example, 
if you have a bad habit, such as drinking too much, and 
you make a New Year’s resolution that during this com- 
ing year you will stop drinking, that is a very dangerous 
thing to do. The devil will immediately know about it, 
and he will confront you with the prospect of 365 drink- 
less days. That will be awful, just overwhelming, and 
you won't be able to make much more than three days 
on the wagon. So, in that case, you compromise with the 
devil and say, “Just today I'm not going to drink, you 
see, but tomorrow maybe we'll go back.” Then, when 


| 99 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


tomorrow comes, you say, “Oh, just another day, let’s 
try, that’s all.” And the next day, you say, “Oh, one 
more day won’t make much difference.” So, you only do 
it for the moment, and you don’t let the devil know that 
you have a secret intention of going on day after day 
after day after day. Of course, there’s something still bet- 
ter than that, and that is not to let the devil know any- 
thing. That means, of course, not to let yourself know. 
One of the many meanings of that saying “Let not your 
left hand know what your right hand doeth” is just this. 
That is why, in Zen discipline, a great deal of it centers 
around acting without premeditation. As those of you 
know who read Eugen Herrigel’s book Zen in the Art of 
Archery, it was necessary to release the bowstring with- 
out first saying “Now.” There’s a wonderful story you 
may have also read by a German writer, Van Kleist, 
about a boxing match with a bear. The man can never 
defeat this bear because the bear always knows his plans 
in advance and is ready to deal with any situation. The 
only way to get through to the bear would be to hit the 
bear without having first intended to do so. That would 
catch him. So, this is one of the great problems in the 
spiritual life, or whatever you want to call it: to be able 
to have intention and to act simultaneously— this means 
you escape karma and the devil. 

So, you might say that the Taoist is exemplary in 
this respect: that this is getting free from karma without 
making any previous announcement. Supposing we have 
a train and we want to unload the train of its freight 
cars. You can go to the back end and unload them one 
by one and shunt them into the siding, but the simplest 
of all ways is to uncouple between the engine and the 
first car, and that gets rid of the whole bunch at once. It 
is in that sort of way that the Taoist gets rid of karma 
without challenging it, and so it has the reputation of 


THE TAOIST WAY OF KARMA 


being the easy way. There are all kinds of yogas and 
ways for people who want to be difficult. One of the 
great gambits of a man like Gurdjieff was to make it all 
seem as difficult as possible, because that challenged the 
vanity of his students. 

If some teacher or some guru says, “Really, this 
isn’t difficult at all—it’s perfectly easy,” some people 
will say, “Oh, he’s not really the real thing. We want 
something tough and difficult.” When we see somebody 
who starts out by giving you a discipline that’s very 
weird and rigid, people think, “Now there is the thing. 
That man means business.” So they flatter themselves by 
thinking that by going to such a guy they are serious stu- 
dents, whereas the other people are only dabblers, and 
so on. All right, if you have to do it that way, that’s the 
way you have to do it. But the Taoist is the kind of per- 
son who shows you the shortcut, and shows you how to 
do it by intelligence rather than effort, because that’s 
what it is. Taoism is, in that sense, what everybody is 
looking for, the easy way in, the shortcut, using clever- 
ness instead of muscle. 

So, the question naturally arises, “Isn’t it cheat- 
ing?” When, in any game, somebody really starts using 
his intelligence, he will very likely be accused of cheat- 
ing; and to draw the line between skill and cheating is a 
very difficult thing to do. The inferior intelligence will 
always accuse a superior intelligence of cheating; that is 
its way of saving face. “You beat me by means that 
weren’t fair. We were originally having a contest to find 
out who had the strongest muscles. And you know we 
were pushing against it like this, and this would prove 
who had the strongest muscles. But then you introduced 
some gimmick into it, some judo trick or something like 
that, and you’re not playing fair.” So, in the whole 
domain of ways of liberation, there are routes for the 


ro 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


stupid people and routes for the intelligent people, and 
the latter are faster. This was perfectly clearly explained 
by Hui-neng, the sixth patriarch of Zen in China, in his 
Platform Sutra, where he said, “The difference between 
the gradual school and the sudden school is that 
although they both arrive at the same point, the gradual 
is for slow-witted people and the sudden is for fast-wit- 
ted people.” In other words, can you find a way that 
sees into your own nature—that sees into the Tao imme- 
diately. 

Earlier, I pointed out to you the immediate way, 
the way through now. When you know that this 
moment is the Tao, and this moment is considered by 
itself without past and without future—eternal, neither 
coming into being nor going out of being—there is nir- 
vana. And there is a whole Chinese philosophy of time 
based on this. It has not, to my knowledge, been very 
much discussed by Taoist writers; it’s been more dis- 
cussed by Buddhist writers. But it’s all based on the same 
thing. Zenji Dogen, the great thirteenth-century Japanese 
Zen Buddhist, studied in China and wrote a book called 
Shobogenzo. A roshi recently said to me in Japan, 
“That’s a terrible book, because it tells you everything. It 
gives the whole secret away.” But in the course of this 
book, he says, “There is no such thing as a progression 
in time. The spring does not become the summer. There 
is first spring, and then there is summer.” So, in the 
same way, “you” now do not become “you” later. 

In T. S. Eliot’s Four Quartets, he says that the per- 
son who is settled down on the train to read the newspa- 
per is not the same person who stepped onto the train 
from the platform. Therefore, you who sit here are not 
the same people who came in at the door: these states 
are separate, each in its own place. There was the “com- 
ing in at the door person,” but there is actually only the 


THE TAOIST WAY OF KARMA 

“here-and-now sitting person.” The person sitting here 
and now is not the person who will die, because we are 
all a constant flux. The continuity of the person from 
past through present to future is as illusory in its own 
way as the upward movement of the red lines on a 
revolving barber pole. You know it goes round and 
round, and the whole thing seems to be going up or 
going down, whichever the case may be, but actually 
nothing is going up or down. When you throw a pebble 
into the pond and you make concentric rings of waves, 
there is an illusion that the water is flowing outward, 
but no water is flowing outward at all. The water is only 
going up and down. What appears to move outward is 
the wave, not the water. So this kind of philosophical 
argument says that our seeming to go along in a course 
of time does not really happen. 

The Buddhists say that suffering exists, but no one 
who suffers. Deeds exist, but no doers are found. A path 
there is, but no one follows it. And nirvana is, but no 
one attains it. In this way, they look upon the continuity 
of life as the same sort of illusion that is produced when 
you take a cigarette and whirl ic in the dark and create 
the illusion of the circle, whereas there is only the one 
point of fire. The argument, then, is that so long as you 
are in the present there aren’t any problems. The prob- 
lems exist only when you allow presents to amalgamate. 
There is a way of putting this in Chinese that is rather 
interesting. They have a very interesting sign—it’s pro- 
nounced nin (nen in Japanese). The top part of the char- 
acter means “now” and the bottom part means “the 
mind heart,” the shin. And so, this is, as it were, an 
instant of thought. In Chinese they use this character as 
the equivalent for the Sanskrit word jnana. Then, if you 
double this character and put it twice or three times, 
nin, nin, nin—it means “thought after thought after 


[roy 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


thought.” The Zen master Joshu was once asked, “What 
is the mind of the child?” He said, “A ball in a mountain 
stream.” He was asked, “What do you mean by a ball in 
a mountain stream?” Joshua said, “Thought after 
thought after thought with no block.” He was using, of 
course, the mind of the child as the innocent mind, the 
mind of a person who is enlightened. One thought fol- 
lows another without hesitation. The thought arises; it 
does not wait to arise. When you clap your hands, the 
sound issues without hesitation. When you strike flint, 
the spark comes out; it does not wait to come out. That 
means that there’s no block. . 

So, “thought, thought, thought”—xin, nin, nin— 
describes what we call in our world the stream of con- 
sciousness. Blocking consists in letting the stream 
become connected, or chained together in such a way 
that when the present thought arises, it seems to be drag- 
ging its past, or resisting its future by saying, “I don’t 
want to go.” When the connection, or the dragging of 
these thoughts, stops, you have broken the chain of 
karma. If you think of this in comparison with certain 
problems in music it is very interesting, because when we 
listen to music, we hear melody only because we remem- 
ber the sequence. We hear the intervals between the 
tones, but more than that, we remember the tones that 
led up to the one we are now hearing. We are trained 
musically to anticipate certain consequences, and to the 
extent that we get the consequences, we anticipate it, we 
feel that we understand the music. But to the extent that 
the composer does not adhere to the rules—and gives us 
unexpected consequences—we feel that we don’t under- 
stand the music. If he gives us harmonic relationships 
that we are trained not to accept, or expect, we say, 
“Well this man is just writing garbage.” Of course, it 
becomes apparent that the perception of music and the 


104 


THE TAOIST WAY OF KARMA 


ability to hear melody will depend upon a relationship 
between past, present, and future sounds. You might 
say, “Well, you’re talking about a way of living that 
would be equivalent to listening to music with a tone- 
deaf mind so that you would eliminate the melody and 
have only noise. In your Taoist way of life, you would 
eliminate all meaning and have only senseless present 
moments.” Up to a point that is true; that is, in a way, 
what Buddhists also mean by seeing things in their such- 
ness. 

What is so bad about dying, for example? It’s real- 
ly no problem. When you die, you just drop dead, and 
that’s all there is to it. But what makes it a problem is 
that you are dragging a past. And all those things you 
have done, all those achievements you’ve made and all 
these relationships and people that you’ve accumulated 
as your friends have to go. It isn’t here now. A few 
friends might be around you, but all the past that identi- 
fies you as who you are (which is simply memory) has to 
go, and we feel just terrible about that. If we didn’t, if 
we were just dying and that’s all, death would not be a 
problem. Likewise, the chores of everyday life become 
intolerable when everything—all the past and future— 
ties together and you feel it dragging at you every way. 
Supposing you wake up in the morning and it’s a lovely 
morning. Let’s take today, right here and now—here we 
are in this paradise of a place and some of us have to go 
to work on Monday. Is that a problem? For many peo- 
ple it is because it spoils the taste of what is going on 
now. When we wake up in bed on Monday morning and 
think of the various hurdles we have to jump that day, 
immediately we feel sad, bored, and bothered. Whereas, 
actually, we’re just lying in bed. 

So, the Taoist trick is simply, “Live now and there 
will be no problems.” That is the meaning of the Zen 


| 
| 105 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


saying, “When you are hungry, eat. When you are tired, 
sleep. When you walk, walk. When you sit, sit.” Rinzai, 
the great Tung dynasty master, said, “In the practice of 
Buddhism, there is no place for using effort. Sleep when 
you’re tired, move your bowels, eat when you’re hun- 
gry—that’s all. The ignorant will laugh at me, but the 
wise will understand.” The meaning of the wonderful 
Zen saying “Every day is a good day” is that they come 
one after another, and yet there is only this one. You 
don’t link them. This, as I intimated just a moment ago, 
seems to be an atomization of life. Things just do what 
they do. The flower goes puff, and people go this way 
and that way, and so on, and that is what is happening. 
It has no meaning, no destination, no value. It is just like 
that. When you see that, you see it’s a great relief. That 
is all it is. Then, when you are firmly established in such- 
ness, and it is just this moment, you can begin again to 
play with the connections, only you have seen through 
them. Now they don’t haunt you, because you know 
that there isn’t any continuous you running on from 
moment to moment who originated sometime in the past 
and will die sometime in the future. All that has disap- 
peared. So, you can have enormous fun anticipating the 
future, remembering the past, and playing all kinds of 
continuities. This is the meaning of that famous Zen say- 
ing about mountains: “To the naive man, mountains are 
mountains, waters are waters. To the intermediate stu- 
dent, mountains are no longer mountains, waters are no 
longer waters.” In other words, they have dissolved into 
the point instant, the tshana. “But for the fully perfected 
student, mountains are again mountains and waters are 
again waters.” 


106 


