Alan Watts crystallizes his basic phaosophies in 
this fast orginal work... timeless heritage of 
simplicity, beauty and wisdom. 


-—s 4 4 | i i i i 473 3 a? 
| =| | + l= “y Mee |= " | | i= P| | 1 
. § | = | > *E | h 
oF Fhe A ue Ja Jk ue | a oe a 
._ wi -_ = 4 «a 1.3. —s— ——< 5 
rh i 1: / “_ , - | * 
i’ | i hs, ef : 
9 ye Vi- 
ry So a 1 ‘a al J / 


The Essence of Alan Watts 
Alan Watts 


Celestial Arts 
Millbrae, California 


This book is based on the spoken work of the late Alan Watts. It 
is produced from a series of programs entitled ‘‘The Essential Alan 
Watts.”’ These talks arc available on audiocassettes from Electron- 
ic University, a nonprofit educational corporation. Electronic Uni- 
versity also has audiocassette series of Alan Watts on the Philosophy 
of Religion, Psychology, Eastern Philosophy, Buddhism, and Taoism. 
To obtain a complete Electronic University catalog, please send a 
self-addressed stamped envelope to: The Electronic University 

Box 361 

Mill Valley, CA 94941 


For a catalog of the audio library of Alan Watts’ lectures and semin- 
ars write to: MEA 

Box 303 

Sausalito, CA 94965 


Cover design by Betsy Bruno 


Copyright ©1974, 1977 by Celestial Arts 
231 Adrian Road 
Millbrae, California 94030 


No part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, 
photographic, or electronic process, or in the form of a 
phonographic recording, nor may it be stored in a retrieval 


system, transmitted. or otherwise be copied for public or 
private use without the written permission of the publisher. 


First printing July 1977 
Made in the United States of America 


photo of Alan Watts by Margo Moore 
photo page 27 by Richard Borst 


Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 


Watts, Alan Wilson, 1915-1973. 
The essence of Alan Watts. 


1. Philosophy — Collected works. I. Title. 
B945.W321 1977) 191 77-7724 
ISBN 0-89087-210-4 


5 678 — 82 81 80 


Contents 


God 25 
Meditation 43 
Nothingness 73 
Death 91 
Time 113 
The Nature of Man 133 
The Cosmic Drama 173 
Philosophical Fantasies 195 


THE STORY OF ALAN WATTS 


For more than twenty years Alan Watts earned a reputation as the 
foremost interpreter of Eastern philosophies to the West. Begin- 
ning at the age of 20, when he wrote The Spirit of Zen, he devel- 
oped an audience of millions who were enriched by his offerings 
through books, tape recordings, radio, television, and public lec- 
tures. 


He wrote 25 books, each building toward a personal philosophy 
that he shared, in complete candor and joy, with his readers and 
listeners throughout the world. They presented a model of individ- 
uality and self-expression that can be matched by few contem- 
poraries. His life and work reflect an astonishing adventure: he 
was editor, Anglican priest, graduate dean, broadcaster, and 
author-lecturer. He had fascinations for cooking, calligraphy, 
singing, and dancing. He held fellowships from Harvard 
University and the Bollingen Foundation and was Episcopal 
Chaplain at Northwestern University. He became professor and 
dean of the American Academy of Asian Studies in San Francisco, 
made the television series ‘Eastern Wisdom and Modern Life” for 
the National Educational Television, and served as visiting 
consultant to many psychiatric institutes and hospitals. He 
traveled widely with students in Japan. 


Born in England in 1915, Alan Watts attended King’s School 
Canterbury, served on the Council of the World Congress of 
Faiths (1936-38), and came to the United States in 1938. He held a 
Master’s Degree in Theology from Seabury-Western Theological 
Seminary and an Honorary D.D. from the University of Vermont 
in recognition of his work in Comparative Religion. 


Alan Watts died in 1973. The Essence of Alan Watts, a series of 
nine books in the unique Celestial Arts format, includes edited 
transcripts by his wife Mary Jane Watts of videotaped lectures that 
were produced by his friend, Henry Jacobs, and filmed by his son, 
Mark Watts, in the last years of his life. 


vi 


The Essence of Alan Watts 


Photographs by Mike Powers and Maria Demarest 


Deane. the most fascinating question in the world is: Who 
am 1? Or, What am I? The seer, the knower, the one you are, 
is the most inaccessible of all experiences, completely 
mysterious and hidden. 


We talk about our egos. We use the word I. I've always been 
tremendously interested in what people mean by the word | 
because it comes out in curious ways in speech. For instance, 
we don't say, “I am a body.” We say, “I have a body.” Some- 
how we don't seem to identify ourselves with all of ourselves. 
Isay, “my feet,” “my hands,” “my teeth,” as if they were 
something outside me. And as far as 1 can make out, most 
people feel that they are something about half way between 
the ears, and a little behind the eyes, inside the head, and 
from this center the rest of them sort of dangles. And the 
governing principle in there is what you call the ego. 

That's me! 


But I just can’t get rid of the idea that it’s a hallucination. 
That's not what you are at all. And it’s a very dangerous 
hallucination because it gives you the idea that you area 
center of consciousness, energy, and responsibility that 
stands over against and in opposition to everything else. You 
are the principle inside your own body as if your body were 
an automobile and you the chauffeur. You feel caught in a 
trap because your body's something of a mess. It gets sick, 
tired, hurts, and eventually wears out and dies. You feel 
caught in the thing because you feel different from it. 


3 


Furthermore, you feel the world outside your body is an 
awful trap, full of stupid people, who are sometimes nice to 
you but mostly aren’t. They’re all out for themselves like you 
are and therefore there's one hell of aconflict going on. The 
rest of it, aside from people, is absolutely dumb—animals, 
plants, vegetables and rocks. Finally, behind the whole thing 
there are blazing centers of radioactivity called stars, and out 
there there’s no air, there’s no place for a person to live. 


We have come to feel ourselves as centers of very, very 
tender, sensitive, vulnerable consciousness, confronted with 
a world that doesn’t give adamn about us. And therefore, we 
have to pick a fight with this external world and beat it into 
submission to our wills. We talk about the conquest of 
nature; we conquer everything. We talk about the conquest 
of mountains, the conquest of space, the conquest of cancer, 
etc., etc. We're at war. And it’s because we feel ourselves to 
be lonely ego principles, trapped in, somehow inextricably 
bound up with, a world that doesn’t go our way unless 
somehow we can manage to force it to do so. 


I feel this sensation of ourselves as an ego isa hallucination. 
A completely false conception of ourselves as an ego inside a 
bag of skin. What we really are is, first of all, the whole of 
our body. Although the body is bounded by a skin, I can 
differentiate between my outside and my inside. My body 
cannot exist except in a certain kind of natural environment. 
Obviously it requires air, and that air must be near a certain 
temperature, it requires nutrition; it requires that it be ona 
certain kind of planet near a certain kind of warm star 
spinning regularly around it ina harmonious and rhythmical 
way so that life can go on. That arrangement is just as 
essential to the existence of my body as to its own internal 
organs—my heart, my brain, my lungs, and so forth. So 
there really is no way of separating myself as a physical body 
from the natural environment in which ] live. 


Now, that means that I as a body go with my natural 
environment in the same way exactly as bees go with flowers. 
Bees look very different from flowers. The flower grows out 
of the ground, colors and perfumes the air. The bee is 
independent and buzzes around and flies. But where there are 
no bees, there are no flowers, and where there are no flowers, 
there are no bees. They go together and, in that sense, they 
make up a single system. Substitute for the word system the 
word organism, a single life form, a single individual, bees 
and flowers, however different they look. Naturally, my feet 
look very different from my head. Of course, a string is 
joining them and therefore we say, “well, it’s all one, 
obviously.” They are very different but they're both me. The 
feet and the head, though different, are like the bees and the 
flowers—they go with each other. 


Therefore, to define myself in a scientific way, to makea 
clear description of my body, my organism, my behavior, 
and describe what it’s doing, must also describe the 
environment, the surroundings in which it is doing it. In 
other words, it would be meaningless to describe myself as 
walking if I didn’t describe the ground. Because if I didn’t 
describe the ground, my description of walking would simply 
be of a person swinging his legs in empty space. That 
wouldn't be walking—I have to describe the ground on 


which I walk. 


What I am is a transaction or an interaction between this 
organism and its surrounding environment. They go together 
and constitute what we call in physics, a unified field. And 
that’s what Iam from a purely physical, scientific point of 
view. It may involve many more things than that, but lam 
an organism/environment. 


But that’s not what my ego feels like. That’s not the average 
commonsensical conception of I. Because !| is associated with 
the organism and not with the environment. It is opposing 
the environment, and it is not associated with all of the 
organisms. As I said, the ego tends to regard the rest of the 
organism as the chauffeur does the automobile. 


How do we get this false sensation of being an ego? Well, it 
seems to me that it’s made up of two things and the first 
thing we have to understand is that in the course of 
civilization we confuse our ideas and words and symbols 
about the world with the world itself. The General Semantics 
group, founded by Dr. Alfred Korzybski, have a little song. . 
“Oh, the word is not the thing, the word is not the thing, hi, 
ho, the derry-o, the word is not the thing.” Obviously you 
can’t get wet from the word water. The image, the idea, the 
symbol, the word is not the reality,“T he ego, what we feel as 
I, consists of the image or idea of ourselves we see ina 
mirror, or by listening to ourselves played back ona tape 
recorder or television. 


When | was a little boy I remember | had a friend up the 
street called Peter, and! admired him very much. Sometimes 
I came home and imitated Peter’s behavior. My mother 
would say to me, “Alan, that’s not you, that’s Peter.” You 
see, she was giving me an image of myself. When | did 
anything terrible she would say, “Alan, it’s just not like you 
to do that.” She was busy building in me an image, an idea of 
the kind of act I was supposed to put on, the kind of person | 
was supposed to be..- 


The word person comes from the Latin persona, which 
means that through which (per) the sound (sona) goes. It 
referred originally to the masks worn by actors in classical 
drama, because those masks had megaphonic mouths, so 
that in the open-air theater they would project the sound. So 
the persona, the person, is the mask, is the role you're 
playing. And all your friends and relations and parents and 
teachers are busy telling you who you are, what your role in 
life is, and there are only a certain number of acceptable roles 
you can play. 


First of all then, your sense of | is your sense of who you are, 
whether you're tinker, tailor, soldier, sailor, rich man, poor 
man, beggarman, thief, whether you're a clown, strong and 
silent, a clinging vine—we can name dozens of them— you 
identify yourself with a certain way of acting. It’s quite 
complicated, but nevertheless there’s a certain way of acting 
with which you identify yourself and which constitutes your 
image. 


The image of yourself that you have is a social institution in 
the same way as it is, for example, a social institution to 
divide the day into twenty-four hours, or to divide the foot 
into twelve inches, or to draw lines of latitude and longitude 
which are purely imaginary over the surface of the earth. It’s 
very useful to do that because these lines are the means of 
navigation, but there are no lines of latitude and longitude on 
or over the earth—they are imaginary. You cannot, for 
example, use the equator to tie up a package, because it’s an 
abstract, imaginary line. And in just the same way, your 
image of yourself as an ego is an imaginary concept that is 
not the organism and furthermore, is not this organism in its 
inseparable relationship to its whole physical and natural 
environment. 


11 


The image of yourself that you have is simply a caricature! A 
Caricature is an excellent example: When we make a 
caricature of Adolf Hitler, we pull down the hair and puta 
comb under his nose instead of a mustache. In the same way, 
our image of ourselves is a caricature of ourselves because it 
does not include almost all the important things about 
ourselves; it does not include all the goings-on inside the 
physical organism. Oh, we get belly-rumbles; occasionally 
we re aware of our breathing; occasionally we’re aware that 
it hurts somewhere. But forthe most part we're totally 
unconscious of everything going on inside us. We're 
unconscious of our brains and how they work. We're 
unconscious of our relationships to the external world, many 
of our relationships to other people are completely 
unconscious. We depend on telephone operators, electricians 
supplying our electricity, on all kinds of service that we never 
even think about. We don’t think about air pressure. We 
don’t think about the chemical composition of the air we 
breathe, we don’t think about cosmic rays, gamma rays, 
X-rays, the output of the sun. All these things are absolutely 
essential to our life but they are not included in the ego 
image. 


So the ego image is very incomplete. In fact, it’s an illusion. 
But we say, “Now, look, it can’t be that way, because | feel /, 
I mean, it’s not just an image of myself I have; I have a solid 
feeling behind the word I, when | think I, I feel there’s 
something there.’ What is that? Interesting question. Because 
if your brain is your ego, you have very little in the way of 
direct sensation of your brain. In fact, operations can be 
performed on the brain with only surface anesthesia—there’s 
no feeling in the brain itself. Therefore, the brain cannot be 
the sensation of ego. 


12 


When your eyes are functioning well you don’t see your eyes. 
If your eyes are imperfect you see spots in front of them. 
That means there are some lesions in the retina or wherever, 
and because your eyes aren't working properly, you feel 
them. In the same way, you don’t hear your ears. If you have 
a ringing in your ears it means there’s something wrong with 
your ears. Therefore, if you do feel yourself, there must be 
something wrong with you. Whatever you have, the 
sensation of / is like spots in front of your eyes—it means 
something's wrong with your functioning. That’s why you 
feel you're there, why you feel you as being different from, 
somehow cut off from, all that you really are, which is 
everything you're experiencing. The real you is the totality of 
everything you're aware of and a great deal more besides. 


But what is this thing that we feel in ourselves when we say, 
“That is the concrete, material me’? Well, I'll tell you what it 
is. When you were a little child in school, you were picking 
your nose and looking out the window or flicking spit balls 
or something, suddenly the teacher rapped the desk, ‘Pay 
attention!’’ Now, how did you pay attention? Well, you 
stared at the teacher, and you wrinkled your brow, because 
that’s how you look when you pay attention. And when the 
teacher sees all the pupils in the class staring and frowning, 
then the teacher is consoled and feels the class is paying 
attention. But the class is doing nothing of the kind. The class 
is pretending to pay attention. 


1S 


You're reading a book; there’s some difficult book you have 
to read because it’s required. You're bored to death with it, 
and you think, ‘Well, I've really got to concentrate on this 
book.” You glare at it, you try to force your mind to follow 
it’s argument, and then you discover you're not really 
reading the bobok— you're thinking about how you ought to 
read it. What do you do if I say to you, “Look, take a hard 
look at me, take a real hard look.” Now what are you doing? 
What's the difference between a hard look and a soft look? 
Why, with your hard look, you are straining the muscles 
around your eyes, and youre starting to stare. If you stare at 
a distant image far away from you, you'll make it fuzzy. If 
you want to see it clearly you must close your eyes, imagine 
black for awhile, and then lazily and easily open them and 
you'll see the image. The light will come to you. And what do 
you do if I say, “Now, listen carefully, listen very carefully 
to what I'm saying.” You'll find you're beginning to strain 
yourself around the ears. 


] remember in school there was a boy who couldn't read. He 
sat next to me in school, and he wanted to convince the 
teacher that he really was trying to read. He would say, 
“rrruuunnn, ssspppooottt, rrruuunnn.” He was using all his 
muscles. What have they got to do with reading? What does 
straining your muscles to hear have to do with hearing? 
Straining your muscles to see, what's that got to do with 
seeing? Nothing. 


16 


Supposing somebody says, “O.K. now, you've got to use 
your will, you've got to exercise strong will.’’ That's the ego, 
isn’t it. What do you do when you exercise your will? You 
grit your teeth, you clench your fists. If you want to stop 
wayward emotions you go uptight. You pull your stomach 
in, or hold your breath, or contract your rectal muscles. But 
all these activities have absolutely nothing to do with the 
efficient functioning of your nervous system. Just as staring 
at images makes them fuzzy, listening hard with all this 
muscular tension distracts you from what you're actually 
hearing; gritting your teeth has nothing to do with courage, 
all this is a total distraction. And yet we do it all the time; we 
have a chronic sensation of muscular strain, the object of 
which is an attempt to make our nervous system, our brains, 
our sensitivity function properly—and it doesn’t work. 


It’s like taking off in a jet plane. You’re going zooming down 
the runway and you think, ‘This plane has gone too far 
down the runway and it isn’t up in the air yet,”’ so you start 
pulling at your seatbelt to help the thing up. It doesn’t have 
any effect on the plane. And so, in exactly the same way, all 
these muscular strains we do and have been taught to do all 
our lives long, to look as if we're paying attention, to look as 
if we're trying, all this is futile. But the chronic sensation of 
strain is the sensation to which we are referring as I. 


So our ego is what? An illusion married to a futility. It’s the 
image of ourselves, which is incorrect, false, and only a 
caricature, married to, combined with, a futile muscular 
effort to will our effectiveness. 


19 


Wouldn't it be much better if we had a sensation of ourselves 
that was in accord with the facts? The facts, the reality of our 
existence, is that we are both the natural environment, which 
ultimately is the whole universe, and the organism playing 
together. Why don’t we feel that way? Why, obviously 
because this other feeling gets in the way of it. This socially 
induced feeling which comes about as a result of a kind of 
hypnotism exercised upon us throughout the whole 
educational process has given us a hallucinatory feeling of 
who weare, and therefore we act like madmen. We don't 
respect our environment; we destroy it. But you know, 
exploiting and destroying your environment, polluting the 
water and the air and everything, is just like destroying your 
own body. The environment is your body. But we act in this 
crazy way because we've got a crazy conception of who we 
are. We're raving mad. 


“Well,” you ask, “how do I get rid of it?” And my answer to 
that is, that’s the wrong question. How does what get rid of 
it? You can’t get rid of your hallucination of being an ego by 
anactivity of the ego. Sorry, but it can’t be done. You can’t 
lift yourself up by your own bootstraps. You can’t put out 
fire with fire. And if you try to get rid of your ego with your 
ego, you'll just get into a vicious circle. You'll be like 
somebody who worries because they worry, and then 
worries because they worry because they worry, and you'll 
goround and round and get crazier than ever. 


The first thing to understand when you say, “What can 1 do 
about getting rid of this false ego?” is that the answer is 
“nothing,” because you're asking the wrong question. You're 
asking, “How can I, thinking of myself as an ego, get rid of 
thinking of myself as an ego?” Well, obviously you can’t. 
Now, you say, “Well then, it’s hopeless.” It isn’t hopeless. 
You haven't got the message, that’s all. 


20 


If you find out that your ego feeling, your will and all that 
jazz, cannot get rid of that hallucination, you've found out 
something very important. In finding out that you can’t do 
anything about it, you have found out that you don’t exist. 
That is to say, you as an ego, you don’t exist so obviously 
you can't do anything about it. So you find you can’t really 
control yourthoughts, your feelings, your emotions, all the 
processes going on inside you and outside you that are 
happenings—there’s nothing you can do about it. 


So then, what follows? Well, there’s only one thing that 
follows: You watch what's going on. You see, feel, this 
whole thing happening and then suddenly you find, to your 
amazement, that you can perfectly well get up, walk over to 
the table, pick up a glass of milk and drink it. There’s nothing 
standing in your way of doing that. You can still act, you can 
still move, you can still go on in a rational way, but you've 
suddenly discovered that you're not what you thought you 
were. You're not this ego, pushing and shoving things inside 
a bag of skin. 


You feel yourself now in a new way as the whole world, 
which includes your body and everything that you 


experience, going along. It’s intelligent. Trust it. 


23 


eee ne the world coming suddenly out of nothing. Close 
your eyes and listen and you will hear silence and then 
sounds coming out of that silence. Now use your eyes and see 
light, shape, form coming at you asa vibration that is 
proceeding out of space. 


Our logic resists such concepts because common sense tells us 
we can’t get something out of nothing. Normally we think of 
all the energetic manifestations of this universe as coming out 
of the past; the things that were here are producing the things 
that are here now. But I want you to look at it the other way 
so that you can see the whole world starting now instead of 
in the past, and the past as a kind of echo fading away into 
memory, like the wake of a ship that trails across the water 
and then fades out. But the wake is started by the ship in the 
present. In the same way, I am moving on to the 
uncommonsensical idea of the world as a production of 
energy that is beginning right now and is coming out of the 
nothing that we variously call space and silence. 


How on earth could that happen? The usual explanation is 
that the world is being created by God. In Christian 
theology it is said that God creates the world out of nothing. 
I want to emphasize the point, in all fairness to Catholic, 
Islamic, and Jewish doctrine, that it doesn’t merely teach 
that God once upon a time started the world and set it going 
like you would wind up a machine and then leave it alone. 
These religions teach that God is always creating the world 
out of nothing and willing it by his divine energy into being 
at this moment. 


25 


Now the difficulty for most of us—especially for educated 
people—in the modern world is that the old-fashioned idea of 
God has become incredible or implausible. In church or in 
synagogue, we seem to be addressing a royal personage. The 
layout looks like aroyal court. There is some sort of throne, 
and we address prayers and requests to the being represented 
by the alter, throne, or tabernacle as if that being were a king 
and were causing this universe in his royal, omnipotent, and 
omniscient wisdom. 


But then, when we take a look through our telescopes and 
microscopes or when we just look at nature, we have a 
problem. Because the idea of God that we get from the holy 
scriptures, the Bible, the Koran, doesn’t quite seem to fit 

the world around us in just the same way you wouldn't 
ascribe a composition by Stravinsky to Bach. The style of 
God venerated in church, mosque, and synagogue seems 
completely different from the style of the natural universe. 
It’s so hard to conceive the author of the one as the author of 
the other. 


Furthermore, it strikes most intelligent people that our 
traditional religious ideas of God are primitive. It seems 
naive to think that this universe could have been authored by 
a sort of old gentleman who lives far above the stars in 
heaven, seated on a golden throne and adored by legions of 
angels. That is a concept unworthy of the sort of universe 
modern science has revealed to us. 


Ihave a picture of God. A friend of mine photographed a 
statue of him in a church just south of Oaxaca in Mexico. It 
shows a primitive Indian-Catholic image of God the Father 
wearing a triple crown like the Pope, only he’s rather young 
and handsome. He’s not like the old, gray-bearded man. This 
is a serious Christian idol of God the Father Almighty. This is 
what has become implausible. 


26 


But also for many people it has become implausible that the 
root of the universe, which the theologian Paul Tillich 

calls the ground of being, can be in some way a person to 
whom we can relate in the same way that we relate to other 
people—a person who cares about us. 


Jesus said, “Five sparrows are sold for a farthing. But yet not 
one of them falls to the ground without the Father knowing 

it. So realize that you are of more value than many 
sparrows.” In other words, God cares a great deal more 
about you. But it just baffles our imagination that there could 
be this sort of person, who cares about each one of us, who 

is totally aware of every single thing that we are and that we 
do and, by virtue of being aware of us, creates us. 


Of course, one thing that is difficult about the idea is that 
it’s embarrassing. We do not feel comfortable if we are 
watched all the time by an infinitely intelligent judge. 
Imagine you are a child in school and you're working at 
some exercise and the teacher walks behind your desk and 
looks at what you're doing. Evenif you like the teacher 
very much, you feel put down by being watched; it makes 
you self-conscious and awkward. Many people opt for 
atheism for the same reason, because they don’t want the 
uncomfortable feeling that they're being watched all the 
time. It’s awkward. And if | were God I wouldn't do it. | 
wouldn't want to embarrass my creatures in that way, so I 
would leave them alone for a lot of the time. 


29 


The kind of god that people worship is, of course, an attempt 
to imagine an absolutely perfect human being. But it’s a very 
poor attempt. For example, Jesus taught that if somebody 
sins against you, forgive him. His disciples asked, “How 
many times do you forgive him?” And Jesus answered, 
“Ninety and nine times,” always forgive somebody who sins 
against you. But notice, that what is required of a saint—a 
saint is always forgiving—is not required of God. God will 
not forgive you unless you apologize, and you have to grovel 
on the ground if you’ve committed what the Catholic church 
callsa mortal sin. You have to come to God in astate of great 
penitence and if you don’t you are liable to be confined in the 
dungeons of the court of Heaven, commonly known as Hell, 
for always and always andalways. 


Now, I don’t think that’s a very nice kind of fellow. You 
wouldn’t invite that sort of God to dinner. He would 
embarrass everybody! When God would look at you, you 
would feel you were being seen through and through, and 
that all your awful past, all your falseness, would be 
completely perceptible to him. And though he understood 
it and forgave it he would nonetheless make you feel 
absolutely terrible. You just wouldn’t want that sort of 
company at dinner. 


You may think it’s frivolous of me to describe sucha 
situation, but don’t forget the pictorial image of God that 
people have in the backs of their minds. Even if you're a very 
sophisticated philosopher or theologian, that primitive 
pictorial image has a very strong influence on your feelings 
about religion, about the universe, and about yourself. 

This is the reason that the traditional idea of God has become 
implausible to many people. 


30 


Modern Protestant theologians, and even some Catholics, 
have been talking recently about the death of God and 
about the possibility of a religionless religion, a religion 
which does not involve belief in God. What would become 
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ if it were shown that Jesus’ own 
belief in God was unnecessary and invalid? What would 
remain of his teachings? Of his ideas about caring for other 
human beings, about social responsibility and so on. I 

think that would be a pretty wishy-washy kind of religion. If 
you're going to say that this life is fundamentally nothing 
but a pilgrimage from the maternity ward to the crematorium 
and that’s it, baby, you've had it, I think that indicates a 
singular lack of imagination. I would like to look at the 
death-of-God theology in an entirely different way. What 

is dead is not God but an idea of God, a particular 
conception of God that has died in the sense of becoming 
implausible. And I find this a very good thing. 


The Greek word in the New Testament for asin is antinomic 
or anomia and that means to miss the point or, as in 
archery, to miss the mark. And therefore, from the Mosaic 
Ten Commandments comes the idea that it is asin, a 
missing of the point, to substitute an idol for God. 


Then, the statue of God I described is an idol. But even those 
Mexican-Indians, don’t seriously confuse that 

particular image with God. The danger of it is they may think 
of God inthe form of man. But the images that have been 
made of God out of wood and stone and in painting have 
never really been taken seriously as actually what God is 
like. Nobody has confused the actual image of Buddha for 
the statues commonly seen in the East. Buddha is never 
identified with a god because Buddha is a human being, and 
these images are never seriously confused with what they 
represent any more than a Catholic confuses a crucifix with 
Jesus Christ. 


33 


The images of God that are tangible are not really very 
dangerous. The dangerous images of God are those that we 
make, not out of wood and stone, but out of ideas and 
concepts. Sir Thomas Aquinas, for example, defined God as 
a necessary being, He who is necessarily. That is a 
philosophical concept; but that concept is an idol because it 
confuses God with an idea. Because an idea is abstract it 
seems much more spiritual than an image made of wood or 
stone. That's precisely where it becomes deceptive. 


Many people think that the Bible is the authentic word of 
God and they worship the Bible, making it into an idol. 
They disregard the ironical remark of Jesus to his 
contemporary Jews, “You search the scriptures daily, for 

in them you think you have life.” And as St. Paul said later, 
The letter kills, but the spirit gives life.” So whatever you 
put as an image or an idea in the place of God necessarily 


falsifies God. 


A lot of people say, “I don’t think I could face life unless I 
could believe in a just and loving god.” It strikes me that 

that kind of belief in God is actually expressing a lack of faith. 
The word belief in Anglo-Saxon comes from the Anglo- 
Saxon root lief which means to wish. So belief really means a 
strong wish. When you say the creed, “I believe in God, 

the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth and of all 
things seen and unseen,” you are really saying: “! fervently 
wish that there exists God the Father Almighty, creator of 
heaven and earth, etc.” Because, if you really have faith 
youdon't need belief, because faith is an entirely different 
attitude from belief. 


34 


Faith is a state of openness or trust. To have faith is like when 
you trust yourself to the water. You don’t grab hold of the 
water when you swim, if you go stiff and tight in the water 
you sink. You have to relax. Thusly, the attitude of faith 

is the very opposite of clinging, of holding on. In other 
words, a person who is a fanatic in religion, one who 

simply has to believe in certain propositions about the nature 
of God and of the universe is a person who has no faith at 
all—he’s holding on tight. 


Although Martin Luther made such a thing about faith, he 
wrote a hymn —in German, Ein fest Burg ist unser Gott, 
“A Mighty Fortress is our God.” That’s not a hymn of faith! 
A person of faith doesn’t need a fortress; he’s not on the 
defensive. 


In the same way, many churches are designed like the royal 
courts of kings. In the church design called the basilica, 
which means the court of a basileus or king, the bishop sits at 
the back in his throne and all his attendant clergy stand 
around him like his guards in a court. Why is this? A king 
stands with his back to the wall because he rules by force. 
And when his subjects and his courtiers approach him they 
prostrate themselves, they kneel down. Why? Because that’s 
a difficult position from which to start a fight. Are we 
projecting the image of a frightened king as being the 
godhead? 


37 


The usual Protestant church, on the other hand, looks like a 
courthouse. The minister wears a black gown as is worn by a 
judge, and there are pews and pulpits and all the familiar 
wooden boxes of court furniture. And the minister, like the 
judge, throws the book at you! He preaches the law laid 
down in that other idol of God, the Bible. But does God need 
all that? Is God somebody who takes this aggressive attitude 
either of the king in court where all the subjects must 
prostrate, or of the judge who bangs the gavel and interprets 
the law? This is ridiculous! And a God so conceived is an idol 
and manifests the absence of faith of all those who worship 
him because they demonstrate no attitude of trust. They cling 
to these rules, to these conceptions, and have no fundamental 
adaptability to life. 


You might say that a good scientist has more faith than a 
religious person, because a good scientist says, “My mind is 
opento the truth, whatever the truth may turn out to be. | 
have no preconceptions, but 1 do have some hypotheses in 
my mind as to what the truth might be, and I’m going to test 
them.” And the test is to open all the senses to reality and 
find out what that reality is. But then again, the scientist runs 
into a problem because he knows that whatever comes to him 
as reality depends on the structure of his instruments and his 
senses, and ultimately the structure of his brain. So he has to 
have faith in his own brain, faith in himself, faith that his 
physical organism including his mind is indeed reliable and 
will determine reality, truth—what is. 


You have to believe your reason, your logic, your 
intelligence. You have to have faith in them even though you 
can’t ultimately check on yourself to make certain you're 
operating properly. It’s not like your mind is a radio and can 
be fixed by screwing in a new connection here and there— 
you always have to trust. 


38 


Therefore, one could say-that the highest image of God is the 
unseen behind the eyes—the blank space, the unknown, 

the intangible and the invisible. That is God! We have no 
image of that. We do not know what that is, but we have to 
trust it. There’s no alternative. You can’t help trusting it. 
You've got to. 


That trust ina God whom one cannot conceive in any way 

is a far higher form of faith than fervent clinging to a God of 
whom you have a definite conception. That conception 

can easily be wrong and, evenif it’s right, clinging to it would 
be the wrong attitude, because when vou love someone 

very much you shouldn't cling to them. 


In a New Testament story Mary Magdalene, who loved Jesus 
very much, is said to have seen him after his resurrection, 
and she immediately ran tocling to him. And he said, “Do 
not touch me,” but the Greek word hatir means to cling to. 
Don't cling to me! Don’t cling to anything of the spirit. Don't 
cling to the water, because the more you grabit the faster it 
will slip through your fingers. Don’t cling to your breath, 
you'll get purple in the face and suffocate. You have to let 
your breath out. That's the act of faith, to breathe out, and it 
will come back. The Buddhist word nirvana actually 

means to breathe out; letting go is the fundamental attitude of 


faith. 


It isn’t as if Christians haven’t been aware of this. One of the 
most fundamental sourcebooks of Christian spirituality, 
Theologia Mystica, was written in the sixth century by an 
Assyrian monk, Dionysius Exiguus. It is a very strange 
document, because it explains that the highest knowledge of 
God is through what he calls in Greek agnostos, which 
means unknowing. One knows God most profoundly, the 
most truly, in not knowing God. 


41 


The art of meditation is a way of getting into touch with 
reality. And the reason for meditation is that most civilized 
people are out of touch with reality. They confuse the world 
as itis with the world as they think about it, talk about it, 
and describe it. For onthe one hand there is the real world 
and on the other a whole system of symbols about that 
world which we have in our minds. These are very, very 
useful symbols; all civilization depends on them. But like all 
good things, they have their disadvantages, and the principle 
disadvantage of symbols is that we confuse them with reality 
in the same way as we confuse money with actual wealth, 
and our names, ideas, and images of ourselves with 
ourselves. 


Of course, reality from a philosopher’s point of view is a 
dangerous word. A philosopher will ask what do I mean by 
reality—am I talking about the physical world of nature, or 
am | talking about a spiritual world, or what? I have a very 
simple answer: When we talk about the material world, that 
is actually a philosophical concept. In the same way, if | say 
that reality is spiritual, that’s also a philosophical concept. 
And reality itself is not a concept. Reality is...... (Sound of a 
gong). And we won't give it aname. 


43 


It’s amazing what doesn’t exist in the real world. For 
example, in the real world there aren't any things, nor are 
there any events. That doesn’t mean the real world is a 
perfectly featureless blank! It means that it is a marvelous 
system of wiggles in which we descry things and events in the 
same way as we would project images on a Rorschach blot or 
pick out particular groups of stars in thesky and call them 
constellations. Well, there are groups of stars in our mind’s 
eye in our system of concept, but they are not out there as 
constellations already grouped in the sky. In the same way, 
the difference between myself and all the rest of the universe 
is nothing more than an an idea—it is not a real difference. 
Meditation is a way in which we come to feel our basic 
inseparability from the whole universe. What that requires is 
that we shut up. We become interiorly silent and cease from 
the interminable chatter that goes on inside our skulls. 


Most of us think compulsively all the time; we talk to 
ourselves. If I talk all the time I don’t hear what anyone else 
has to say. In exactly the same way, if I think all the time, 
that is to say if I talk to myself all the time, I don’t have 
anything to think about except thoughts. Therefore, I’m 
living entirely in the world of symbols and I'm never in 
relationship with reality. I want to get in touch with reality: 
That's the basic reason for meditation. 


44 


There is another reason, and this is a bit more difficult to 
understand. We could say that meditation doesn’t have a 
reason or doesn’t have a purpose. In this respect it’s unlike 
almost all other things that we do except perhaps making 
music and dancing. When we make music we don't do it in 
order to reach a certain point, such as the end of the 
composition. If that were the purpose of music then 
obviously the fastest players would be the best. Also, when 
we are dancing we are not aiming to arrive at a particular 
place on the floor as in taking a journey. When we dance, the 
journey itself is the point, as when we play music the playing 
itself is the point. And exactly the same thing is true in 
meditation. Meditation is the discovery that the point of life 
is always arrived at in the immediate moment. 


Therefore, if you meditate for an ulterior motive, that is to 
say to improve your mind, to improve your character, to be 
more efficient in life, you've got your eye on the future and 
you are not meditating. The future is a concept—it doesn’t 
exist! There is no such thing as tomorrow! There never will 
be because time is always now. That's one of the things we 
discover when we stop talking to ourselves and stop 
thinking. We find there is only a present, only an eternal 
now. 


One meditates for no reason at all except for the enjoyment 
of it. Here I would interpose the essential principle that 
meditation is supposed to be fun—it’s not something you do 
as agrim duty. The trouble with religion today is that it is so 
mixed up with grim duties. You do it because it is good for 
you. It’s a kind of self-punishment. Meditation when 
correctly done has nothing to do with all that. It’s a kind of 
digging the present. It’s a kind of grooving with the eternal 
now, it brings us into a state of peace where we can 
understand that the point of life, the place where it’s at, is 
simply here and now. 


47 


The art of meditation uses various props or supports which 
should be mentioned. The first thing we are going to use as a 
means of stilling chatter in the mind is pure sound. And for 
that reason it is useful to have a gong. I have a Japanese 
Buddhist gong made of bronze and shaped like a bowl. You 
may buy one or make your own. Or you can use your own 
voice, chanting. 


The second prop is a string of beads. These beads are used in 
meditation for an unconscious method of timing yourself. 
Instead of looking at a watch you move a bead each time you 
breathe in and out. And when you get to a certain rate of 
slow breathing, counting half the 108 beads on a rosary takes 
about 40 minutes. That is the usual length of time one sits 

in meditation, otherwise you become uncomfortable and get 
stiff legs and problems of that kind. 


A third prop in meditation is the use of incense. The sense of 
smell is our repressed sense. Because it’s our repressed sense, 
it has a very powerful influence on us and I will discuss it at 
length at the end of this book. Unconsciously we associate 
certain smells with certain states of mind, and since the smell 
of incense is associated with peace and contemplation, 

it’s advantageous to burn incense in meditation. 


48 


Another thing that we should discuss is how does one sit in 
meditation. You can sit any way you want—you can sit ina 
chair, or you can sit like I sit which is the Japanese way, 
kneeling with the toes pointing behind and sitting on the 
heels in an upright posture, hands lying loosely in the lap. Or 
you Can sit in the lotus position, which is more difficult, 
cross-legged with the feet on the thighs, soles up>wards—and 
the younger you begin practicing this the easier you find it to 
do. You can just sit cross-legged on a raised cushion above 
the floor if you prefer. The point is if you keep your back 
erect—I don’t mean stiff nor sltumped—you are centered and 
easily balanced and have the feeling of being rooted to the 
ground. That sort of physical stability is very important for 
the avoidance of distraction and generally feeling settled, 
here and now. “Je suis, je reste,” as the French say, “I’m here 
and I'm going to stay.” 


Now that you are sitting and have your props, the easiest 
way to get into the meditative state is to begin listening. 
Simply close your eyes and allow yourself to hear all the 
sounds that are going on around you, listen to the general 
hum and buzz of the world as if you were listening to music. 
Don't try to identify the sounds you are hearing, don’t put 
names on them, simply allow them to play with your ear- 
drums. Let them go. In other words, let-your ears hear - 
whatever they want to hear. Don’t judge the sounds— there 
are no proper sounds nor improper sounds, and it doesn’t 
matter if somebody coughs or sneezes or drops something— 
it’s all just sound. 


| 


As you pursue that experiment you will very naturally find 
that you can’t help naming sounds, identifying them, and go 
on thinking, talking to yourself inside your head, 
automatically. But it’s important that you don’t try to repress 
those thoughts by forcing them out of your mind because 
that will have precisely the same effect as if you were trying 
to smooth rough water with a flatiron—you’re just going to 
disturb it all the more. What you do is this: As you hear 
sounds coming into your head, thoughts, you simply listento 
them as part of the general noise going on just as you would 
be listening to cars going by, or to birds chattering outside 
the window. So look at your own thoughts as just noises. 
And soon you will find that the outside world and the inside 
world come together. They are a happening. Your thoughts 
are a happening just like the sounds going on outside, and 
everything is simply a happening and all you are doing is 
watching it. 


In this process another happening that is very important is 
that you're breathing. As you start meditation you allow 
your breath to run just as it wills. In other words, don’t do 
any breathing exercise, just watch your breath breathing the 
way it wants to breathe. And then notice a curious thing: 
You say in the ordinary way I| breathe because you feel that 
breathing is something you are doing voluntarily just as you 
might be walking or talking. But you will also notice that 
when you are not thinking about breathing, your breathing 
goes on just the same. So the curious thing about breath is 
that it can be looked at both as a voluntary and an 
involuntary action. You can feel, on the one hand, |!am 
doing it and, on the other hand, it is happening to me. And 
so, breathing is a most important part of meditation because 
it is going to show you, as you become aware of your breath, 
that the hard and fast division we make between what we 
do and what happens to us is arbitrary. 


52 


Watch your breathing and become aware that both the 
voluntary and the involuntary aspects of your experience are 
all one happening. That may at first seem a little scary. You 
may think am I! just the puppet of a happening, the mere 
passive witness of something that's going on completely 
beyond my control? or am I really doing everything that's 
going along? If I were, I should be God and that would be 
very embarrassing because I would be in charge of 
everything—that would be a terribly responsible position! 
The truth of the matter is both things are true. Everything is 
happening to you, and you are doing everything. For 
example, your eyes are turning the sun into light, it’s the 
nerve ends in your skin turning electric vibrations in the air 
to heat and temperature, it’s your eardrums that are turning 
vibrations in the air into sound. This is the way in which you 
are creating the world. But when we're not talking about it, 
when we're not philosophizing about it, then there is just this 
happening, this...(Sound of a gong)...and we won't give it a 
name. 


When you breathe for a while, just letting it happen and not 
forcing it in any way, you will discover a curious thing: 
Without making any effort you can breathe more and more 
deeply. Breathing out is important because it’s the breath of 
relaxation as when we say, “Whew!” and heave a sigh of 
relief. So when you are breathing out you get the sensation 
that your breath is falling out. Dropping, dropping, 
dropping out with the same sort of feeling you would have if 
you were settling down into an extremely comfortable bed, 
you just get as heavy as possible and let yourself go. You let 
your breath go out in just that way. And when it’s 
thoroughly, comfortably out and feels like coming back 
again, you don't pull it back in, you let it fall back in, letting 
your lungs expand, expand, expand until they feel very 
comfortably full. You wait a moment and let it stay there and 
then once again you let it fall out. In this way you will 
discover that your breath becomes naturally easier and easier 
and slower and slower, and more and more powerful. 


55 


Now you are listening to sound, listening to your own 
interior feelings and thoughts, and watching your breath all 
just as happenings that are neither voluntary nor 
involuntary. Youaresimply aware of these basic sensations. 
Then you begin tc be in the state of meditation. Don’t hurry 
anything, don’t worry about the future, don’t worry about 
what progress you're making. Be entirely content to be aware 
of what is. Don’t be selective—‘I should think of this and not 
that.” Just watch whatever is happening. 


To make this somewhat easier, to have the mind free from 
discursive, verbal thinking, chanted sound is extremely 
useful. If you, for example, simply listen to a gong, let that 
sound be the whole of your experience. It’s quite simple, it 
requires no effort. And then along with that, or alone if you 
don’t have a gong, you canuse what in the Sanskrit language 
is called mantra. Mantras are chanted sounds which are used 
not for their meaning but for the simple tone, and they go 
along with slow breathing. One of the basic mantras is, of 
course, the word spelled OM. That sound is used because it 
runs from the back of your throat to your lips and contains 
the whole range of the voice and—it represents the total 
energy of the universe. This word is called the pranava, the 
name for the Ultimate Reality, for which than which there is 
no whicher. And so in this way then, if you chant it, 
Ahhhhhhuuummmmmm. And vary it Ahhhhhhmmmm, 
Ahummmmmmm, and keep it up for quite a long time and 
find that the words will become pure sound. You won't be 
thinking about it, you won’t have any images about the 
sound going on in your mind. You will become completely 
absorbed in the sound and find yourself living in an eternal 
now in which there is no past and there is no future, and 
there is not difference between what you are as knower and 
what you are as the known, between yourself and the world 
of nature outside you. It all becomes one doing, one 
happening. 


56 


In addition to those slow moving chants you may find, 
according to your temperament, it is easier to do a fast 
moving one. These have a rhythm that is absorbing. A chant 
that you may have heard goes Hari Krishna, Hari Krishna, 
Krishna Krishna, Hari Hari, Hari Krishna, Hari Krishna, 
Krishna Krishna, Hari Hari, Hari Rama Hari Rama, Rama 
Rama, Hari Hari, Hari Krishna, Hari Krishna, Krishna 
Krishna, Hari Hari... And it doesn’t matter what it means 
(Actually Krishna and Rama are the names of Hindu 
divinities.) The point is to get with that thing that is running, 
running, running... Hari Krishna, Hari Krishna, Krishna 
Krishna, Hari Hariand so on. 


If you’re a Christian or a Jew you may feel more inclined to 
use a meditation word that is more congenial to you, 
Halleluja, Halleluja, Halleluja... 


If you area Mohammedan you can use the Allah, the name 
of God. They have a way of doing it which gets very 
exciting: Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, 
Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, 
Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah,  Al-lah, 
Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, 
Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, 
Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah, Al-lah Al-lah Al-lah 
Al-lah Al-lah Al-lah Al-lah Al-lah Al-lah... And it gets faster 


and faster and after 40 minutes you will be out of your mind. 


But you see, to go out of your mind at least once a day is 
tremendously important. By going out of your mind you 
come to your senses. And if you stay in your mind all the 
time, you are overrational. In other words, you are like a 
very rigid bridge which because it has no give, no craziness 
init, is going to be blown down in the first hurricane. 


59 


INCENSE 


Trying to convey the idea of smells to you in words has the 
same sort of frustration one gets trying to describe color to 
the blind. I have a friend who was born blind. She has no idea 
what darkness is. And so I had to try to give her an idea of 
what stars are and why we love them. I said, “Imagine when 
you touch the edge of something, you feel the edge, and then 
you move your hand away and nothing obstructs your hand, 
so there is space, nothing obstructing. Now imagine if you 
could put your hands out and feel around yourself a large 
collection of randomly distributed prickles, sharp points, 
that don’t hurt you. At least not like the point of a needle. 
They’re kind of pleasure-pain. We get this impression with 
the things we call our eyes, a friendly prickle coming at us 
from all over space when we cansee them at night.” So we 
try and translate the language of sight into the language of 
touch. Likewise we have this difficulty in talking about smell 
to people who, as G. K. Chesterton said, ‘They haven't got 
no noses, and goodness only knowses the noselessness of 
man. 


60 


Our sense of smell is not only repressed but is the one that we 
aren't really very proud of. For example, if I ask you “Do you 
smell?” It seems to be a rude question. There’s a famous story 
about that great English literatus, Dr. Johnson, who got into 
a stagecoach one day (this was in the eighteenth century 
when people didn’t bathe as much as they do today) and, 
shortly after, a lady got onto the stagecoach and sat opposite 
him, and said to him, “Sir, you smell.” He said, “On the 
contrary, madam, you smell. I stink.” And so you see how 
even in those times the word smell had a bad odor. There are 
only four adjectives in the English language that apply 
specifically to the sense of smell. We have acrid, pungent, 
fragrant, and putrid. We have ever so many adjectives from 
taste which we apply to smell, as when we say something 
smells sweet, or something of that kind. But we really aren't 
very conscious of the sense of smell. And yet it exercises an 
enormous influence upon us just because we're not conscious 
of it. I believe that instant likes and dislikes that we have for 
other people that are sometimes completely irrational are 
based on an unconscious determination of whether we do or 
don’t like their smell. Smells are so powerful in evoking 
memories! Things you smelled as a child, say the smell of 
fresh coffee being cooked early in the morning, bacon frying, 
leaves being burned on an autumn day, all evoke vivid 
emotions and feelings of childhood. 


But when people talk about very deep things, they never talk 
about the sense of smell. They talk about touch, vision, taste, 
and hearing. For example, we hear about the vision of God. 
In the Catholic Church it is said that the highest thing to 
which man can attain or to which the angels can attain is the 
beatific vision, to see God. One of the Psalms says, ‘’Oh taste 
and see how excellent the Lord is.” Taste and see. But no one 
ever had the idea of smelling God, of having not just the 
beatific vision, but the beatific aroma. Yet curiously enough, 
throughout the whole history of religions, until we got to 
what is called the phenomenon of the Protestant nose, we've 
used incense in our religious services. 


63 


Hindus use incense, Buddhists use incense, Mohammedans 
use incense, Catholics use incense, Hebrews use incense or 
used to. But there came a break at the time of the 
Reformation when incense was somehow given up. And why 
is this? Why this repression of the sense of smell? don’t ~ 
know, but I do know that it is repressed. That’s a shame! 
We're depriving ourselves of a whole world of wonder. The 
nose is just as sensitive as the ears, and the same way as there 
can be glories for the eyes, there can be glories for the nose. | 
don’t know why we're so diffident, so uptight about 
admitting that we have noses. Animals have the most 
incredible sense of smell and can detect all sorts of things. 
They open up to themselves a whole new world of experience 
by simply using their noses. Now if you don’t use your nose, 
you're really in just as pitiable a condition as somebody who 
was born blind or deaf. You've lost a whole sense. So there is 
a whole art of smell. I know very little about one half of it: 
The art of perfumery. But 1 do know that a very skilled 
manufacturer of perfumes gets a very beautiful lady, sniffs 
the odor of her body and combines the natural odor of her 
body with a perfume ingredient that will be its perfect 
partner, producing some entirely individual scent that is her 
own authentic smell. I don’t know why you shouldn't have 
your own authentic smell just as you have your own 
authentic voice, your own authentic face, and, indeed, your 
own authentic character. However, I do know quite a bit 
about incense. 


64 


Everybody knows that incense is widely sold in the United 
States and Europe. But the ordinary incense sold is usually 
black or purple in color. And although there are good 
incenses that are black and purple, I advise you never to buy 
a black or a purple incense, unless you're buying from 
someone who really understands incense and can advise you 
what to buy. But ordinarily, black or purple incenses smell 
like cheap perfume. A bad incense always has a soapy smell; 
a good incense has a woodsy, resinous, or floral smell. The 
absolutely basic incense for the Orient is sandalwood. I have 
a small trunk of sandalwood on which are written the 
Chinese characters, “Bird, Sound; Flower, Perfume.” So, 
from the bird—sound, from the flower—perfume. 
Sometimes a piece of sandalwood is made into a statue, such 
as a Hindu goddess. But generally speaking, sandalwood is 
the basic incense. It comes in various forms—chips, powder, 
and sticks. The best way to burn incense is in a bow] with 
sand. Use charcoal, which you can buy from ecclesiastical 
shops, impregnated with saltpeter that lights itself. You can 
use ordinary barbecue charcoal but I don’t recommend it. 
When you get the charcoal going, take a chip of incense 
wood and place it on the charcoal and slowly it will heat up. 
Soon you'll find the whole room marvelously impregnated 
with this curiously sweet, woodsy smell that isn’t icky-sweet. 


There are three basic kinds of incense: temple incense, punk 
for scaring off insects, and boudoir incense. Temple incense 
is very pure; it has the feeling of high mountain forests, or 
loneliness—the chip form of sandalwood. There’s the powder 
form of sandalwood which you just pinch on the lighted 
charcoal. You can use powdered sandalwood for rubbing 
into your hands. I wear round my neck what the Japanese 
call a juzu. It’s a Zen Buddhist rosary. And you rub a little 
sandalwood powder into your hands and you play withit. I 
use them for counting my breath during meditation. You just 
breathe in and out on each bead, once out and once in. After 
you've counted each bead your whole rosary is perfumed 
with sandalwood. 


67 


Another wonderful kind of wooden incense comes from a 
tree, which the Japanese call gingko, found in the Orient that 
gets a disease which causes the wood to become extremely 
hard. And that very hard wood, aloeswood is enormously 
expensive. The disease in the tree is like the pearls in the 
oyster—somehow out of disease comes something beautiful. 
And you can burn aloeswood on charcoal. It has one of the 
most marvelous perfumes in the world. Its smell is the high 
forest, and old Dr. Suzuki, the great authority on Zen 
Buddhism, said, “ Thesmell of gingko is the smell of 
Buddhism.” It is used in Buddhist temples in China and Japan 
for special occasions. There are so many other fantastic 
varieties. There is a special incense which the Japanese use in 
the peculiar custom of tea ceremony. It’s a ceremony that is 
nonreligious and yet very religious. Tea ceremony is drinking 
tea, and there are no images, icons, or religious symbols 
present. There is just drinking of tea in a completely, fully 
attentive way, as if it were the only important thing in the 
universe. Tea ceremony is completely living in the present, 
being absolutely with what you're doing, but in a kind of 
relaxed, easy way. Living in the eternal now, which is 
actually the only place there is to be. For the ceremony the 
Japanese use a particular vase with a curious little ivory top. 
Originally it was a jar for pills or herbal medicine. The 
masters of the tea ceremony felt that they were so elegant 
that they came to be used as incense containers for the 
ceremony. The incense is made of very small, black balls 
with an absolutely distinctive smell that is associated with the 
tea ceremony. 


68 


Another familiar form of incense is stick incense. Stick 
incense is lighted, the flame blown out, and stuck in a bowl 
of sand. The most luxurious of Japanese incense is based on 
musk although it’s green, which is usually pine. Also, you 
can find, although it’s rare, amazing stick incense from Tibet. 
It’s regarded as a punk. Punk has the smell of autumn leaves. 
It is a little richer and is very good for keeping away 
mosquitoes. There is a similar, marvelous incense stick from 
Nepal. It is acoarse incense that I have a special liking for, it 
is distinct from the ones that are too icky-perfumed. One of 
the most extraordinary ones from Nepal comes in the form of 
a little piece of rope. This has a good-sweet flavor as distinct 
from icky-sweet. It’s like the sweetness of fresh strawberries 
or fine honey compared to the sweetness of cheap candy. 


Pakistan has a spiral incense which is a punk, used for 
keeping away mosquitoes. There’s another interesting form 
of spiral incense which is used to reproduce a religious 
symbol, or whatever, when lighted it burns until the symbol 
is outlined in black. 


In the West, the principal incense in use is resin. 
Frankincense, a resin, is really basic to incenses used in the 
Christian churches both of the East and of the West. And the 
delightful thing about using frankincense is the censer or 
thurible which you swing to disperse the incense. It's 
charming to use, and you can swing it rfght around without 
the incense coming out. It is used this way throughout the 
Western churches and, for reasons unknown to me, the 
Protestants gave it up. They lost all the joy of doing this 
thing for the greater glory of God. 


71 


My home is aboard the ferryboat Vallejo which is tied up 
at the north end of Sausalito close to San Francisco. You may 
think a ferryboat is a rather weird place to live. But I've 
always loved weird things. When I was a little boy, people 
used to say to me, “Alan, you're so weird. Why can’t you be 
like other people?” I thought that was just plain dull, like 
having the same thing for dinner every day. And, it is well 
said, variety is the spice of life. 


Some things are weird because they are obvious— nobody 
ever thinks of them. Some of the most fascinating scientific 
discoveries have been made by people who questioned what 
was accepted as common sense. Like ‘Anybody can see that 
the earth is flat and people know it’s flat.” The questioning of 
that fundamental assumption was the beginning of 
geography. 


73 


When I consider the weirdest of all things I can think of, do 
you know what it is? Nothing. The whole idea of nothing is 
something that has bugged people for centuries, especially in 
the Western world. We have a saying in Latin, Ex nihilo nihil 
fit, which means, ‘Out of nothing comes nothing.” In other 
words, you can’t get something out of nothing. It’s occurred 
to me that this is a Fallacy of tremendous proportions. It lies 
at the root of all our common sense, not only in the West, but 
in many parts of the East as well. It manifests as a kind of 
terror of nothing, a putdown on nothing, a putdown on 
everything associated with nothing such as sleep, passivity, 
rest, and even the feminine principle which is often equated 
with the negative principle (although women’s lib people 
don’t like that kind of thing, when they understand what I'm 
saying I don’t think they'll object). To me, nothing—the 
negative, the empty—is exceedingly powerful. I would say, 
not Ex nthilo nihil fit, but, “You can’t have something 
without nothing.” 


How do we basically begin to think about the difference 
between something and nothing? When I say there is a cigar 
in my right hand and there is no cigar in my left hand, we get 
the idea of is, something, and isn't, nothing. At the basis of 
this reasoning lies the far more obvious contrast of solid and 
space. We tend to think of space as nothing; when we talk 
about the conquest of space there’s a little element of 
hostility. But actually, we're talking about the conquest of 
distance. Space or whatever it is that lies between the earth 
and the moon, and the earth and the sun, is considered to be 
just nothing at all. 


74 


But to suggest how very powerful and important this nothing 
at all is, let me point out that if you didn’t have space, you 
couldn't have anything solid. Without space outside the solid 
you wouldn't know where the solid’s edges were. For 
example, you can see me in a photograph because you see a 
background and that background shows up my outline. But 
if it weren't there, then I and everything around me would 
merge into a single, rather peculiar mass. You always have to 
have a background of space to seea figure. The figure and 
the background, the solid and the space, are inseparable and 
go together. 


We find this very commonly in the phenomenon of 
magnetism. A magnet has a north pole and a south pole— 
there is no such thing as a magnet with one pole only. 
Supposing we equate north with is and south with isn’t. You 
canchop the magnet into two pieces, if it’s a bar magnet, and 
just get another north pole and south pole, another is and 
isn't, on the end of each piece. 


What I am trying to get into basic logic is that there isn’t a 
sort of fight between something and nothing. Everyone is 
familiar with the famous words of Hamlet, ‘’To be or not to 
be, that is the question.” It isn’t; to be or not to be is not the 
question. Because youcan’t have a solid without space. You 
can't have an is without an isn’t, asomething without a 
nothing, a figure without a background. And we can turn 
that round, and say, “You can’t have space without solid.” 


Imagine nothing but space, space, space, space with nothing 
in it, forever. But there you are imagining it and you're 
something in it. The whole idea of there being only space, 
and nothing else at all, is not only inconceivable but perfectly 
meaningless, because we always know what we mean by 
contrast. 


77 


We know what we mean by white in comparison with black. 
We know life in comparison with death. We know pleasure 
in comparison with pain, up in comparison with down. But 
all these things must come into being together. You don’t 
have first something and then nothing or first nothing and 
then something. Something and nothing are two sides of the 
same coin. If you file away the tails side of a coin completely, 
the heads side of it will disappear as well. So in this sense, the 
positive and negative, the something and the nothing, are 
inseparable—they go together. The nothing is the force 
whereby the something can be manifested. 


We think that matter is basic to the physical world. And 
matter has various shapes. We think of tables as made of 
wood as we think of pots as made of clay. But is a tree made 
of wood in the same way a table is? No, a tree is wood; it isn’t 
made of wood. Wood and tree are two different names for 
the same thing. 


But there is in the back of our mind, the notion, as a root of 
common sense, that everything in the world is made of some 
kind of basic stuff. Physicists, through centuries, have 
wanted to know what that was. Indeed, physics began as a 
quest to discover the basic stuff out of which the world is 
made. And with all our advances in physics we've never 
found it. What we have found is not stuff but form. We have 
found shapes. We have found structures. When you turn up 
the microscope and look at things expecting to see some sort 
of stuff, you find instead form, pattern, structure. You find 
the shape of crystals, beyond the shapes of crystals you find 
molecules, beyond molecules you find atoms, beyond atoms 
you find electrons and positrons between which there are 
vast spaces. We can’t decide whether these electrons are 
waves or particles and so we call them wavicles. 


78 


What we will come up with will never be stuff, it will always 
be a pattern. This pattern can be described, measured, but we 
never get to any stuff for the simple reason there isn’t any. 
Actually, stuff is when you see something unclearly or out of 
focus, fuzzy. When we look at it with the naked eye it looks 
just like goo. We can’t make out any significant shape to it. 
But when you put it under the microscope, you suddenly see 
shapes. It comes into clear focus as shape. 


And youcan go on and on, looking into the nature of the 
world and you will never find anything except form. Think 
of stuff; basic substance. You wouldn't know how to talk 
about it; even if you found it, how would you describe what 
it was like? You couldn't say anything about a structure in it, 
you couldn't say anything about a pattern or a process in it, 
because it would be absolute, primordial goo. 


What else is there besides form in the world? Obviously, 
between the significant shapes of any form there is space. 
And space and form go together as the fundamental things 
we're dealing with in this universe. The whole of Buddhism is 
based on a saying, ‘That which is void is precisely form, and 
that which is form is precisely void.” Let me illustrate this to 
you in anextremely simple way. When you use the word 
clarity, what do you mean? It might mean a perfectly 
polished lens, or mirror, or a clear day when there’s no smog 
and the air is perfectly transparent like space. 


What's the next thing clarity makes you think of? You think 
of form in clear focus, all the details articulate and perfect. So 
the one word clarity suggests to you these two apparently 
completely different things: the clarity of the lens or the 
mirror, and the clarity of articulate form. In this sense, we 
can take the saying “Form is void, void is form” and instead 
of saying is, say implies, or the word that | invented 
goeswith. Form always goeswith void. And there really isn’t, 
in this whole universe, any substance. 


81 


Form, indeed, is inseparable from the idea of energy, and 
form, especially when it’s moving ina very circumscribed 
area, appears to us as solid. For example, when you spin an 
electric fan the empty spaces between the blades sort of 
disappear into a blur, and you can’t pusha pencil, much less 
your finger, through the fan. So in the same way, you can’t 
push your finger through the floor because the floor’s going 
too fast. Basically, what you have down there is nothing and 
form in motion. 


I knew of a physicist at the University of Chicago who was 
rather crazy like some scientists, and the idea of the 
insolidity, the instability of the physcial world, impressed 
him so much that he used to go around in enormous padded 
slippers for fear he should fall through the floor. So this 
commonsense notion that the world is made of some kind of 
substance is a nonsense idea—it isn’t there at all but is, 
instead, form and emptiness. 


Most forms of energy are vibration, pulsation. The energy of 
light or the energy of sound are always on and off. In the case 
of very fast light, very strong light, even with alternating 
current you don't notice the discontinuity because your 
retina retains the impression of the on pulse and youcan't 
notice the off pulse except in very slow light like an arc lamp. 
It's exactly the same thing with sound. A high note seems 
more continuous because the vibrations are faster than a low 
note. In the low note you hear a kind of graininess because of 
the slower alternations of on and off. 


82 


All wave motion is this process, and when we think of 
waves, we think about crests. The crests stand out from the 
underlying, uniform bed of water. These crests are perceived 
as the things, the forms, the waves. But you cannot have the 
emphasis called a crest, the concave, without the 
de-emphasis, or con¥é, called the trough. So to have 
anything standing out, there must be something standing 
down or standing back. We must realize that if you had this 
part alone, the up part, that would not excite your senses 
because there would be no contrast. 


The same thing is true of all life together. We shouldn't really 
contrast existence with nonexistence, because actually, 
existence is the alternation of now-you-see-it/now-you-don't, 
now-you-see-it/now-you-don’t, now-you-see-it/now-you- 
don't. It is that contrast that presents the sensation of there 
being anything at all. 


Now, in light and sound the waves are extraordinarily rapid 
so that we don't hear or see the interval between them. But 
there are other circumstances in which the waves are 
extraordinarily slow, as in the alternation of day and night, 
light and darkness, and the much vaster alternations of life 
and death. But these alternations are just as necessary to the 
being of the universe as in the very fast motions of light and 
sound, and in the sense of solid contact when it’s going so 
rapidly that we notice only continuity or the is side. We 
ignore the intervention of the isn't side, but it’s there just the 
same, just as there are vast spaces within the very heart of the 
atom. 


85 


Another thing that goes along with all this is that it’s 
perfectly obvious that the universe is a system which is aware 
of itself. In other words, we, as living organisms, are forms 
of the energy of the universe just as much as the stars and the 
galaxies, and, through our sense organs, this system of 
energy becomes aware of itself. 


But to understand this we must again relate back to our basic 
contrast between on and off, something and nothing, which 
is that the aspect of the universe which is aware of itself, 
which does the awaring, does not see itself. In other words, 
you can’t look at your eyes with your eyes. You can’t observe 
yourself in the act of observing. You can’t touch the tip of a 
finger with the tip of the same finger no matter how hard you 
try. Therefore, there is onthe reverse side of all observation 
a blank spot; for example, behind your eyes from the point of 
view of your eyes. However you look around there is 
blankness behind them. That’s unknown. That’s the part of 
the universe which does not see itself because it is seeing. 


We alwaysget this division of experience into one-half known, 
one-half unknown. We would like to know, if we could, this 
always unknown. If we examine the brain and the structure 

of the nerves behind the eyes, we're always looking at 
somebody else’s brain. We're never able to look at our own 
brain at the same time we're investigating somebody else’s 
brain. 


So there is always this blank side of experience. What I’m 
suggesting is that the blank side of experience has the same 
relationship to the conscious side as the off principle of 
vibration has to the on principle. There's a fundamental 
division. The Chinese call them the yang, the positive side, 
and the yin, the negative side. This corresponds to the idea of 
one and zero. All numbers can be made of one and zero as in 
the binary system of numbers which is used for computers. 


86 


And so it’s all made up of off and on, and conscious and 
unconscious. But the unconscious is the part of experience 
which is doing consciousness, just as the trough manifests the 
wave, the space manifests the solid, the background 
manifests the figure. And so all that side of life which you call 
unconscious, unknown, impenetrable, is unconscious, 
unknown, impenetrable because it’s really you. In other 
words, the deepest you is the nothing side, is the side which 
you don’t know. 


So, don’t be afraid of nothing. I could say, ‘There's nothing 
in nothing to be afraid of.” But people in our culture are 
terrified of nothing. They're terrified of death; they are 
uneasy about sleep, because they think it’s a waste of time. 
They havea lurking fear in the back of their minds that the 
universe is eventually going to run down and end in nothing, 
and it will all be forgotten, buried and dead. But this is a 
completely unreasonable fear, because it is just precisely this 
nothing which is always the source of something. 


Think once again of the image of clarity, crystal clear. 
Nothing is what brings something into focus. This nothing, 
symbolized by the crystal, is your own eyeball, your own 
consciousness. 


89 


d Maria Demarest 


Photographs by Mike Powers an 


lee always been fascinated with the idea of death as far back 
as 1 canremember, from earliest childhood. You may think 
that’s kind of morbid, but when a child at night says the 
phrase If I should die before I wake, there’s something about 
it that’s absolutely weird. What would it be like to go to sleep 
and never wake up? Most reasonable people just dismiss the 
thought. They say, You can’t image that”; they shrug their 
shoulders and say, “Well, that will be that.” 


But I’mone of those ornery people who aren't content with 
an answer like that. Not that I’m trying to find something else 
beyond that, but I am absolutely fascinated with what it 
would be like to go to sleep and never wake up. Many people 
think it would be like going into the dark forever or being 
buried alive. Obviously it wouldn't be like that at all! 
Because we know darkness by contrast, and only by 
contrast, with light. 


I have a Friend, a girl, who is very intelligent and articulate, 
who was born blind and hasn't the faintest idea what 
darkness is. The word means as little to her as the word light. 
So it is the same for you; you are not aware of darkness when 
you are asleep. 


91 


If you went to sleep, into unconsciousness for always and 
always, it wouldn't be at all like going into the dark; it 
wouldn't be at all like being buried alive. As a matter of fact, 
it would be as if you had never existed at all! Not only you, 
but everything else as well. You would be in that state, as if 
you had never been. And, of course, there would be no 
problems, there would be no one to regret the loss of 
anything. You couldn’t even call it a tragedy because there 
would be no one to experience it as a tragedy. It would bea 
simple—nothing at all. Forever and for never. Because, not 
only would you have no future, you would also have no past 
and no present. 


At this point you are probably thinking, “Let's talk about 
something else.” But I’m not content with that, because this 
makes me think of two other things. First of all, the state of 
nothingness makes me think that the only thing in my 
experience close to nothingness is the way my head looks to 
my eye. I seem to feel there is a world out there confronting 
my eye, andthen behind my eye there isn’t a black spot, 
there isn’t even a hazy spot. There’s nothing at all! I’m not 
aware of my head, as it were, as a black hole in the middle of 
all this luminous visual experience. It doesn’t even have very 
clear edges. The field of vision is an oval, and behind this 
oval of vision there is nothing at all. Of course, if | use my 
fingers and touch | can feel something behind my eyes; if I 
use the sense of sight alone there is just nothing there at all. 
Nevertheless, out of that blankness, I see. 


92 


The second thing it makes me think of is when I'm dead I am 
as if | never had been born, and that’s the way I was before | 
was born. Just as I try to go back behind my eyes and find 
what is there! come to a blank, if I try to remember back and 
back and back to my earliest memories and behind 
that—nothing, total blank. But just as I know there's 
something behind my eyes by using my fingers on my head, 
so I know through other sources of information that before I 
was born there was something going on. There were my 
father and my mother, and their fathers and mothers, and the 
whole material environment of the Earth and its life out of 
which they came, and behind that the solar system, and 
behind that the galaxy, and behind that all the galaxies, and 
behind that another blank—space. | reason that if I go back 
when I’m dead to the state where I was before ! was born, 
couldn't I happen again? 


What has happened once can very well happen again. If it 
happened once it’s extraordinary, and it’s not really very 
much more extraordinary if it happened all over again. I do 
know I've seen people die and I've seen people born after 
them. So after I die not only somebody but myriads of other 
beings will be born. We all know that; there’s no doubt about 
it. What worries us is that when we're dead there could be 
nothing at all forever, as if that were something to worry 
about. Before you were born there was this same nothing at 
all forever, and yet you happened. If you happened once you 
can happen again. 


95 


Now what does that mean? To look at it in its very simplest 
way and to properly explain myself, I must invent a new 
verb. This is the verb to J. We'll spell it with the letter / but 
instead of having it as a pronoun we will call it a verb. The 
universe I's. It has [‘d in me it I's in you. Now let's respell the 
word eye. When | talk about to eye, it means to look at 
something, to be aware of something. So we will change the 
spelling, and will say the universe I's. It becomes aware of 
itself in each one of us, and it keeps the IJ'ing, and everytime it 
I's every one of us in whom it I's feels that he is the center of 
the whole thing. I know that you feel that you are | in just the 
same way that I feel that I am 1. We all have the same 
background of nothing, we don’t remember having done it 
before, and yet it has been done before again and again and 
again, not only before in time but all around us everywhere 
else in space is everybody, is the universe I'ing. 


Let me try to make this clearer by saying it is the universe 
ling. Who is ling? What do you mean by !? There are two 
things. First, you can mean your ego, your personality. But 
that’s not your real /‘ing, because your personality is your 
idea of your self, your image of yourself, and that’s made up 
of how you feel yourself, how you think about yourself 
thrown in with what all your friends and relations have told 
you about yourself. So your image of yourself obviously isn’t 
you any more than your photograph is you or any more than 
the image of anything is it. All our images of ourselves are 
nothing more than caricatures. They contain no information 
for most of us on how we grow our brains, how we work our 
nerves, how we circulate our blood, how we secrete with our 
glands, and how we shape our bones. That isn’t contained in 
the sensation of the image we call the ego, so obviously, then 
the ego image is not my self. 


96 


My self contains all these things that the body is doing, the 
circulation of the blood, the breathing, the electrical activity 
of the nerves, all this is me but I don’t know how it’s 
constructed. And yet, I do all that. It is true to say J breathe, I 
walk, I think, I am conscious—I don’t know how I manage to 
be, but I do it in the same way as! grow my hair. I must 
therefore locate the center of me, my I‘ing, at a deeper level 
than my ego which is my image or idea of myself. But how 
deep do we go? 


We can say the body is the J, but the body comes out of the 
rest of the universe, comes out of all this energy—so it’s the 
universe that’s I‘ing. The universe |’s in the same way that a 
tree apples or that a star shines, and the center of the appling 
is the tree and the center of the shining is the star, and so the 
basic center of self of the J‘ing is the eternal universe or 
eternal thing that has existed forten thousand million years 
and will probably go on for at least that much more. We are 
not concerned about how long it goes on, but repeatedly it 
I's, sothat it seems absolutely reasonable to assume that 
when | die and this physical body evaporates and the whole 
memory system with it, then the awareness that I had before 
will begin all over once again, not in exactly the same way, 
but that of a baby being born. 


99 


Of course, there will be myriads of babies born, not only 
baby human beings but baby frogs, baby rabbits, baby fruit 
flies, baby viruses, baby bacteria—and which one of them 
am | going to be? Only one of them and yet every one of 
them, this experience comes always in the singular one at a 
time, but certainly one of them. Actually it doesn’t make 
much difference, because if | were born again as a Fruit Fly I 
would think that being a fruit fly was the normal ordinary 
course of events, and naturally I would think that I was an 
important person, a highly cultured being, because fruit flies 
obviously have a high culture. We don’t even know how to 
look at it. But probably they have all sorts of symphonies 
and music, and artistic performances in the way light is 
reflected on their wings in different ways, the way they dance 
in the air, and they say, “Oh, look at her, she has real style, 
look how the sunlight comes off her wings.” They in their 
world think they are as important and civilized as we do in 
our world. So, if | were to wake up as a fruit fly I wouldn't 
feel any different than I do when! wake up as a human being. 
I would be used to it. 


Well, you say, “It wouldn't be me! Because if it were me again 
I would have to remember how I was before!” Right, but you 
don’t know, remember, how you were before and yet you are 
content enough to be the me that you are. In fact, it’s a 
thoroughly good arrangement in this world that we don’t 
remember what it was like before. Why? Because variety is 
the spice of life, and if we remembered, remembered, 
remembered having done this again and again and again we 
should get bored. In order to see a figure you have to have a 
background, in order that a memory be valuable you also 
have to have a forgettory. That's why we sleep every night to 
refresh ourselves; we go into the unconscious so that coming 
back to the conscious is again a great experience. 


100 


Day after day we remember the days that have gone on 
before, even though there is the interval of sleep. Finally 
there comes a time when, if we consider what is to our true 
liking, we will want to forget everything that went before. 
Then we can have the extraordinary experience of seeing the 
world once again through the eyes of a baby—whatever kind 
of baby. Then it will be completely new and we will have all 
the startling wonder that a child has, all the vividness of 
perception which we wouldn’t have if we remembered 
everything forever. 


The universe is a system which forgets itself and then again 
remembers anew so there’s always constant change and 
constant variety in the span of time. It also does it in the span 
of space by looking at itself through every different living 
organism, giving an all-around view. 


That is a way of getting rid of prejudice, getting rid of a one- 
sided view. Death in that sense is a tremendous release from 
monotony. It puts an end to all of total forgetting in a 
rhythmic process of on/off, on/off so you can begin all over 
again and never be bored. But the point is that if you can 
fantasize the idea of being nothing for always and always, 
what you are really saying is after I'm dead the universe 
stops, and what I'm saying is it goes on just as it did when 
you were born. You may think it incredible that you have 
more than one life, but isn’t it incredible that you have this 
one? That's astonishing! And it can always happen again and 
again and again! 


103 


What I am saying then is just because you don’t know how 
you manage to be conscious, how you manage to grow and 
shape your body, doesn’t mean that you're not doing it. 
Equally, if you don’t know how the universe shines the stars, 
constellates the constellations, or galactifies the 
galaxies—you don’t know but that doesn’t mean that you 
aren't doing it just the same way as you are breathing 
without knowing how you breathe. 


If I say really and truly I am this whole universe, or this 
particular organism is an I'ing being done by the whole 
universe, then somebody could say to me, “Who the hell do 
you think you are? Are you God? Do you warm up the 
galaxies? Canst’ thou bind the sweet influences of the 
Pleiades or loosen the bonds of Orion?” And I reply, “Who 
the hell do you think you are! Can you tell me how you grow 
your brain, how you shape your eyeballs, and how you 
manage to see? Well, if you can’t tell me that, I can’t tell you 
how I warm up the galaxy. Only I’ve located the center of 
myself at a deeper and more universal level than we are, in 
our culture, accustomed to do.” 


So then, if that universal energy is the real me, the real self 
which I's as different organisms in different spaces or places, 
and happening again and again at different times, we've got a 
marvelous system going in which you can be eternally 
surprised. The universe is really asystem which keeps on 
surprising itself. 


104 


Many of us have an ambition, especially in an age of 
technological competence, to have everything under our 
control. This is a false ambition because you've only got to 
think for one moment what it would be like to really know 
and control everything. Supposing we had a supercolossal 
technology which could go to our wildest dreams of 
technological competence so that everything that is going to 
happen would be foreknown, predicted, and everything 
would be under our control. Why, it would be like making 
love to a plastic woman! There would be no surprise in it, no 
sudden answering touch as when we touch another human 
being. There comes out a response, something unexpected, 
and that’s what we really want. 


You can’t experience the feeling you call self unless it’s in 
contrast with the.feeling of other. It’s like known and 
unknown, light and dark, positive and negative. Other is 
necessary in order for you to feel self. Isn’t that the 
arrangement you want? And, in the same way, couldn’t you 
say the arrangement you want is not to remember? Memory 
is always, remember, aform of control: I've got it in mind, I 
know your number, you're under control. Eventually you 
want to release that control. 


Now if you go on remembering and remembering and 
remembering, it’s like writing on a piece of paper and going 
on writing and writing until there is no space left on the 
paper. Your memory is filled up and vou need to wipe it 
clean so you can begin to write on it once more. 


107 


That’s what death does for us: It wipes the slate clean and 
also, for looking at it fromthe point of view of population 
and the human organism on the planet, it keeps cleaning us 
out! A technology which would enable each one of us to be 
immortal would progressively crowd the planet with people 
having hopelessly crowded memories. They would be like 
people living in a house where they had accumulated so 
much property, so many books, so many vases, so many sets 
of knives and forks, so many tables and chairs, so many 
newspapers that there wouldn't be any roomto move 
around, 


To live we need space, and space is a kind of nothingness, 
and death is a kind of nothingness—it’s all the same 
principle. And by putting blocks or spaces of nothingness, 
spaces of space in between spaces of something, we get life 
properly spaced out. The German word lebensraum means 
room for living, and that’s what space gives us, and that’s 
what death gives us. 


Notice that in everything I’vesaid about death I haven't 
brought in anything that I could call spookery. I haven't 
brought in any information about anything that you don’t 
already know. I haven’t invoked any mysterious knowledge 
about souls, memory of former lives, anything like that; I’ve 
just talked about it in terms that we already know. If you 
believe the idea that life beyond the grave is just wishful 
thinking, I'll grant that. 


Let’s assume that it is wishful thinking and when we are dead 
there just won't be anything. That'll be the end. Notice, first 
of all, that’s the worst thing you've got to fear. Does it 
frighten you? Who's going to be afraid? Supposing it ends— 
no more problems. 


108 


But then you will see that this nothingness, if you've followed 
my argument, is something you'd bounce off from again just 
as you bounced in in the first place when you were born. You 
bounced out of nothingness. Nothingness is a kind of bounce 
because it implies that nothing implies something. You 
bounce back all new, all different, nothing to compare it with 
before, a refreshing experience. 


You get this sense of nothingness, just like you've got the 
sense of nothing behind your eyes, very powerful frisky 
nothingness underlying your whole being. There’s nothing in 
that nothing to be afraid of. With that sense youcancome on 
like the rest of your life is gravy because you'realready + 
dead: You know your're going to die. 


Wesay the only things certain are death and taxes. And the 
death of each one of us now is as certain as it would be if we 
were going to die five minutes from now. So where's your 
anxiety? Where's your hangup? Regard yourself as dead 
already so that you have nothing to lose. A Turkish proverb 
says, ‘He whosleeps on the floor will not fall out of bed.”” So 
in the same way is the person who regards himself as already 


dead. 


Therefore, you are virtually nothing. A hundred years from 
now you will be a handful of dust, and that will be for real. 
All right now, act onthat reality. Andout of that... 
nothing. You will suddenly surprise yourself: The more you 
know you are nothing the more you will amount to 
something. 


11 


dies What is time? 


St. Augustine of Hippo when asked, “What is time?” said, 

“I know what it is, but when you ask me I don’t.” Yet it is 
absolutely fundamental to our life: ‘Time is money.” “I don’t 
have enough time.” “Time flies.” “Time drags.” 


I think we should question what time is, because of our 
ordinary common sense we think of it as a one-way motion 
from the past through the present and on into the future. 
That carries with it the impression that life moves from the 
past tothe future in such a way that what happens now and 
what will happen is always the result of what has happened 
in the past. In other words, we seem to be driven along. 


Once it was fashionable in psychology for people to speak of 
man’s instincts, the instinct for survival, an instinct to make 
love, and so on. But nowadays that word has become 
unfashionable and psychologists tend instead to use the word 
drive, and to speak of the need for food as a drive, the need 
for survival or for sex as drives. That’s a very significant 
word because it’s brought out by people who feel driven. 
Personally, if I feel hungry I don’t feel driven; if I feel lusty I 
don't feel driven; I don’t say, “Oh, excuse me but I have to 
eat,” or, “Excuse me but I need to fulfill my sexual urges.” | 
say, “Hooray!” |] identify myself with my drives. They are 
me, and I don't take a passive attitude towards them and 
apologize for them. So the whole idea of our being driven is 
connected with the idea of causality, of lite moving under the 
power of the past. That is so ingrained in our common sense 
that it's very difficult to get rid of it. But | want to turn it 
round completely and say the past is the result of the present. 


113 


From one point of view that is very obvious. For example, let 
us suppose that this universe started with a big bang as some 
cosmologists believe. Now when that bang happened, it was 
the present, wasn’t it? And so the universe began in what we 
will call a now moment, then it goes on doing its stuff. When 
any event that we now call past came into being, it came into 
being in the present and out of the present. That's one way of 
seeing it. 


But before we get further involved in this, | want to draw 
your attention to a fallacy in the very commonsense idea of 
causality —events are caused by previous events from which 
they flow or necessarily result. To understand the fallacy of 
that idea, we have to begin by asking, “What do you mean 
by an event?” Let's take the event of a human being coming 
into the world. Now when does that event begin? Does it 
occur at the moment of parturition when the baby actually 
comes out of its mother? Or does the baby begin at the 
moment of conception? Or does a baby begin when it is a 
gleam in its father’s eye? Or does a baby begin when the 
spermatozoa are generated in the father or the ova in the 
mother? Or could you say a baby begins when its father is 
born or when its mother is born? All these things can be 
thought of as beginnings, but we decide for purposes of legal 
registration that a lite begins at the moment of parturition. 
And that is a purely arbitrary decision; it has validity only 
because we all agree about it. 


114 


Let me show you the same phenomenon in the dimension of 
space instead of the dimension of time. Let's ask, ‘How big is 
the sun?” Are we going to define the sun as limited by the 
extent of its fire? That's one possible definition. But we could 
equally well define the sphere of the sun by the extent of its 
light. And each of these would be reasonable choices. We 
have arbitrarily agreed to define the sun by the limit of its 
visible fire. But you see in these analogies that how big a 
thing is or how long an event is, is simply a matter of 
definition. 


Therefore, when by the simple definition for purposes of 
discussion we have divided events into certain periods—the 
First World War began in 1914 and it ended in 1918 (actually, 
all those things which led up to the First World War started 
long before 1914, and the repercussions of that war 
continued long after 1918)—we sort of forget we do it. We 
have a puzzle, “How do events lead to each other?” 


In reality there are no separate events. Life moves along like 
water, it’s all connected as the source of the river is connected 
to the mouth and the ocean. All the events or things going on 
are like whirlpools in a stream. Today you see a whirlpool 
and tomorrow you see a whirlpool in the same place, but it 
isn’t the same whirlpool because the water is changing every 
second. 


What is happening is not really what we should call a 
whirlpool, but rather a whirlpooling. It is an activity, not a 
thing. And indeed every so-called thing can be called an 
event. We can call a house, housing, a mat, matting, and we 
could equally call a cat, a catting. So we could say, “The 
catting sat on the matting.” And we would thereby have a 
world in which there were no things but only events. To give 
another illustration: A flame is something we say, ‘There is a 
flame on the candle.” But it would be more correct to say, 
“There is a flaming on the candle,” because a flame is a 
stream of hot gas. 


Let’s take another amusing example. Fist is a noun and fist 
looks like a thing, but what happens to the fist when I open 
my hand. I was fisting, now I'm handing, handing it to you. 
So every kind of so-called thing can be spoken of as anevent 
and because events flow into each other, the fisting flows into 
the handing, we cannot say exactly where one ends and the 
other begins. 


So, therefore, we do not need the idea of causality to explain 
how aprior event influences a following event. Consider it 
this way: Suppose I’m looking through a narrow slitina 
fence, and a snake goes by. I've never seena snake before, so 
it is mysterious. Through the fence I see first the snake’s 
head, then I see a long trailing body, and then finally the tail. 
Then the snake turns around and goes back. Then I see first 
the head, and then after an interval the tail. Now if I call the 
head one event and the tail another, it will seem to me that 
the event head is the cause of the event tail. And the tail is the 
effect. But if Ilook at the whole snake | will see a head-tail 
snake and it would be simply absurd to say that the head of 
the snake is the cause of the tail, as if the snake came into 
being as a head first and then a tail. The snake comes into 
being out of its egg as a head-tail snake. And in exactly the 
same way all events are really one event. We are looking, 
when we talk about different events, at different sections or 
parts of one continuous happening. 


Therefore, the idea of separate events, which have to be 
linked by a mysterious process called cause and effect, is 
completely unnecessary. But having thought that way, we 
think of present events as being caused by past events, and 
tend to regard ourselves as the puppets of the past, driven 
along by something that is always behind us. 


118 


we 


SSE 


It's very simple to overcome this impression. You begin with 
an experiment in meditation—approach the world through 
your ears. If you shut your eyes and make contact with 
reality purely with your ears, you will realize that the sounds 
you are hearing are all coming out of silence. It’s curious isn’t 
it because you hear all the realities, the sounds suddenly 
coming out of nothing. You don’t see any reason for them to 
begin, they just appear and then they echo away through the 
corridors of the mind which we call memory. 


Now if you open your eyes, it’s a little harder to see this 
because unlike sound, the eyes sound static or rather, they 
see static. Everything looks still to your eyes, but you must 
understand that the world you are looking at is vibrating. All 
material things are vibrating and they are vibrating at you 
now in the same way as the sound was vibrating on your 
ears. In other words, the present world that you see is a 
vibration coming out of space just as the sound comes out of 
silence. It is coming out of nothing straight at you and 
echoing away into the past. 


So the course of time is really very much like the course of a 
ship in the ocean. The ship leaves a wake behind it, and the 
wake fades out and tells us where the ship has been in just the 
same way as the past and our memory oF the past tells us 
what we have done. But as we go back into the past, and we 
go back and back to prehistory and we use all kinds of 
instruments and scientific methods for detecting what 
happened, we eventually reach a point where all record of 
the past fades away in just the same way as the wake of a 
ship. 


121 


Now the important thing to remember in this illustration is 
that the wake doesn’t drive the ship anymore than the tail 
wags the dog. The power, the source of the wake, is always 
in the ship itself which represents the present. You-can’t insist 
that the wake drives the ship. You can plot the course of the 
ship on graphpaper and calculate a trend by seeing over 
what number of squares the ship has been doing its wiggling, 
and make predictions as to where it will go next. This would 
give you a trendas to where the ship is going and you might 
say, “Because we can plot the trend from the pattern which 
the ship has followed, we can tell where it is going and, 
therefore, we are inclined to think that where it has been will 
determine where it will go.” But that is not actually the case. 
Where it has been is determined not by where it will go but 
where it is going. To put that more accurately, where it has 
been does not determine where it is going; where it is going 
determines where it has been. 


If you insist that your present is the result of your past, you 
are like a person driving your car looking always in the rear- 
view mirror. You are not, as it were, open to the future, you 
are always looking back over your shoulder to find out what 
you ought to do. And this is something absolutely 
characteristic of us and this is why human beings find it 
difficult to learn and difficult to adapt themselves to new 
situations. Because we are always looking for precedents, for 
authority from the past for what we are supposed to do now, 
that gives us the impression the past is all-important and is 
the determinative factor in our behavior. 


It isn’t anything of the kind. The life, the creation, comes out 
of you now. In other words, don’t look for the creation back 
here at the beginning of where the wake fades out. Don’t look 
for the creation of the universe at some very far-distant point 
in time behind us. The creation of the universe is now in this 
present instant. This is where it all begins! And it trails away 
from here and eventually vanishes. 


122 


Now of course we have a method of passing the buck in all 
matters of responsibility by saying, “Well, the past is 
responsible for me.” For instance, when dealing with a 
difficult child, we are apt to say, “Well, bang him about, beat 
him up, and maybe he'll change.” But then we say, “No, 
that’s not fair to the child to beat him up, because it was his 
parents’ fault; they didn’t bring him up properly.” And so 
then we say, “Well, punish the parents.” But the parents say, 
“Well, excuse me, but our parents were neurotic, too, and 
they brought us up badly so we couldn't help what we did.” 
And since the grandparents are dead we can't get at them, 
and if we could we would pass the whole blame back to 
Adam and Eve. We would say, “They started all this mess.” 
But then Eve would say, ‘No, the serpent tempted me and | 
did eat.”” Then it was the serpent’s fault! 


When God asked Eve, “Didst thoueatthe fruit of the tree 
whereof I told thee thou shouldst not eat?” she said, ‘‘Oh, but 
the serpent tempted me and | did eat.” And God looked at the 
serpent, and the serpent didn’t make any excuse. He 
probably winked—because the serpent, being an angel, was 
wise enough to know where the present begins. 


So you see, if you insist on being moved, being determined 
by the past, that’s your game. But the fact of the matter is it 
all starts right now. But we like to establish a connectivity 
with the past because that gives other people the impression 
that we're sane. People ask, for example, why you do 
something. Now that’s a ridiculous question. A child finds 
out that to irritate its parents it can always put the word wiiy 
after any answer to a question. “Why does the sun shine?” 
and he gets an astronomical explanation, ‘Well, why does 
nuclear heat generate in star bodies?” “Oh, because it reaches 
a critical mass.” “Well, why does it reach a critical mass?” 
And you can go on and on and on asking why until papa 
says, “Oh, shut up and suck your lollipop.” 


125 


The question “why,” because it can be asked interminably, 
never leads to any interesting answers. If you ask me then 
why am] proposing this, I could say, “Well, I'm making a 
living this way, or Ihave a message I want to get across to 
you.” But that’s not the reason. I am talking for the same 
reason that birds sing and the stars shine. I dig it. Why do I 
dig it? I could go on answering all sorts of questions about 
human motivation and psychology, but they wouldn't 
explain a thing, because explaining things by the past is really 
a refusal to explain them at all. All you're doing is 
postponing the explanation. You're putting it back and back 
and back and that explains nothing. 


What does explain things is the present. Why do you do it 
now? Now this is a slight cheat because that doesn’t explain it 
either, because what happens now, just as the sound comes 
out of silence, all this comes out of nowhere. All life suddenly 
emerges out of space—Bang! Right now! 


And to ask again why does it happen is an unprofitable 
question because the interesting thing is not why but what. 
What happens? Not, why does it happen? I can say, “Well, I 
am doing this now because | did that then,” and so I am 
producing for you a continuous line of thought, but actually 
] am doing it backwards. I'm doing it always from now and 
connecting up what I do now with what I did so that you can 
see a consistent story. 


126 


Now another interesting thing about this is that | can show 
you how the present changes the past. Let's take for example 
the order of words. Now words are strung out ina line just 
like we think events in time are strung out ina line andI can 
change a past word by a future word. If I say (taking a line 
from the poet Thomas Hood), ‘They went and told the 
sexton, and the sexton tolled the bell.” You don’t know what 
the first toldmeans until you get the sexton; you don’t know 
what the second tolled means until you get to the word bell. 
And so the later event changes the meaning of the former. Or 
you can say for example, “The bark of the tree,” and the 
word bark has a certain meaning. Then I say, ‘The bark of 


the dog,” and the later word has changed the meaning of the 
former one. 


Andso, inthis way, when we write history we find that 
writing history is really an art. The historian keeps putting a 
fresh interpretation on past events and in that sense he is 
changing it. He is changing their meaning just like we were 
changing the meaning of a former word by a later word by 


saying, “They went and told the sexton and the sexton tolled 
the bell.” 


129 


In this way you can experience a curious liberation from 
what the Hindus and the Buddhists call karma. The word 
karma in Sanskrit actually means doing, action. Karma 
comes from the root kriwhich simply means to do. When 
something happens to me, an accident or an illness, a 
Buddhist or a Hindu will say, “Well, it was your karma.” In 
other words, you had done something in the past and you 
reap the unfortunate consequence in a later time. Now that’s 
not the real meaning of karma. Karma does not mean cause 
and effect. It simply means doing. In other words, you are 
doing what is happening to you. And that, of course, 
depends upon how you define the word you. For example, 
consider breathing; am doing it or is it happening to me? I 
am growing my hair; am | doing it or is it happening to me? 
You can look at it either way. I am being sick, or | am being 
destroyed in an accident — if I define myself as the whole field 
of events, the organism-environment field which is the real 
me, then all the things that happen to me may be called my 
doing. And that is the real sense of karma. 


But when we speak about freedom from karma, freedom 
from being the puppet of the past, that simply involves a 
change in our thinking. It involves getting rid of the habit of 
thought whereby we define ourselves as the result of what 
has gone before. We instead get into the more plausible, 
more reasonable habit of thought in which we don’t define 
ourselves in terms of what we’ve done before but in terms of 
what we're doing now. And that is liberation from the 
ridiculous situation of being a dog wagged by its tail. 


130 


‘The Tibetans use a wooden cylinder mounted on an axis for 
saying prayers. They sit comfortably and spin it around with 
little effort and their prayers are said for them by this prayer 
wheel and they relax for the few minutes it takes. Westerners 
think this is a superstition, a meaningless heathen ritual. It 
doesn’t require any great effort; it’s nothing like work or 
duty; and there’s no expression of humility or unworthiness. 
Any child would enjoy doing it. It’s curious; it’s fascinating. 


I] happen to like archery—not for killing things, but as a 
sport. What I like most of all is to set an arrow free like a 
bird. It climbs high into the sky, then suddenly turns and 
drops. 


What is it that fascinates us about that? We are 

delighted by it because it’s not usetul. It doesn’t really achieve 
anything that we would call purposive work. It is simply 
what we call play. But in our culture we make an extremely 
rigid division between work and play. You are supposed to 
work in order to earn enough money to give you sutticient 
leisure time tor something entirely ditterent called having frit 
or play. 


133 


This is a most ridiculous division. Everything that we do, 
however tough it is, however strenuous, can be turned into 
the same kind of play as shooting an arrow into the sky or 
spinning a prayer wheel. Let's, forexample, take the 
situation that I ran into a little while ago: I was in the New 
York subway at 59th Street near Columbus Circle, and | 
wanted to get my shoes shined. (Actually, I don’t wear shoes 
except on the East Coast. There one dresses respectably. On 
the West Coast I wear Indian moccasins because it’s the only 
comfortable shoe! can wear.) I found a place to get my shoes 
shined and there was a Black who was making shoe-shining a 
real art. He used his cloth to beat out arhythm. He had just 
the same fascination in shining shoes as one has in spinning a 
prayer wheel or shooting an arrow. Imagine if you werea 
bus driver. A bus driver is ordinarily considered a totally 
harassed person. He's got to watch out for all the laws, all the 
competing traffic, the people coming on board giving their 
fares, and he has to make change. And if he has it in his head 
that this is work, it will be hell. But let’s suppose he has a 
different thing in his head. Suppose he has the idea that 
moving this enormous conveyance through complicated 
traffic isa very, very subtle game; he has the very same 
feeling about it that you might have if you were playing the 
guitar or dancing. And so he goes through that traffic 
avoiding this and avoiding that and taking fares, and he 
makes a music of the whole thing. Well, he’s not going to be 
tired out at the end of the day. He's going to be full of energy 
when he gets through with his job. 


134 


Suppose you're condemned to be a housewife, which is the 
most lowly of all occupations, and you have to clean up. 
There are only four fundamental philosophical questions. 
The first is “Who started it?” The second is Are we going to 
make it?” The third is ‘Where are we going to put it?” And 
the fourth is "Who's going to clean up?” And this, the 
cleaning up, is the lowliest of all occupations, the housewife 
who washes the dishes and the garbage collector who takes 
away the stuff. Supposing the housewife about to clean up 
approaches washing dishes in an entirely different spirit. And 
don't think I’m some sort of male chauvinist who's trying to 
talk women into the idea of staying in their place. I'm 
perfectly willing to wash dishes too, because the art of 
washing dishes is that you only have to wash one at atime. If 
you're doing it day after day you have in your mind's eye an 
enormous stack of filthy dishes which you have washed in 
years past and an enormous stack of filthy dishes which you 
will wash in future years. But if you bring your mind to the 
state of reality which is only now, this is where we are, you 
only have to wash one dish. It’s the only dish you'll ever have 
to wash. You ignore all the rest, because in reality there is no 
past and there is no future. There is just now. So you wash 
this one. And instead of thinking, “Have I got it really clean 
as my mother taught?”, you turn the cleaning movement into 
a dance, you swing that plate around, you let the rinsing 
water run over it, and you put it in the rack—you get a 
rhythm going. 


When I wasa little boy and went to school in England I had 
to learn the piano. They called it playing the piano, but 
actually they said, “You must play.” Wehad, also in 
England, compulsory games. They used to post notices on 
the bulletin board in the school that said, “This afternoon 
everyone will go for arun.” And if you didn’t go for a run 
and it was found out, you were flogged! So everybody hated 
going for a run because they were under compulsion to play. 
It’s like the whole game of life we're involved in. It’s only a 
game, but everybody has got to belong. 


137 


I remember one day | was out on arun and! was trying to 
enjoy myself, running on the balls of my feet, dancing along. 
A fellow came up behind me who was running on his heels. 
He was jogging, and going clunk-clunk-clunk-clunk-clunk- 
clunk, and | said to him, “What's the matter with you? 
You're running on your heels and you are jarring your whole 
body all the way through.” He shrugged, stuck to it, and 
became the champion long-distance runner of the school. But 
he didn’t enjoy it! It was work! All he enjoyed was the 
suffering that he endured. It made him feel he had really 
contributed to the human race by suffering so much. He 
identified his existence and his worth with his suffering. Now 
really great runners dance when they run. They don’t 
necessarily follow a straight course; they may weave. A great 
example of this occurred in 1970 in the World Cup 
Championship of soccer. The winning team from Brazil, 
which consisted mostly of Blacks, played soccer in a most 
extraordinary way: They played it like basketball; they 
danced. The way we learned soccer in school when I was a 
boy was very, very formal and orderly. and we didn't really 
enjoy it. But these fellows were bounding balls of f their 
shoulders, off every muscle. and they had astonishing team- 
work, and at the same time they were dancing. The sports 
writer in The London Times said, “They danced their way to 
victory.” So the point is that you can do everything you have 
to do in this spirit. Don’t make a distinction between work 
and play, and don’t imagine for one minute that you've got 
Lo be serious about it. 


138 


Let's take, for example,, the rest of the world rather than 
ourselves. Think for a moment: What are plants doing? 
What are plants all about? They serve human beings by being 
decorative, but what is it from its own point of view? It’s 
using up air; it’s using up energy. It’s really not doing 
anything except being ornamental. And yet here’s this whole 
vegetable world, cactus plants, trees, roses, tulips, and edible 
vegetables, like cabbages, celery, lettuce—they’re all doing 
this dance. And what's it all about? Why are they doing it? 
Well, we say, one must live. It’s necessary to survive. You 
know you really must go on. It’s your duty. It’s your duty to 
your children. If you bring up your children that way and tell 
them they should be grateful because you are doing your 
duty towards them, they will learn to bring up their children 
in the same way—and everybody will be depressed. There 
really is no necessity to go on living. It’s part of Western 
philosophy, this drive to survive. We must go on living 
because some big daddy said to us, ‘You've got to go on 
living, see? And you'd better make it or else!”” Well, the fear 
of death is completely absurd. Because if you’re dead you've 
got nothing to worry about! This plant, I’m quite sure, 
doesn't say to itself, You ought to go on living.” You've got, 
just as it has, an instinct to survive which is something other 
than yourself and which you have to obey. 


I don't think of my own instincts as drives, which is the 
proper psychological term for them nowadays. | think of my 
instincts as myself. | don’t say, “Excuse me, but I have an 
unfortunate desire to reproduce myself; would you please 
accommodate me.” I don’t say, ‘Excuse me, but I have to eat: 
it’s absolutely necessary that I eat.”’ I say, “Hooray! I am this 
desire to make love, and I am this desire to eat.” It’s not 
something else that pushes me around; it’s me. It doesn’t have 
to go on. If it were to stop, if I were to die, that would be 
another scene; that would be a different form of the dance. 


141 


If I'm in pain, people say don’t scream, don’t cry. But 
screaming or crying is a perfectly natural reaction to pain. 
When a baby is first born they cut the umbilical cord and 
someone smacks it on the bottom and the baby cries. That's 
the first thing in the world. There is in Zen Buddhism a koan 
that says when the Buddha was born he suddenly stood up 
and announced, “Above the heavens and below the heavens, 
I alone am the world-honored one.” Well, everybody would 
say that’s an extremely proud thing to say. So they give this 
to students of Buddhism as a problem: How could it be that 
the Buddha as a little baby was so proud as to make this 
pompous statement when he was born? And if you 
understand the problem correctly, you cry like anewborn 
baby. Because that is the perfectly natural response to the 
painful event of being born into this world. But thereafter we 
say, “Baby, don’t you cry! Shut up!” And therefore we stamp 
out in human beings their natural release from the problem of 
pain. If you're in pain, cry. And if you can't do that, then 
pain is your problem. But if you cancry, if you can let go in 
that way, pain is no problem. And if you get the shudders at 
death, the idea of death, the idea of not being here anymore, 
just get those shudders and dig them. Isn’t it curious? You 
really get the shivers of delight! 


142 


So all these emotions that we have, the emotions of 
uptightness, dread, shivers, horrors, can be intepreted in 
other ways. But we interpret them in a negative way so long 
as we are under the sense that you absolutely must go on 
living. Now, you see, living is something spontaneous. In 
Chinese the word for nature is clt't lan, which means that 
which happens of itself, not under any control of an outside 
entity. And they feel that all the world is happening of itself; 
it’s spontaneous. And youstop this spontaneous flowering of 
nature cold if you tell it it must do it. It’s like saying to 
someone, “You must love me.” Well it’s ridiculous. If I were 
to ask my wife, “Darling, do you really love me?” and, she 
says, “I'm trying my best to do so,” that’s not the answer | 
want. I want her to say, “I can’t help loving you. I love you 
so much I could eat you.” And that’s what the plant feels in 
growing. It doesn’t feel it must grow; it’s not under orders. It 
does this spontaneously so that when you try to command 
this spontaneous process, you stop it. 


There is a belief in India that if you think of amonkey while 
you're taking medicine it won't work. Next time you take 
your vitamins or pills try not to think of amonkey. You will 
completely tie up the spontaneous process, and it won't 
work. So all the things that we say to our children, like, “You 
must have a bowel movement every day after breakfast”; 


wow 


“Try, darling, to go to sleep”; “Stop pouting; take that look 
off your face”; “Oh, you're blushing.’’ They all make you feel 
guilty. All those things are attempts to say this one thing, 
Darling little child, you are required to do what will be 
acceptable only if you do it voluntarily.” On this account, 
everybody is completely mixed up because we are trying to 
force genuine behavior. We all admire artists; we say they're 
unselfconscious, they're so natural, they seem to dance or 
paint or talk or play the piano so effortlessly. Of course, a lot 
of work has gone into it, but if you are a vreat artist your 
periods of practice will not be effective unless they are a 
pleasure for you. You have to come to the point where going 
over it again and again is a dance. 


145 


One of my friends is a great Hindu musician who has the 
most extraordinary technique of playing an instrument called 
the sarod. It’s like an extremely sophisticated Hindu guitar. 
His name is Ali Akbar Khan and he is generally 
acknowledged to be the leading master of Northern, Indian 
music. He once told me that the comprehension of music is 
in understanding one note. He can sit for hours and hours 
working on only one note at a time. He gets into that note 
and listens. He really listens, gets into the sound. It simply 
doesn’t matter that it takes a long time, that he has to do this 
for many hours, because he’s completely absorbed in 
listening to the sound he is now making. He’s going with that 
vibration, as when you might chant like they do in yoga, 
“OM.” Youcan chant for hours and be absolutely fascinated 
by the vibration in the same way as I am fascinated shooting 
an arrow into the sky. Now what is it? This is the real secret 
of life—to be completely engaged with what you are doing in 
the here and now. And instead of calling it work, realize that 
it is play. 


In Hindu philosophy the whole creation is regarded as the 
Vishnu Lila, the Play of Vishnu. Lila means dance or play. 
Also, in Hindu philosophy, they call the world an illusion; 
and in Latin the root of the word illusion is ludere, to play. 
All that is going on, the spinning of the prayer wheel, the 
pattern in which the flower grows, is just the living. And if 
you take it seriously and say, “Are you doing anything 
useful?”’ Useful for what? Useful for going on? But if you 
have to be useful for going on, going on becomes a drag, 
survival becomes a sweat, and it’s not worth it. And if you 
teach this to your children, they'll imitate you. They'll treat 
survival as an ordeal which they have to undergo. They have 
to keep going on and they'll teach their children to do it, and 
the whole continuation of the human race will be a drag 
which is in fact what it has become because of this attitude. 
And this is the reason we have invented the atomic bomb and 
are preparing to commit suicide. We think we must happen 
and, to the degree to which we think we must happen, we 
hate it, and are going to bring it to an end, stop it. 


So I sincerely suggest (I'm talking with you; I’m not 
preaching) as G. K. Chesterton once said, ‘‘The angels fly 
because they take themselves lightly. How much more so 
than he-she who is Lord of the Angels. The whole world is 
three for a penny, three for a pound, it’s love that makes the 
world go round.” Or in the words of Dante: 


“That my own wings were not to flutter 
Were not forsucha flight 
Except that smiting through the mind of me 
There came fulfillment in a flash of light. 
That my volition now and my desires 
Were moved like wheel-revolving evenly 
By love that moves the sun in starry sky. 


Thither my own wings could not carry me, 
But that a flash my understanding clove, 
Whence its desire came to it suddenly. 


High fantasy lost power and here broke off; 
Yet, as a wheel moves smoothly, free from jars, 
My will and my desire were turned by love, 


The love that moves the sun and the other stars.” 


End of Canto XXXII Paradise 


149 


When! was a boy in London, I used to love to visit the 
British Museum. In the neighborhood of the museum were a 
number of old shops, some of them dating from the end of 
the 18th century. The inscription over one shop window said 
they sold philosophical instruments. | couldn't for the life of 
me figure out what philosophical instruments could be. I 
thought philosophers were people who simply sat thinking 
and wouldn't have any need for any special instruments. But 
when | went up to this shop I found that what they had in the 
window were telescopes, slide rules, chronometers, and all 
sorts of what we could now call scientific instruments, 
because the original name for science was natural 
philosophy. A philosopher is a person who is curious about 
everything. He’s not only curious about theoretical matters, 
but he’s also curious about what we should now call practical 
matters. | regard myself as a philosopher in exactly that 
sense. Aside from being interested in changed states of 
consciousness, the problems of death, problems of time and 
space, and the practice of meditation, I am also interested in 
what you would call down-to-earth things, such as food, 
clothing, housing, problems of ecology and population, 
because all of this is part of natural curiosity or philosophy. 


One thing that tells us a great deal about our society, about 
our nature, is clothing. | am now arrayed in what has become 
the standard official man’s dress for the whole world—the 
business suit. Derived from England, popularized in 
America, adopted by the Japanese, the Indonesians, the 
Indians, the Persians, the Arabs, everybody on the face of 
the earth is now tending to go around dressed like this ina 
peculiar form of clothing derived from military uniforms. 
You will notice that it has buttons on the sleeve. Now what 
do you suppose those are for? They don't fasten to anything. 


150 


Originally, on the uniforms from which these coats were 
derived, there was a whole row of buttons all the way up, 
and they were on military uniforms or uniforms worn by 
servitors to prevent them from wiping their noses on their 
sleeves. And then it has these curious lapels, and goodness 
knows what purpose they served. Sometimes people turn 
them up to try to protect themselves from the rain, but they 
are not really very effective. And then you have to wear a 
shirt and strangle yourself with a necktie. Also, you have to 
wear pants, British trousers, which is a most devastating 
garment for men. Trousers are worn by Chinese women; 
Chinese men in the old times, before the era of Mao Tse 
Tung, wore skirts. Trousers are a garment suitable for 
shapely women—they are not at all suitable for men because 
they are castrative and extremely uncomfortable, especially 
if you want to sit on the floor. To wear a business suit and be 
comfortable you invariably have to sit ona chair. If you 
don’t your trousers will become baggy at the knees. Also, the 
coat and shirt are very difficult to fold if you have to put 
them in a suitcase. The problem of the business suit is that it 
is made to fit the contours of the human body. It has to be 
tailored to show off your form, whichis all very well if you 
havea slim form! Another problem is how do you keep the 
trousers suspended? I still wear a belt, but the time is going to 
come when | have to wear suspenders, a kind of block-and- 
tackle contraption which is another and further 
inconvenience. It just astonishes me that all over the world 
men are putting up with this drab, funeral uniform, looking 
like undertakers and ministers when they could be much 
more comfortable. I could be just as comfortable, just as 
proper, just as demure, by wearing a Japanese kimono, 
which is worn not so much in modern times as 50 years ago 
by all Japanese gentlemen. 


153 


The kimono is one of the most extraordinary garments ever 
made. To begin with, it is completely comfortable. You feel 
absolutely relaxed underneath it; nothing is restricting you 
anywhere. It has tremendously capacious sleeves which are 
immense pockets into which you can put anything you 
want—your wallet, your pipe and tobacco or cigarettes, and 
money, anything you want. With a kimono it’s quite proper 
to carry a fan, and when the weather is too hot you can cool 
yourself off. There is an outer garment, the haori, which is 
actually a coat for cooler weather and for rather proper 
occasions. You can take the haori off and just wear what's 
underneath and have the same thing as before with the big 
sleeves and enormous pockets. There is a peculiar thing 
about a kimono, that is that it is entirely cut from rectangular 
pieces of cloth. The cloth has not been shaped to fit the 
human body. Cloth is naturally rectangular because of its 
being woven material with a perpendicular warp and 
horizontal woof. 


154 


Now, in designing this form of clothes we do not 

alter the rectangular nature of the cloth. Wedo not 

attempt to shape it in any other way to force it to fit the 
curves of the human body. But if we honor the nature of 
cloth in that way and respect its nature, curiously enough it 
respects our nature. Because if you hang rectangular cloth 
upon you it falls in Folds which give you a kind of natural 
dignity. When you shape the cloth to you, you begin to look 
more and more like a monkey. But when you allow the cloth 
to hang upon you and follow its own nature, you look more 
and more like a prince. This is the essential principle of 
Japanese clothing. However, the Japanese have been 
abandoning this clothing. I asked one of them why and the 
first thing he said was, ‘Well, it’s impossible to run for a bus 
ina kimono.” And that’s perfectly true! You cannot run in 
this garment; you have to walk at a dignified pace, and | 
think that is very good for us. I don’t think any 
self-respecting person shouldever run for a bus; we need 
above all for things to slow down and get ourselves to amble 
through life instead of rush through it. And, therefore, | 
consider that this garment, commonly worn by men, would 
have an enormously beneficent effect on American 
civilization. We would be much more comfortable, much 
more at ease, much more dignified. | wear one all the time. 


157 


The style of kimono worn for normal purposes is called the 
yukata. It is a cotton kimono which the Japanese 
businessman would don when he gets home. But, first, he 
takes a very hot bath in an enormous tub where practically 
the whole family can sit together. It’s a wonderful institution. 
It’s the first thing you do when you get home from work. You 
don’t wash in the tub; you wash by taking a bucket and 
sloshing yourself with water from the tub, soap yourself, and 
rinse off; and then you sit in the bath and steam rises all 
about you and you smoke cigarettes and chat with all the 
family. And that’s the greatest kind of bath in all the world. 
After the bath you get into your yakata. It is perfectly 
permissible to go out strolling in the streets in the evening 
dressed in this type of kimono. The warm-weather yukata is 
made of cotton, and the cold-weather yukata, called a 
penzen, is made of padded silk. You can wear your kimono 
with a sash called an obi. Men's obi are made with tie-dye 
ornamentations on the end, and women’s obi are much more 
stiff and made of very, very heavy silk—not nearly as 
comfortable to wear. This is an absolutely perfectly relaxed 
dress for men. Since 1 am a writer and do most of my werk at 
home, I wear one of these most all of the time because it is 
not constricting, and because of the extreme convenience of 
the pockets. When you notice how the sash fastens into an 
elegant bow in the back you may think that, along with the 
absence of pants, it is effeminate. But men, especially in 
America and England, are terribly uptight about coming on 
in a way they suppose to be feminine. They say, “Skirts are 
women, sissy stuff!” But if you are biologically male you 
don't need to prove that you are. It is so strange to me how 
an enormous number of men don’t seem to be able to realize 
that they are men unless they can in some way come on with 
tremendous energy, very strong, that shows off their 
manhood. But if you're areal man you don’t need to show 
that at all. All you need to do to find out if you are a real man 
is ask a woman. 


158 


There is another garment worth considering and this is the 
ancient Greek chlamys. It is along, linen garment that has 
come down to us in modern times through the Roman 
Catholic Church in the form of an alb, which a priest wears 
at Mass over his ordinary suit. He takes off his coat and puts 
ona long, heavy, black garment called a cassock, and then 
he puts this extra suit of clothes, the alb, over it. But any 
sensible priest in celebrating Mass would take off all his 
clothes and simply wear his underpants and his chlamys, or 
alb. Also, there is a hood which can be pulled over your head 
and makes a comfortable thing around the neck —it catches 
the sweat. It’s called an amice. So this is what men in our 
Western world commonly wore back about 400 B.C. and 
afterwards in Greece. The toga was worn in Rome, a 
somewhat more inconvenient garment because you had to 
throw it over you and all the folds of cloth were always 
dropping down and falling off. But the chlamys is extremely 
comfortable and very convenient. Along with the alb, or 
chlamys, a priest of the Catholic Church when celebrating 
Mass will wear over this garment called a chasuble in 
English, casubla in Latin. And the word casubla means a little 
house or a tent; it is much like a poncho, a garment which 
you could tie to a pole, spread out, put stones on it and rest 
under during the night to keep the rain off you. You could 
make achasuble, a poncho, simply by taking a perfectly 
square piece of cloth, hem it, cut a slit in it, and then you 
have a tent. It goes easily over your head, and without any 
tailoring or fitting you at once have a very dignified and 
becoming garment. They are of enormous use, you can wear 
them with anything, they keep you beautifully warm 
especially if you make them out of some heavy material. | 
have one that is made of camel's hair. And once when I wore 
it | was stopped in a bar by an Irishman who said, “Where 
have I seen that before?” “Well,” I said, “you saw a priest 
wearing it at Mass,” which he thought was very funny. But 
this essential poncho gives great freedom of movement; your 
hands are free and it’s very warm and you can wear it over 
loosefitting clothes and be extremely comfortable, not 
castrated, and at your ease. 


Of all the garments we will consider, the most outlandish is 
the Philippine sarong. My Japanese friend said you can’t run 
fora busin akimono. All right, you could sure run for a bus 
in a Philippine sarong, because it gives you complete freedom 
for your legs. It is essentially a divided skirt, very floppy, 
made of cotton, which wraps around and tucks in at the 
waist and can be secured with a safety pin. Over it you 
simply wear a colorful shirt. The sarong, with variations, is 
worn all over South Asia, but the Philippine design with the 
divide is the most comfortable, the most elastic I have ever 
discovered, and I do not know any more comfortable form of 
dress in the world. You can make it from any material, out of 
worsted in order to be warm in cold weather and have a 
completely comfortable and reasonably dignified form of 
clothing 


162 


Well, now, what is our problem? What’s the problem with 
Western man and even Western woman that they dress so 
damned uncomfortable. I’ve thought about this a great deal 
because it comes down to some fundamental philosophical 
matters. One of them is this: When people get up in the 
morning they put on a bathrobe, and after a little time goes 
by they feel slightly guilty. Why do they feel slightly guilty? 
Because, when you have got loose-fitting clothes on, you 
may have a slight suspicion that you don’t really exist. In 
other words, you are not strapped in. All people of action 
wear big belts and boots—things that clutch you tightly. And 
then you feel, because of the pressure on your skin, that you 
are really there. Now this is a very serious mistake, especially 
forsoldiers. I maintain that the German army lost two world 
wars because of the goosestep, because of military pomp and 
swagger, because of such things as brass bands and close- 
order drill. Because a really effective army should be invisible 
and inaudible. But you cannot get men who are on the 
machismo kick, who have to prove they are men, to be 
invisible and inaudible. A truly effective army, an army of 
guerrillas, should dress with complete comfort, complete 
practicality, and no kind of tieing themselves together in 
knots so the pressure will assure you that you are there. 
That's like sleeping on a bed of nails! But a great many people 
in our culture don't feel that they areteally alive unless in 
some way they are uncomfortable or suffering. And the 
reason is that we have a profound, built-in sense of guilt 
about our existence because we feel that we don’t really 
belong to the universe. 


165 


There is a wonderful story about a Japanese mystic, a kind of 
wandering holy man who one night stopped in a Buddhist 
temple for shelter. He went up to the high altar and there 
were all these kneeling cushions which the priests use for 
celebrating the service. He arranged them all and made a 
comfortable bed and went to sleep. Early in the morning the 
priests came in to celebrate the service and saw this apparent 
bum lying on all the cushions in front of the altar. “Hey,” 
they said, ‘what are you doing here? Such disrespectful 
conduct in front of the altar!” And the holy man looked up at 
them and said, “Oh? You must be a stranger here; you 
cannot belong to the family.” And so, likewise, in an Italian 
church, little children were running in and out of the pews 
ducking back and forth while their mother was offering 
candles at the shrine of Saint Anthony. Two American 
spinsters from New England were viewing the church and 
were very shocked at the way these children were playing. 
They went over and touched the mother on the shoulder and 
said, “Don’t you think these children should be controlled?” 
“Well,” she said, “it is their Father’s house; can’t they play 
here?” 


166 


But that’s a most curious thing, isn’t it? Our clothing is 
undertaker clothing, military clothing, ministerial clothing. 
For in our culture we cultivate an uptight attitude: ‘Hold 
yourself in! Restrain yourself!” But in doing this we are 
constantly at war with ourselves. Our society tells us that we 
are a nasty little animal that has to be controlled and beaten 
into submission, and, on the other hand, we are a rational 
soul which is a sort of higher self supposed to take control of 
the lower self. And for this reason we are always at cross 
purposes with ourselves. Freud, for example, distinguished 
between the pleasure principle, which he located in the 
genital region, and the reality principle, which he located in 
the cortical region of the brain, so that there is a distance 
between these two centers. Because they are not in the same 
place, for some reason or other it seems there always has to 
be a fight between them. Ina flower, the mind and sex organ 
are in the same place, so it doesn’t have that conflict. But in 
the human being they are divided (at least, we think they are 
divided) simply because they are at a distance from each 
other in space. 


But they are not really divided at all. They look different. 
The head looks very different from the genitals, but in the 
same way bees look very different from flowers. One flies in 
the air and buzzes, and the other is rooted in the ground and 
colorfully perfumes the environment so the bee is attracted to 
it. But these two very different looking things are in fact one 
single organism: If there are no bees there are no flowers; if 
there are no flowers there are no bees. They come together, 
as the Chinese say, to arise mutually. In the same way, when 
you were born, your head and your genitals arose mutually. 
They came in together; they are not really separate from each 
other. 


169 


Therefore, this idea that living an ordered life consists in 
controlling yourself, is doing nothing but creating a conflict 
and a disturbance inside yourself. Imagine what it would be 
like if you had to control the movement of your right hand 
with your left hand. If I want to pick up a cigar with my right 
hand, my left hand would come over and grab it and direct it 
to the object, close the fingers around it, and carry it to my 
mouth. Wouldn’t that be absurd? But that is what we are 
doing all the time when we divide ourselves into two parts, 
the spiritual and the material, the angelic and the animal, and 
the rational and irrational. We are constantly holding clubs 
over ourselves. That is one of the reasons why, when you get 
up in the morning and put on your bathrobe, after awhile 
you begin to feel guilty. You feel you should be, as we say, 
dressed and in your right mind, so that you can go out and be 
a person of action. So you can feel yourself meeting your 
obligations, doing your duty. 


Every day in the urban areas millions of people are literally 
wearing themselves out, tearing their nerves to distraction, 
by going along the freeways in a car, fouling the atmosphere, 
to do their work. That wonderful work which is completely 
divorced, quite separate, from their play. Now this is one of 
the great insanities of our civilization. Every sensible person 
should get paid for playing. If you don’t get paid for playing 
something is wrong with you—you haven't learned the art of 
life. But we have got this idea that work is one thing and play 
is another, therefore we have work-clothes—the business 
suit—and we have play-clothes. And I suggest that one of the 
most important things is to get our heads together with our 
venitals, our genitals together with our heads, and our work 
together with our play, and make our life a pleasure—unified 
and one. 


170 


Ace Ea 
AAS tr ~S 
( De A THE \® La), 


ext bce a) 


Photographs by Mike Powers and Maria Demarest 


| ea you to think of the curious sensation of nothing that 
lies behind ourselves. Think of the blank space behind the 
eyes, about the silence out of which all sound comes, and 
about empty space, out of which all the stars appear. | liken 
this curious emptiness behind everything to God, an image- 
less, non-idolatrous God of which we can have no 
conception at all. Basically, when you really get down to it, 
that emptiness is yourself. 


Now it sounds very odd in our civilization to say, 
“Therefore, | am God,” or for that matter, “You are God.” 
But this is exactly what Jesus Christ felt. And he was crucified 
for it, because in his culture God was conceived as the royal 
monarch of the universe, and anybody who got up and said, 
“Well, lam God,” was blasphemous. He was subversive. He 
was Claiming to be, if not the boss himself, at least the boss’ 
son, and that was a put-down for everybody else. But Jesus 
had to say it that way because, in his culture, they did not 
have, as the Hindus have, the idea that everybody, not only 
human beings, but animals and plants, all sentient beings 
whatsoever, are God in disguise. 


Now, let me try to explain this a little more clearly. | cannot 
help thinking of myself as identical with, continuous with, 
one with the whole energy that expresses itself as this 
universe. If the universe is made up of stars, a star is a center 
trom which energy flows. In other words there’s the middle, 
and all the rays come out from it. And so I feel that, as the 
image of the whole thing, all energy is a center from which 
rays come out and, therefore, each one of us is an expression 
ol what is basically the whole thing. 


173 


In the Jewish, Christian, and Islamic religions we think of 
God not only as a monarch but as the maker of the world, 
and, asa result of that, we look upon the world as an 
artifact, asort of machine, created by a great engineer. 
There's a different conception in India, where the world is 
not seen as an artifact, but asa drama. And therefore God is 
not the maker and architect of the universe but the actor of it, 
and is playing all the parts at once, and this connects up with 
the idea of each one of us as persons, because a person is a 
mask, from the Latin persona, the mask worn by the actors 
in Greco-Roman drama. So this is an entirely different 
conception of the world, and as I think | shall be able to show 
you, it makes an amazing amount of sense. 


So we start with the premise that you are God, and you don’t 
know how you grow your body, how you make your 
nervous system work, how you manage to emerge in this 
environment of nature. All this is unknown to you, the you 
that is not you, the you that is not the ego. This is God—that 
is to say, not the cosmic boss, but the fundamental ground of 
being, the reality that always was, is, and will be, that lies at 
the basis of reality. That's you. 


174 


Now, let's go into a more mythological kind of imagery. 
Suppose you're God. Suppose you have all time, eternity, 
and all power at your disposal. What would you do? | 
believe you would say to yourself after awhile, “Man, yet 
lost.” It’s like asking another question which amounts to 
supposing you were given the power to dream any dream 
you wanted to dream every night. Naturally, you could 
dream any span of time— you could dream seventy-five years 
of time in one night, a hundred years of time in one night, a 
thousand years of time in one night—and it could be 
anything you wanted— because you make up your mind 
betore you go to sleep, “Tonight I'm going to dream of 
so-and-so.” Naturally, you would start out by fulfilling all 
your wishes. You would have all the pleasures you could 
imagine, the most marvelous meals, the most entrancing love 
attairs, the most romantic journeys, you could listen to music 
such as no mortal has heard, and see landscapes beyond your 
wildest dreams. 


And for several nights, oh, maybe for a whole month of 
nights, you would go on that way, having a wonderful time. 
But then, after a while, you would begin to think, “Well, I've 
seen quite a bit, let’s spice it up, let’s havea little adventure.” 
And you would dream of yourself being threatened by all 
sorts of dangers. You would rescue princesses from dragons, 
you would perhaps engage in notable battles, you would be a 
hero. And then as time went on, you would dare yourself to 
do more and more outrageous things, and at some point in 
the game you would say, “Tonight Lam going to dream in 
such a way that 1 don’t know that I'm dreaming,” and by so 
doing you would take the experience of the drama for 
complete reality. What a shock when you woke up! You 
could really scare yourselt! 


177 


And then on successive nights you might dare yourself to 
experience even more extraordinary things just for the 
contrast when you woke up. You could, forexample, dream 
yourself in situations of extreme poverty, disease, agony. 
You could, as it were, live the essence of suffering to its most 
intense point, and then, suddenly, wake up and find it was 
after all nothing but a dream and everything’s perfectly O.K. 


Well, how do you know that’s not what you're doing 
already. You, reading, sitting there with all your problems, 
with all your whole complicated life situations, it may just be 
the very dream you decided to get into. If you don’t like it, 
what fun it'll be when you wake up! 


This is the essence of drama. In drama, all the people who see 
it know it’s only a play. The proscenium arch, the cinema 
screen tells us, “Well, this is an illusion, it is not for real.” In 
other words, they are going to act their parts so convincingly 
that they're going to have us sitting on the edge of our seats in 
anxiety, they're going to make us laugh, they're going to 
make us cry, they're going to make us feel horror. And all the 
time, in the back of our minds we have what Germans call 
hintergedanken which is a thought way, way, way in the 
back of our minds, that we're hardly aware of but really 
know all the time. in the theater, we have a hintergedanken 
that it's only a play. But the mastery of the actors is going to 
almost convince us that it’s real. 


178 


zo : 


aN 


And, so, imagine a situation in which you have the best of all 
possible actors, namely God, and the best of all possible 
audiences ready to be taken in and convinced that it’s real, 
namely God, and that you are all many, many masks which 
the basic consciousness, the basic mind of the universe, is 
assuming. To use a verse from G. K. Chesterton: 


But now a great thing in the street 
Seems any human nod 

Where shift in strange democracy 
The million masks of God. 


It is like the mask of Vishnu, the preserver of the universe, a 
multiple mask which illustrates the fact that the one who 
looks out of my eyes and out of everyone's eyes is the same 
center. So, when | look at another human being, and | look 
straight into their eyes, I don’t like doing that, there’s 
something embarrassing about looking into someone’s eyes 
too closely. Don’t look at me that closely because I might 
give myself away! You might find out who! really am! And 
what do you suppose that would be? Do you suppose that 
another person who looks deeply into your eyes will read all 
the things you're ashamed of, all your faults, all the things 
you are guilty of? Or is there some deeper secret than that? 


The eyes are our most sensitive organ, and when you look 
and look and look into another person's eyes you are looking 
at the most beautiful jewels in the universe. And if you look 
down beyond that surface beauty, it’s the most beautiful 
jewel in the universe, because that's the universe looking at 
you. We are the eyes of the cosmos. So that in a way, when 
you look deeply into somebody's eyes, you're looking deep 
into yourself, and the other persons looking deeply into the 
same self, which many-eyed, as the mask of Vishnu is many- 
faced, is looking out everywhere, one energy playing 
myriads of different parts. Why? 


181 


Its perfectly obvious, because if you were God, and you 
knew everything and were in control of everything, you 
would be bored to death. It would be like making love toa 
plastic woman. Everything would be completely predictable, 
completely known, completely clear, no mystery, no surprise 
whatever. 


Look at it another way. The object of our technology is to 
control the world, to have a superelectronic pushbutton 
universe, where we can get anything we want, fulfill any 
desires simply by pushing a button. You're Aladdin with the 
lamp, you rub it, the jinni comes and says, “Salaam, I’m your 
humble servant, what do you wish? Anything you want.” 


And after a while, just asin those dreams | described you 
would decide one day to forget that you were dreaming, you 
would say to the jinni of the lamp, “I would like a surprise.” 
Or God, in the Court of Heaven, might turn to his vizier, and 
say, “Oh, Commander of the Faithful, we are bored.” And 
the vizier of the Court would reply, “Oh King, live forever, 
surely out of the infinitude of your wisdom you can discover 
some way of not being bored.” And the King would reply, 
“Oh vizier, give us a surprise.” That's the whole basis of the 
story of the Arabian Nights. Here was a very powerful 
sultan, who was bored. And therefore he challenged 
Scheherazade to tell him a new story every night so that the 
telling of the tales, getting involved in adventures, would 
never, never end. 


Isn't that the reason why we go to the theater, why we go to 
the movies, because we want to get out of ourselves? We 
want a surprise; and a surprise means that you have to other 
yourself. That is to say, there has to enter into your 
expericnce some element that is not under your control. 


182 


So if our technology were to succeed completely, and 
everything were to be under our control, we should 
eventually say, “We needa new button.” With all these 
control buttons, we always have to have a button labeled 
SURPRISE, and just so it doesn’t become too dangerous, 
we'll put a time limit on it—surprise for 15 minutes, for an 
hour, for a day, fora month, a year, a lifetime. Then, in the 
end, when the surprise circuit is finished, we'll be back in 
control and we'll all know where we are. And we'll heave a 
sigh of relief, but, after a while, we'll press the button labeled 
SURPRISE once more. 


You will notice a curious rhythm to what I have been 
explaining, and this rhythm corresponds to the Hindu idea of 
the course of time and the way evolution works, an idea 
drastically different from ours. First of all, Hindus think of 
time as circular, as going round— look at your watch, it goes 
round. But Westerners tend to think of time in a straight line, 
a one-way street, and we got that idea from Hebrew religion, 
and from St. Augustine. 


There is a time of creation, then a course of history which 
leads up to final, eschatological catastrophe, the end of the 
world, and after that, the judgment, in which all things will 
be put to right, all questions answered, and justice dealt out 
to everyone according to his merits. And that'll be that! 
Thereafter the universe will be, ina way, static; there will be 
the cternally saved and the eternally damned. 


185 


Now, many people may not believe that today, but that has 
been a dominating belief throughout the course of Western 
history, and it has had a tremendously powerful influence on 
our culture. But the Hindus think half of the world is going 
round and round for always, ina rhythm. They calculate the 
rounds in periods that in Sanskrit are called kalpas, and each 
kalpa lasts for 4,320,000 years. And so a kalpa is the period 
or manvantara during which the world as we know it is’ 
manifested. And it is followed by a period, also a kalpalong, 
4,320,000 years, which is called pralaya, and this means 
when the world is not manifested anymore. 


And these are the days and nights of Brahma, the godhead. 
During the manvantara when the world is manifested, 
Brahma is asleep, dreaming that he is all of us and everything 
that’s going on, and during the pralaya, which is his day, he’s 
awake, and knows himself, or itself (because it’s beyond sex), 
tor whoand what he/she/it is. And then, once again, presses 
the button—surprise! As in the course of our dreaming, we 
would very naturally dream the most pleasant and rapturous 
dreams first and then get more adventurous, and experience 
and explore the more venturesome dimensions of experience. 


In the same way, the Hindus think of a kalpa of the 
manifested universe, manvantara, as divided into four 
periods. These four periods are of different lengths. The first 
is the longest, and the last is the shortest. They are named in 
accordance with the throws in the Hindu game of dice. There 
are four throws and the throw of four is always the best 
throw, like the six in our game, the throw of one, the worst 
throw. 


186 


Now, therefore, the first throw is called krita and the epoch, 
the long, long period for which this throw lasts, is called a 
yuga. So we will translate yuga an epoch, and we will 
translate kalpa as aneon. Now the word krita means done, 
as when we say, “well done,” and that is a period of the 
world’s existence that we call the Golden Age when every- 
thing is perfect, done to perfection. When it comes to an end, 
we get treta-yuga that means the throw of three, and in this 
period of manifestation there’s an element of the uncertain, 
an element of insecurity, an element of adventure in things. 
It's like a three-legged stool is not as secure as a four-legged 
one— you're alittle more liable to be thrown off balance. 


That lasts for a very long time, too, but then we get next 
what is called dvapara-yuga. Dyam means two, and in this 
period, the good and the bad, the pleasurable and the 
painful, are equally balanced. But, finally, there comes kali- 
yuga. Kali means the worst throw, and this lasts for the 
shortest time. This is the period of manifestation in which the 
unpleasurable, painful, diabolical principle finally takes 
over—but it has the shortest innings. 


And at the end of the kali-yuga, the great destroyer of the 
worlds, God manifested as the destructive principle Shiva, 
does a dance called the tardava, and he appears, blue-bodied 
with ten arms, with lightning and fire appearing from every 
pore in his skin, and does a dance in which the universe is 
tinally destroyed. The moment of cosmic death is the waking 
up of Brahma, the creator, for as Shiva turns round and 
walks otf the stage, seen trom behind, he is Brahma, the 
creator, the beginning of it all again. And Vishnu is the 
preserver, that is to say, the going on of it all, the whole state 
of the godhead being manifested as many, many taces. So, 
you see, this is a philosophy of the role of evil in life which is 
rational and mercitul. 


189 


If we think God is playing with the world, has created it for 
his pleasure, and has created all these other beings and they 
go through the most horrible torments—terminal cancer, 
children being burned with napalm, concentration camps, 
the Inquisition, the horrors that human beings go through— 
how is that possibly justifiable? We try by saying, “Well, 
some God must have created it; if aGod didn’t create it, 
there’s nobody in charge and there’s no rationality to the 
whole thing. It’s just a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and 
fury signifying nothing. It’s a ridiculous system and the only 
out is suicide.” 


But suppose it’s the kind of thing I’ve described to you, 
supposing it isn’t that God is pleasing himself with all 

these victims, showing off his justice by either rewarding 
them or punishing them, supposing it’s quite different from 
that. Suppose that God is the one playing all the parts, that 
God is the child being burned to death with napalm. There is 
no victim except the victor. All the different roles which are 
being experienccd, all the different feelings which are being 
felt, are being felt by the one who originally desires, decides, 
wills to go into that very situation. 


190 


Curiously enough, there is something parallel to this in 
Christianity. There’s a passage in St. Paul's Epistle to the 
Philippians in which he says a very curious thing: ‘Let this 
mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus, who being 

in the form of God, did not think identity with God a thing to 
be clung to, but humbled himself and made himself of no 
reputation, and was found in fashion as a man and became 
obedient to death, even the death of the cross.’ Here you 
have exactly the same idea, the idea of God becoming 
human, suffering all that human beings can suffer, even 
death. And St. Paul is saying, “Let this mind be in you,” that 
is to say, let the same kind of consciousness be in you that 
was in Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ knew he was God. 


Wake up and find out eventually who you really are. In our 
culture, of course, they'll say you're crazy or you're 
blasphemous, and they'll either put you in jail or in the nut 
house (which is the same thing). But if you wake up in India 
and tell your triends and relations, “My goodness, I've just 
discovered that I’m God,” they'll laugh and say, “Oh, 
congratulations, at last you found out.” 


193 


l am going to relate three fantasies, all of which have some- 
thing in common that will be evident to you at the end. The 
first fantasy is about reproduction. We use the word 
reproduction in two principal ways: We talk about the 
biological reproduction of a species, and we also speak of 
reproduction in terms of a painting, a photograph, a 
recording, a movie, or a videotape. Now what is 
reproduction in the latter all about? Well, hundreds of years 
ago, kings of Europe formed feudal alliances by marrying the 
princesses of far-off states. Before entering into a marriage 
contract they would have painters send portraits of the lady 
in question to see if his majesty approved of her. On one such 
occasion Henry the Eighth of England was badly cheated in 
this procedure by a too flattering portrait of Anne of Cleves. 


Therefore, there developed a kind of moral code among 
artists in the European tradition beginning with the 
marvelous work of the Renaissance, and later the Flemish 
painters. Finally, with the Art Officiale of the 19th Century, 
we got what we now call photographic realism. 


At that time they said, “Isn't there some more scientific way 
of doing this?” And so they discovered the camera. First there 
were those brownish daguerrotypes. People said, “Well, that 
is pretty, it really looks like grandpa, doesn’t it?” “But,” they 
said, “something, several things are missing; it isn’t colored 
for one thing.” So they tinted them. 


195 


And then they said, “Why, it’s real lifelike, but you know, 
there are some people whose whole style of life, whose whole 
personality is in the way they move, and if you just take a 
static shot like that the personality isn’t there.” So they 
invented a way of making the images move—movies. I 
remember when the first movies came out they were all 
moving ina jerky way. They smoothed it out and everyone 
said, ‘Now that’s real lifelike.” 


But after awhile they said, ‘But there’s another thing missing 
which is sound; a whole lot of the personality is in the voice, 
so can’t we have them talking at the same time that they 
move?” And someone invented the talkies; eventually they 
added color to them, and everyone said, “Wow, now we're 
really getting somewhere!” Then to make it even more real 
they put them in a three-dimensional process which required 
that you wear special spectacles to see. 


But then people said, “Why is it that every time we want to 
see one of these things we have to go down to the center of 
town? Can't we have it all at home?” And so television was 
introduced; they started out with black and white and 
looking as Robert Benchley once described the cuts in French 
newspapers, as all looking as if they had been made on 
bread. 


They improved it, colored it, and that’s where we are now. 
Not quite. Because somebody has developed a thing that we 
shall all be seeing soon—the hologram—a television image 
produced by laser beams in which you see a three- 
dimensional figure out in the air in front of you. Soon 

well all say, “Now, isn’t that marvelous!” But, of course, 
when you go up to it and put your hand on it, your hand 
goes right through it. You can’t touch it. And, you see, that is 
the trouble with television—you look at whatever you're 
seeing behind a screen; but it’s intangible, it doesn’t smell, 
and it won't relate to you. 


196 


So there are future problems to be solved in the techniques of 
electronic reproduction—and they'll do it. They'll manage a 
way in which the electronic emission source can solidify and 
make the air vibrate so that you can touch the figure. You 
won't be able to push your hand through it because the air 
will be going faster than your hand. Imagine that! If there’s a 
beautiful dancer on television, you'll actually be able to go 
up and embrace her. But she won't know you're there, she 
won't respond to you. And you'll say, “Well, that’s not very 
lifelike,” just as people once said,“If the photograph doesn’t 
move it’s not very lifelike, if it doesn’t talk it’s not very life- 
like.” They'll next say if the tangible, three-dimensional 
reproduction doesn’t respond, it’s not very lifelike, so they'll 
have to figure out a technique for doing that. 


Will our technology be able to develop such a technique? Of 
course they will! Sitting in your home you will watch the 
scene on a kind of stage, not a screen, and there will bea TV 
camera observing you. That TV camera will report back 
everything you do into a computer and the computer will 
manage each bit of information going into the image that 
you're looking at, and will immediately decide what is the 
appropriate response to your approach to the image—and 
won't that be great! She may slap you in the face, or she may 
kiss you. Younever know. 


But eventually you'll say, ‘This is still not really the kind of 
reproduction I wanted. What I want is to be able to identify 
with one of the characters in the scene.” We want not only to 
watch the drama that is being performed on the stage but 
actually to get into it. We will want to be wired in with 
electrodes on our brains that will actually allow us to feel the 
emotions of the people acting on the stage. Eventually we 
will get absolutely perfect reproductions and be able to see 
that image so vividly that we shall become it. 


199 


And so the question arises—could that be where we are 
already? Are we a reproduction which over the centuries of 
evolution has worked out to be a replica of something else 
that was going on and we are where we always were? 


The second fantasy presents the idea that every living being 
thinks it’s human, and that means a plant, a worm, a virus, a 
bacterium, a fruit fly, a hippopotamus, a giraffe, a rabbit. 
All beings whatever they feel out from, as we feel out from 
our bodies, feel that they’re in the center. That is to say, 
wherever you look, you turn your head around and you feel 
you're the center of the world, you feel you're the center of 
the universe. Also, a rabbit or a fruit fly feels that it is the 
center. And it has around it acompany of associates who 
look like it and therefore this creature knows that these are 
the right people, just as we know when we look at human 
beings they're the right people, they are one of us. Only, of 
course, we have to make distinctions because you never 
really know that you are you and are really in the right place 
unless you can compare and contrast yourself with some 
other people who are after all not quite in the right place and 
some other people who are very much in the wrong place. 
Through having this succession of comparisons, you know 
that you're OK. 


Other animals and insects have exactly the same 
understanding of this arrangement. “Well,” you say, “insects 
and things like fishes, they don’t have any culture; what do 
you mean fishes are entitled to consider themselves in the 
same way as humans?” Let me present the argument from the 
fishes’ point of view. Fishes think, “Human beings are a mess; 
look at what they do; they can’t exist without cluttering 
themselves and carrying around all kinds of things outside 
their bodies; they have to have houses and automobiles and 
books and records and television and hi-fi equipment and 
stuff, endless stuff, and they litter the earth with rubbish. 


200 


(vr a i 


Consider a dolphin’s point of view (he isn’t really a fish but a 
mammal) of the human race. Dolphins spend most of their 
time playing; they don’t work because the grocery is right 
there in the ocean, whatever they need. A dolphin will catch 
up with a ship and get on the wake, putting its tail at an exact 
angle of 26°, and be carried along. The dolphin will make 
circles around the ship just for fun, playing all its life in the 
water. We know that a dolphin’s brain is as big if not bigger 
than ours, that it is incredibly intelligent, and that it has a 
language which we can’t decipher. The person who knows 
most about dolphins, Dr. John Lilly, is a friend of mine and 
he said he came to the conclusion that dolphins were too 
smart to tellus their language. So he abandoned this project. 
He said he would no longer keep sucha highly civilized being 
in the concentration camp of a zoo, and that it should go 
back to the ocean. The point is, that every being, not only 
dolphins, but every organism that has any sensitivity in it 
whatsoever, considers itself to be the center of the universe. 


Now this idea has its problems. There is a Zen poem which 
says, “The morning glory which blooms for an hour differs 
not at heart from a giant pine that lives for a thousand 
years.” In other words, an hour is a long life to a morning 
glory, and a thousand years is a long life to a pine. And our 
four score and ten years or, as the insurance companies’ 
actuarial tables put it, somewhere between 65 and 70 years as 
an average human life, seems about the right length of life. 
There are people who want to go on and on, who are 
impressed with immortality and have their bodies frozen in 
case there should develop in the future some technique by 
which they could be revived. 


203 


But I really don’t agree with that idea because nature has 
mercifully arranged the principle of forgettery as well as the 
principle of memory. If you always and always remembered 
everything, you would be like a piece of paper which has 
been painted over and over until there was no space left and 
you wouldn't be able to distinguish between one thing and 
another. Or like a bunch of people screaming and making 
more and more noise until you can hear nobody. And in the 
same way one’s memories become screams. Nature merci- 
fully arranges for the whole thing to be erased so you can 
begin again. 


It doesn’t matter in what form you begin, whether you begin 
again as a human being, or as a fruit fly, or a beetle, ora 
bird, for it feels the same way that you feel now. So we're 
really all in the same place, we all have above us things much 
higher than ourselves, and we all have below us things that 
we feel are much lower than we. There are things out there 
on the left and things out there on the right, and things in 
front and things behind. You're the middle, you're the middle 
everywhere, always. 


204 


* a 
oP) 


My third fantasy. It seems to me that nobody has really 
seriously asked the questions, ‘How do the stars begin?” 
“Why?” “How out of space do these enormous radioactive 
centers arise?” I'm going to solve this problem by using the 
analogy of the egg and chicken and say, “The chicken is one 
egg’s way of becoming other eggs.” And if you understand 
my second fantasy you know how that could be true. Now, 
let’s suppose that a planet is one star’s way of becoming 
another star. Stars, when they explode, send a lot of goo out 
into space and some of this goo solidifies into balls which get 
into orbit and spin round the star. And in one chance ina 
thousand, maybe, one of those balls will evolve like the 
planet Earth and slowly upon it will arise what some people 
might call a disease, the bacteria of intelligent life. And with 
them comes a notion, these things that we call alive, that they 
ought to go on. They have fixed ideas in their heads that they 
should keep on doing whatever it is they're doing and they 
should always be doing it better. They divide themselves into 
different species and these species compete with each other in 
order to, as it were, flex their muscles and get better and 
better at whatever it is they are. And they go on daing this 
until one species really establishes itself as top species on the 
particular planet just as we human beings, Homo sapiens, 
have established ourselves as top species on Earth, whatever 
top means. 


207 


Then, when we have a little leisure and don’t have to spend 
all our time finding food to put into our mouths, we start 
asking questions. We look around at each other and.-every- 
thing and say, “What is this? What is going on here?” Some 
people say, ‘That's a stupid question to ask. Why don’t 

you just go on doing your work. Go hunting, go farming, go 
doing your business.” But we persist, ‘No, there are higher 
things.”"And thereby create a special class of people who in 
India are called Brahmans, among us philosophers, scientists, 
theologians, thinkers. And because they go into the question 
of why we are here they are allowed to stop farming, to stop 
hunting, to stop mining, to stop scrubbing floors, and they 
go to very special places called universities where they can sit 
around and think about what is going on. They do what is 
called philosophy, which means they try to say what it 
means. What does the word be mean, what does the word 
exist mean? What do we mean when we say we're here? They 
find they can’t discuss that very far because the word stops 
meaning anything, it sort of becomes a noise. 


They say, “Now, we're not really getting to the point, what 
we've got to do is instead of thinking all the time, theorizing 
and talking words about what's going on, we've got to 
investigate it experimentally. We've somehow got to look 
into this stuff that we call reality, the material world, and 
find out what it is. Sothey start chopping it up. They dissect 
flowers, they chop up the seeds and look into the middle of 
them. They find something there and then they have to get a 
magnifying glass to examine that and break it down into 
smaller and smaller pieces and reason they must eventually 
come to some particle called an atom. In Greek, atomos, or 
atom, means noncuttable, what you can’t split any further. 
So they come down to the atomos, that than which there is 
no whicher—they thought! But then they found they could 
split the atom, they could find the electron, the positron, the 
meson, etc., etc., etc., forever. 


208 


# 1 ae wh owt ROE 


Eventually they determined that every atomos of matter 
contains immense energy and that such energy could be 
released. The trouble with intellectual people is that anything 
that can be done must be done. And in the necessary course of 
the development of nature they found out how to blow the 
Earth to pieces and turn it into a star. 


So that may be how stars originate. They have planets like 
chickens have eggs, and the eggs burst and turn into 
chickens. And planets burst through the agency of intelligent 
life and turn into stars which throw out other mudballs, some 
of which stand a reasonable chance of giving rise to new 
intelligent life, about as reasonable a chance as any male 
spermatozoan stands when it enters the female womb of 
becoming a baby—one ina million. 


Now you may think this is a rather unpleasant fantasy. You 
may feel that things are going the wrong way, the wrong 
direction. If the whole point of life, this tender biological 
substance with all its tubes and filaments and nerves which 
are so very sensitive, if all this is to end up in fire, into an 
absolute blaze of light, won’t that be a shame? Is that the way 
it all ends? 


Many people say they want to see the light, they want to be 
enlightened, they want to dissolve into the light of God. 
Then when they ’ve succeeded in doing just that (all over 
again) the process goes on, and the exploding Earth/star 
blows out those mudballs, and planets are created and once 
again you're a baby, you're a child, the flowers are brilliantly 
colored, the stars are gorgeous, the smell of the earth, the 
sound of the rain, everything is marvelous once again. And 
once again youscee the other, the man, the woman that you 
love as if it had never happened before, it all starts over 
again. 


211 


And as it goes on it gets more and more intense, the problems 
get more and more problematic, you find you are wrestling 
with something you can’t control. You've got to control it, 
but you absolutely can’t control it. Like all the problems of 
the world atthe present time, the whole scene is completely 
out of hand. We feel we are going to our doom because once 
again we are going towards the birth of a star which is the 
most creative thing there is. 


Now think about these for awhile, these three fantasies which 
all have a cyclic quality. And to them I want to add a note 
about biological reproduction. When I think back to my 
grandfather whom | knew fairly well, when! wasa little boy, 
he was something extraordinarily impressive. He looked like 
King Edward VII. He was a very, very elegant man witha 
little goatee beard. He didn’t have sideburns as I do, and he 
had shorter hair—a very elegant fellow, dressed beautifully. 
And 1 thought he was the very image of God. Here I am the 
same age as he was when | first knew him, and I have five 
grandchildren, and I am sort of no longer impressed by 
grandfathers! I'm one of them too! And this is the same idea 
of the cycle that we are almost perpetually in the same place 
as the French proverb says, Plus ca change, plus c'est la 
meme chose—The more it changes, the more it’s the same. 


212 


That means then that existence, the feeling of being, is a sort 
of spectrum just as light is a spectrum, at one endred and at 
the other end violet, and you have these extremes in order to 
have color atall, in order to know light. So you see, likewise 
we have to have the experience that there is somebody else, 
something else going on altogether out of our control in order 
to have the experience of being me. And so in order to feel 
good, to feel that life is worthwhile, that existence is worth 
going on with, in order to bring out that feeling just as the red 
brings out the violet, there has to be in the back of our minds, 
maybe very far away, the comprehension that there is 
something that could happen, that absolutely must not 
happen, that is the horrors, that is the screaming-meemies-at- 
the-end-of-the-line. 


We have to know that's there, like just before he died the 
British novelist Arnold Bennett said, “I feel somehow that 
everything is absolutely wrong.” And so the possibility, even 
the imagination, that there could be such an experience in the 
back of our heads is the background which gives intensity to 
the sense that we call feeling good, feeling that it’s all right. 


215 


So if you understand that you are, really and truly, always in 
the same place, just as every creature thinks it’s a human 
being and just as every being turns out to be a reproduction 
by some interesting technology, whether it’s electronic or 
biological makes very little difference, then you understand 
the nature of life. And just as planets may be stars’ ways of 
becoming other stars, you're always in the same place. And 
what is that place? You can ask yourself very, very—I won't 
say seriously because it really isn’t serious, it’s sincere—ask 
yourself very sincerely, if that is so, if the place in which you 
are now is the place where everything and everybody else 
really is. 


Only there’s an arrangement to pretend that you ought to be 
somewhere else, so the place where you are is the place where 
you are always pretending you ought to be somewhere else. 
This is the nature of life, this is the pulse. J ought to be some- 
where else. If you discover that that’s the trick you're playing 
on yourself, you become serene and you don’t entirely give 
up the game because you've seen through it. You say, “Hmm, 
it really might be fun to go on playing.” 


216 


