ESSENTIAL 


The 
Essential 
Alan Watts 


Alan Watts 


CELESTIALARTS 
BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA 


0 OOo SS ——f—! 


Cover design: Tom Burns & Colleen Forbes 

Interior design: Betsy Bruneau-Jones 

Copyright ©1974, 1977 by Celestial Arts 

PO. Box 7237 

Berkeley, CA 94707 

No part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, 
photographic, or electronic process, or in the form of a 
phonographic recording, nor may it be stored in a retrieval 


system, transmitted, or otherwise be copied for public or 
private use without the written permission of the publisher. 


First printing July 1977 
Made in the United States of America 
Library of Congress Catal oging in Publication Data 


Watts. Alan Wilson. 1915-1973. 
The Essential Alan Watts 


1. Philosophy — Collected works. I. Title. 
B945.W321 1977 191 84-045363 
ISBN 0-89087-403-4 


4 5 6 7 - 93 92 91 90 


eo more than twenty years Alan Watts earned a repu- 
tation as one of the foremost interpreters of Eastern 
philosophies to the West. Beginning at the age of 20, when 
he wrote The Spirit of Zen. he developed an audience of mil- 
lions who were enriched by his offerings through books, tape 
recordings, radio, television, and public lectures. 

He wrote 25 books in all, each building toward a personal 
philosophy that he shared, in complete candor and joy, with 
his readers and listeners throughout the world. His works 
present a model of individuality and self-expression that can 
be matched by few contemporaries. His life and work reflect 
an astonishing adventure: he was editor, Anglican priest, 
graduate dean, broadcaster, and author-lecturer. He had fas- 
cinations for cooking. calligraphy, singing, and dancing. He 
held fellowships from Harvard University and the Bollingen 
Foundation and was Episcopal Chaplain at Northwestern 
University. He became professor and dean of the American 


The Story of Alan Watts 


Academy of Asian Studies in San Francisco, made the tele- 
vision series “Eastern Wisdom and Modem Life” for the Na- 
tional Educational Television, and served as visiting consultant 
to many psychiatric institutes and hospitals. He traveled wide- 
ly with students in Japan. 

Born in England in 1915, Alan Watts attended King’s School 
Canterbury, served on the Council of the World Congress of 
Faiths (1936-38), and came to the United States in 1938. He 
held a Master's Degree in Theology from Seabury-Western 
Theological Seminary and an Honorary D.D. from the Univer- 
sity of Vermont in recognition of his work in Comparative 
Religion. Alan Watts died in 1973. 


vi 


Foreword 

The Trickster Guru 

Speaking Personally 

Ego 

The Individual as Man / World 
The Drama of It All 

The More Things Change 
Work as Play 

Time 

Oriental “Omnipotence” 


Psychotherapy and Eastern Religion 


vii 


95 
109 
121 


In the following chapters the reader will discover a unique 
perspective of the philosophy of the late Alan Watts, one of 
the foremost Westem interpreters of Eastem thought. The 
selections included herein are of dual origin in that the first 
two chapters are essays by Watts. and the following chapters 
are based upon his spoken word. Starting with “Trickster Guru” 
and “Speaking Personally” (the essays), this book begins with 
an autobiographical flavor and continues on to reveal Watts’ 
insights in their final and most concise form. 

To anyone familiar with the Eastem tradition of the guru, 
the “Trickster Guru” will strike a familiar note. Perhaps the 
most personal article ever written by Alan Watts, “Trickster” 
examines the myth of the guru from the outside in. Readers, 
teachers and ‘gurus’ alike will find his treatment most 
humorous and forgiving. The rascal guru is revealed in due 
course as an ironically virtuous character. In “Speaking Per- 
sonally,’ Watts muses about his own life, and in fact mentions 


Foreword 


OO Oo OD 


his then-forthcoming autobiography. referring to it as “Coin- 
cidence of Opposites” The title was later changed to In My 
Own Way, a further play on his seminar entitled “Being in 
the Way.” 

The chapters “Ego,” “Cosmic Drama.” “The More It Changes,” 
“Work as Play’ and “Time” were derived from The Essential 
Lectures of Alan Watts, a series of video programs recorded 
by Watts in 1971. two years before his death. Thus they reflect 
the culmination of his lifelong inquiry into the basic philo- 
sophical questions facing mankind. By the early seventies 
Watts had gathered a wide following, and he endeavored to 
present his ideas with the utmost simplicity so that they 
would be comprehensible to everyone. Watts called this prac- 
tice “avoiding spookery,” which loosely translated meant not 
using words or mystical concepts which might be unfamiliar, 
and thus confusing. 

The remaining chapters, “The Individual as Man/World,’ 
“Oriental ‘Omnipotence;" and “Psychotherapy and Eastern 
Religion” are public lectures delivered to general and profes- 
sional audiences. These talks were selected by Watts from 
hundreds of hours of recordings for publication in various jour- 
nals and periodicals. 


Mark Watts 
June. 1984 


SS] 


Aaywars 


have often thought of writing a novel, similar to Thomas 
Mann's “Confessions of Felix Krill: which would be the 
life story of a charlatan making out as a master guru — either 
initiated in Tibet or appearing as the reincarnation of Nagar- 
juna, Padmasambhava. or some other great historical sage of 
the Orient. It would be a romantic and glamorous tale, 
flavored with the scent of pines in Himalayan valleys, with 
garden courtyards in obscure parts of Alexandria, with moun- 
tain temples in Japan, and with secretive meetings and initi- 
ations in country houses adjoining Paris, New York, and Los 
Angeles. It would also raise some rather unexpected phil- 
osophical questions as to the relations between genuine 
mysticism and stage magic. But I have neither the patience 
nor the skill to be a novelist, and thus can do no more than 
sketch the idea for some more gifted author 
The attractions of being a trickster guru are many. There 
is power and there is wealth, and still more the satisfactions 


Trickster Guru 


of being an actor without need for a stage, who turns “real 
life’ into a drama. It is not, furthermore, an illegal undertak- 
ing such as selling shares in non-existent corporations, im- 
personating a doctor, or falsifying checks. There are no rec- 
ognized and official qualifications for being a guru, though 
now that some universities are offering courses in medita- 
tion and Kundalini Yoga it may soon be necessary to be a 
member of the US. Fraternity of Gurus. But a really fine 
trickster would get around all that by the one-upmanship of 
inventing an entirely new discipline outside and beyond all 
know forms of esoteric teaching. 

It must be understood from the start that the trickster guru 
fills a real need and performs a genuine public service. Mil- 
lions of people are searching desperately for a true father- 
Magician* especially at a time when the clergy and the psy- 
chiatrists are making rather a poor show, and do not seem 
to have the courage of their convictions or of their fantasies. 
Perhaps they have lost nerve through too high a valuation 
of the virtue of honesty — as if a painter felt bound to give 
his landscapes the fidelity of photographs. To fulfill his com- 
passionate vocation, the trickster guru must above all have 
nerve. He must also be quite well-read in mystical and oc- 
cult literature, both that which is historically authentic and 
sound in scholarship, and that which is somewhat question- 
able — such as the writings of H.P Blavatsky, PD. Ouspensky, 
and Aleister Crowley. It doesn't do to be caught out on details 
now known to a wide public. 

After such preparatory studies, the first step is to frequent 
those circles where gurus are especially sought, such as the 


"And there have also been such effective mother-magicans as Mary Baker Eddy. Helena 
Blavatsky. Aimee Semple McPherson. Annie Besant. and Alice Bailey. 


Trickster Guru 


[—) 


i=! 


i—!) 


various cult groups which pursue oriental religions or pecu- 
liar forms of psychotherapy, or simply the intellectual and ar- 
tistic milieux of any great city. Be somewhat quiet and solitary. 
Never ask questions, but occasionally add a point — quite 
briefly — to what some speaker has said. Volunteer no infor- 
mation about your personal life, but occasionally indulge in 
a little absent-minded name-dropping to suggest that you have 
travelled widely and spent time in Turkestan. Evade close 
questioning by giving the impression that mere travel is a 
small matter hardly worth discussing, and that your real in- 
terests lie on much deeper levels. 

Such behavior will soon provoke people into asking your 
advice. Don't come right out with it, but suggest that the ques- 
tion is rather deep and ought to be discussed at length in some 
quiet place. Make an appointment at a congenial restaurant 
or cafe — not at your home, unless you have an impressive 
library and no evidence of being tied down with a family. 
At first, answer nothing, but without direct questioning, draw 
the person out to enlarge on his problem and listen with your 
eyes closed — not as if sleeping, but as if attending to the deep 
inner vibrations of his thoughts, Conclude the interview with 
a slightly veiled command to perform some rather odd exer- 
cise, such as humming a sound and then suddenly stopping. 
Carefully instruct the person to be aware of the slightest ded- 
sion to stop before actually stopping, and indicate that the 
point is to be able to stop without any prior decision, Make 
a further appointment for a report on progress. 

To carry this through, you must work out a whole series 
of unusual exercises, both psychological and physical. Some 
must be rather difficult tricks which can actually be ac- 
complished, to give your student the sense of real progress. 
Others must be virtually impossible — such as to think of 


Trickster Guru 


— 


[—! 


— 


the words yes and no at the same instant, repeatedly for five 
minutes, or with a pencil in each hand, to try to hit the op- 
posite hand — which is equally trying to defend itself and 
hit the other. Don't give all your students the same exercises 
but, because people love to be types, sort them into groups 
according to their astrological sun signs or according to your 
own private classifications, which must be given such odd 
names as grubers, jongers, milers, and trovers. 

A judicious use of hypnosis — avoiding all the common 
tricks of hand-raising, staring at lights, or saying “Relax, relax, 
while I count up to ten” will produce pleasant changes of feel- 
ing and the impression of attaining higher states of 
consciousness. 

First, describe such a stage quite vividly — say, the sense 
of walking on air — and then have your students walk around 
barefooted trying not to make the slightest sound and yet giv- 
ing their whole weight to the floor. Imply that the floor will 
soon feel like a cushion, then like water, and finally like air 
Indicate a little later that there is reason to believe that 
something of this kind is the initial stage of levitation. 

Next, be sure to have about thirty or forty different stages 
of progress worked out, giving them numbers, and suggest 
that there are still some extremely high stages beyond those 
numbered which can only be understood by those who have 
reached twenty-eight — so no point in discussing them now. 
After the walking-on-air gambit, try for instance having them 
push out hard with their arms as if some overwhelming force 
were pulling them. Reverse the procedure. This leads quickly 
to the feeling that one is not doing what one is doing and 
doing what one is not doing. Tell them to stay in this state 
while going about everyday business. 

After a while let it be known that you have a rather special 


Thickster Guru 


and peculiar background — as when some student asks, 
“Where did you get all this?” Well, you just picked up a thing 
or two in Turkestan, or “I'm quite a bit older than I look’ 
or say that “Reincarnation is entirely unlike what people sup- 
pose it to be.” Later, let on that you are in some way connected 
with an extremely select in-group. Don't brashly claim 
anything. Your students will soon do that for you, and, when 
one hits on the fantasy that pleases you most, say, “I see you 
are just touching stage eighteen.” 

There are two schools of thought about asking for money 
for your services. One is to have fees just like a doctor, because 
people are embarrassed if they do not know just what is ex- 
pected of them. The other, used by the real high-powered 
tricksters, is to do everything free with, however the 
understanding that each student has been personally selected 
for his or her innate capacity for the work (call it that), and 
thus be careful not to admit anyone without first putting them 
through some sort of hazing. Monetary contributions will 
soon be offered. Otherwise, charge rather heavily, making it 
clear that the work is worth infinitely more to oneself and 
to others than, say, expensive surgery or anew home. Imply 
that you give most of it away to mysterious beneficiaries. 

As soon as you can afford to wangle it, get hold of a coun- 
try house as an ashram or spiritual retreat, and put students 
to work on all the menial tasks. Insist on some special diet, 
but do not follow it yourself. Indeed, you should cultivate 
small vices, such as smoking, mild boozing, or, if you are very 
careful, sleeping with the ladies, to suggest that your stage 
of evolution is so high that such things do not affect you, or 
that only by such means can you remain in contact with or- 
dinary mundane consciousness. 

On the one hand, you yourself must be utterly free from 


Tnckster Guru 


i=} 


i=} 


[=] 


any form of religious or parapsychological superstition, lest 
some other trickster should outplay you. On the other hand, 
you must eventually come to believe in your own hoax, be- 
cause this will give you ten times more nerve. This can be 
done through religionizing total skepticism to the point of basic 
incredulity about everything — even science. After all, this 
is in line with the Hindu-Buddhist position that the whole 
universe is an illusion, and you need not worry about whether 
the Absolute is real or unreal, eternal or non-eternal, because 
every idea of it that you could form would, in comparison 
with living it up in the present, be horribly boring. Further- 
more, you should convince yourself that the Absolute is 
precisely the same as illusion, and thus not be in the least 
ashamed of being greedy or anxious or depressed. Make it 
clear that we are ultimately God, but that you know it. If you 
are challenged to perform wonders, point out that everything 
is already a fabulous wonder, and to do something bizarre 
would be to go against your own most perfect scheme of 
things. On the other hand, when funny coincidences turn up, 
look knowing and show no surprise, especially when any 
student has good fortune or recovers from sickness. It will 
promptly be attributed to your powers, and you may be aston- 
ished to find that your very touch becomes healing, because 
people really believe in you. When it doesn't work, you should 
sigh gently about lack of faith, or explain that this particular 
sickness is a very important working out of Karma which will 
have to be reckoned with some day, so why not now. 
The reputation for supernormal powers is self-reinforcing, 
and as it builds up you can get more daring, such that you 
will have the whole power of mass self-deception working 
for you. But always remember that a good guru plays it cool 
and maintains a certain aloofness, especially from those 


Thickster Guru 


sharpies of the press and TV whose game is to expose just 
about everyone as a fraud. Always insist, like the finest 
restaurants, that your clientele is exclusive. The very highest 
“society” does not deign to be listed in the Social Register 

As time goes on, allow it more and more to be understood 
that you are in constant touch with other centers of work. 
Disappear from time to time by taking trips abroad, and come 
back looking more mysterious than ever. You can easily find 
someone in India or Syria to do duty as your colleague, and 
take a small and select group of students on a journey which 
includes a brief interview with this Personage. He can talk 
any kind of nonsense, while you do the “translating.” When 
travelling with students, avoid any obvious assistance from 
regular agencies, and let it appear that your secret fraternity 
has arranged everything in advance. 

Now a trickster guru is certainly an illusionist, but one 
might ask “What else is art?” If the universe is nothing but 
a vast Rorschach blot upon which we project our collective 
measures and interpretations, and if past and future has no 
teal existence, an illusionist is simply a creative artist who 
changes the collective interpretation of life, and even improves 
on it Reality is mostly what a people or a culture conceives 
it to be. Money, worthless in itself, depends entirely on col- 
lective faith for its value. The past is held against you only 
because others believe in it, and the future seems important 
only because we have conned ourselves into the notion that 
surviving for a long time, with painstaking care, is preferable 
to surviving for a short time with no responsibility and lots 
of thrills. It is really a matter of changing fashion. 

Perhaps, then, a trickster may be one who actually liberates 
people from their more masochistic participations in the col- 
lective illusion, on the homeopathic principle of “The hair 


Tickster Guru 


of the dog that bit you.” Even genuine gurus set their disciples 
impossible psychological exercises to demonstrate the unreal- 
ity of the ego, and it could be argued that they too, are un- 
witting tricksters, raised as they have been in cultures without 
disillusioning benefits of “scientific knowledge,’ which, as 
ecologists note, isn't working out too well. Perhaps it all boils 
down to the ancient belief that God himself is a trickster, eter- 
nally fooling himself by the power of maya into the sensa- 
tion that he is a human being, a cat, or an insect, since no 
art can be accomplished which does not set itself certain rules 
and limitations. A fully infinite and boundless God would 
have no limitations, and thus no way of manifesting power 
or love. Omnipotence must therefore include the power of 
self-restriction — to the point of forgetting that it is restrict- 
ing itself and thus making limitations seem real. It could be 
that genuine students and gurus are on the side of being 
fooled, whereas the phony gurus are the foolers — and one 
must make one's choice. 

I am proposing this problem as a kind of Zen koan, like 
“Beyond positive and negative, what is reality?” How will you 
avoid being either a fool or a fooler? How will you get rid 
of the ego-illusion without either trying or not trying? If you 
need God's grace to be saved, how will you get the grace to 
get grace? Who will answer these questions if yourself is itself 
an illusion? Man's extremity is God's opportunity. 


The cock crows in the evening; 
At midnight, the brilliant sun. 


10 


Speaking 
Personally 


Atgywans 


B= this is a personal journal I think I may be 
allowed to discuss a personal subject, in the strict sense 
of that word. The question is, “Who is Alan Watts — really?” 
All of us can ask that same question about ourselves, and 
find it enormously interesting. Likewise. we are vastly in- 
trigued in asking it about other people, often in the hope that 
it will be revealed that they are. after all, just as much cow- 
ardly, arrant, and lecherous rascals as we deem ourselves to 
be. It is thus that so much autobiography is entitled ‘The Con- 
fessions,’ as of St. Augustine or Rousseau, or the “Apologia,” 
as in the case of Cardinal Newman. It was always a good for- 
mula for a best-seller to write the biography of some person 
renowned for his virtue, and show, as the result of scholarly 
research, that he was a sexual pervert, a glutton, or an alco- 
holic. For “the evil that men do lives after them; the good 
is oft interred with their bones.” 


15 


Speaking Personally 


oO aaa SSE CO 


[=] 


I am somewhat puzzled as to why our socalled vices 
should be thought more real than our equally so-called vir- 
tues. Perhaps it is simply because they are hidden. But as one 
having considerable experience as a counsellor and father- 
confessor, I find that aspect of things somewhat boring; and 
I have concluded that, by and large, my own vices are pretty 
much the same as everyone elses. 

Indeed, I ceased to act as an official minister of religion 
just because playing the role gave people the impression that 
I was, or should be, unusually righteous. 

But in that case, how could I (or anyone else) honestly lead 
a congregation in a general confession of sins in which we 
all informed the Almighty (as if he didn't already know) each 
one of us was a miserable sinner? 

Almost everyone who reads this is already aware that the 
teal self of each one of us is ultimately the Self of each one 
of the universe, the ever-mysterious Brahman which can never 
be made, nor needs to be made, an object of knowledge. So 
the question I have posed here — “Who is Alan Watts, really?” 
— is of a more superficial order Namely, it is, “What is my 
true character or personality? Is the role that I play or the im- 
age that I present, for example, ‘true’ to the underlying 
character?” 

Now this question brings up, in turn, two further intriguing 
questions. The first has to do with the order image, and the 
second with the word true. 

So for the first, today people are immensely concerned 
about Their Image. It is well-known, for example, that politi- 
cians and other prominent persons have images composed 
for them by experts in public relations. (My wife used to work 
in this profession, and she knows all about it.) 

Psychotherapy, on the other hand, as it is now generally 


16 


Speaking Personally 


conducted, is largely concerned with the discovery or un- 
covery of one's real character, so that one can accept it and 
be tue to it. In other words, the psychotherapists want peo- 
ple to be consistent. 

For this there are two reasons. One is that we have been 
reading novels, and novelists are always berated by the critics 
when the characters of whom they write are not consistent. 
The deeper reason, however, is that the behavior of consis- 
tent characters is predictable, and predictable people are more 
easily controllable than surprising people. 

Now | am a surprising person, at least to myself. (Even the 
great Zen master Bodhidharma, when asked by the Chinese 
Emperor “Who are you?” answered “I don't know’) For if I 
teally knew who I am, through and through, I think I would 
be bored. To the extent that a future is fully known, it is 
already past. 

Thus, I am not really interested in being a consistent 
character at all. It is much more amusing (that is, in touch 
with the Muses) to be paradoxical, or to be coincidence of 
opposites. It seems to me, then, that I am a sort of Joker, not 
in the sense of a funny-man or leg-puller, but in the sense 
of the card in the pack that plays wild, and so assumes many 
roles. 

On the one hand, I am a shameless egotist. I like to talk, 
entertain, and hold the center of the stage; and I can con- 
gratulate myself that I have succeeded in doing just this to 
a very satisfactory extent. 

On the other hand, I realize quite clearly that the ego- 
personality named Alan Watts is an illusion, a social institu- 
tion (as are all egos), and a fabrication of words and symbols 
without the slightest substantial reality; that it will be utterly 
forgotten in 500 years (if humanity lasts that long) and that 


Speaking Personally 


cre 


ao > — c 


my physical organism will all too soon be transformed into 
dust and ashes. 

Nevertheless I know too that this me, this temporary pat- 
tern, this process, is a function or a doing or a particular wig- 
gling of the whole energy of the universe in the same way 
as the sun, the galaxy, or, shall we be bold to say, Jesus Christ 
or Gautama the Buddha. 

In the same apparently contradictory way I am an unrepen- 
tant sensualist. I am an immoderate lover of the opposite sex, 
of fine food, wine, and spiritous drink, of smoking, of gardens, 
forests, and oceans, of jewelry and paintings, and of superbly 
bound and printed books. Yet my desk and library are always 
cluttered and untidy. And, beyond all these things, I am totally 
fascinated with the mystical — with the study of religion and 
metaphysics, with the practice of ritual and meditation, and 
with trying to get as close as possible to a comprehension 
of what it is that IS. 

Sometimes I seem immoderate in all things, and yet I am 
a good moderator in the sense that I love to sit on a panel 
and try to bring out the best in all the other speakers by 
judicious questioning. 

(I dont like TV interviewers who try to destroy their guests 
— with the exception, perhaps, of William Buckley who is a 
great artist, whatever one may think of his opinions. My ex- 
emplar in this art of “bringing people out” is Henry Murray, 
the Harvard psychologist. who presided at fascinating 
luncheon and dinner parties at which he proffered no opin- 
ions but simply asked intelligent questions.) 

Some years ago, the US. Air Force invited me, with three 
other philosophers and/or theologians, to address the person- 
nel of their Weapons Research Laboratory in Albuquerque 


Speaking Personally 


be) 


a 


jo} 


on our basis for personal morals. I began by saying something 
like this: 

“Now, gentlemen, I realize that you are dealing with one 
of the toughest and most realistic aspects of life, since it is 
your duty to defend your country to the bitterest end. 

“I will not, therefore, detain you with sentimental considera- 
tions or concerns of gentle sensitivity. We will get down to 
the nitty-gritty. My basis for moral behavior, or any kind of 
behavior, is a total selfishness. I am out for me, just as you 
are out for the collective ego of your country. Of course, as 
a strategian, I’m not unsubtle about it. I'm not going to push 
people around and state bluntly what I want of them. On 
the contrary, I use camouflage and come on like I'm a very 
sociable fellow who has other people's best interests at heart, 
and by such deceptive ingratiation wangle others into doing 
what I want. 

“However, in this enterprise I have to consider two things. 
What do I want, and what is this self which I am out for? 
These are difficult questions to answer, but they really must 
be answered. For a person who doesn't really know what he 
wants is a source of confusion both to himself and others. 
This kind of person fulfills desires which, when attained, are 
not to his liking, or makes promises for which he subsequently 
loses enthusiasm. 

“It is therefore immensely important to clarify our personal 
desires, and I might add, equally important to clarify our po- 
litical objectives, as a nation, and thus their implementation 
through military strategy. (The implication of this-was. of 
course: Do we really want the responsibility and the head- 
ache of ruling Southeast Asia, China, India?) 

“And then when I consider the nature of this self which 


19 


Speaking Personally 


I love so much, | find it most difficult to get at. Let us sup- 
pose that I love beautiful women, money, caviar, Havana 
Cigars, paté de foie gras, Rolls Royces, and aloes-wood incense. 

“I could go on compiling such a list forever, but every single 
item would formally be considered something other than 
myself, For when I look for myself I can't find it. How then 
can | love it?” 


The point then is, speaking personally, that I can compile 
a whole catalog of loves, but I don't find the lover. 1 suppose 
I could also make a catalog of hates, which might include 
boiled onions, American bread, fundamentalist preachers, 
winter in England, physical torture (of myself or others), 
prisons and “mental” hospitals, racism, and bureaucracy. But 
if I should hate myself, as some are supposed to do, what 
on earth am | hating? 

So, then, I find The Real Alan Watts amazingly elusive. I 
can be told who I am by parents, parsons, pyschologists, and 
others. But their opinions differ, and they are just opinions. 
They cannot feel me from the inside, and thus, for my part. 
I am most hesitant in forming firm opinions of others. 

Thus many things puzzle me. Why, for example. do so 
many people keep probing each other for their weaknesses? 
This is particularly so in “spiritual” and psychological circles, 
and it may be merely because of the pretensions and ambi- 
tions of such people to be good, wise, or holy. They there- 
fore keep testing each other out. (This is why it is almost 
impossible to arrange a harmonious meeting of gurus. It was 
once tried at the Esalen Institute in California and was not, 
I am told, a success.) 

Although, as the proverb says, you can't please everyone, 
I firmly believe that 1 enjoy pleasing people — to provoke 


20 


Speaking Personally 


oc 


i——} 


i—) 


laughter, to see faces light up with comprehension, to be an 
agent of mental peace, to be creatively mischievous, to un- 
burden others of nasty ideas which they think it their duty 
to believe, to infuse life with color, imagination, and play- 
fulness, to beguile people into dancing and singing, to help 
them to cease — at least occasionally — from chattering in- 
side their skulls, and to delight their palates and bellies with 
good cooking. 

Even though I have seven children, five grandchildren, and, 
by the now well-established American process of staggered 
polygamy, three wives, I do not consider myself a good fam- 
ily man. I have never liked raising children because I have 
never been sure how it should be done, and have fathered 
them mostly to please the ladies, That is not to say that I regret 
my children’s existence, for they become most lovable as they 
grow up and get mildly rebellious. 

I dislike, in other words, being forced to comply with our 
particular sub-culture concept of the child and its over- 
protective attitude to children. My father, now nearly 90, once 
told me that it took him almost his first ten years to under- 
stand anything that adults had in their minds, and that their 
behaviour struck him as insane. (Refer to my chapter in The 
Book “On Being a Genuine Fake.”) However, he tumed into 
an extraordinarily wise and considerate man. and I trust I 
shall do as well — in my own way. 

So then, if I ever get around to writing an autobiography, 
it will probably be called A Coinddence of Opposites, for | 
am notat all unhappy in having a somewhat inconsistent iden- 
tity as distinct from a rigidly pattemed character Furthermore, 
like St. Paul, I will be “all things to all men” because, in the 
widest sense of the word, | try to talk to people in their own 
language. 


21 


Speaking Personally 


i=] 


[=] 


[=] 


According to circumstance | will play the part of intellec- 
tual professor, literary bohemian, college administrator, sober 
theologian, orientalish guru, philosophical entertainer, aging 
hippie, or even man of business. 

Philosophically, I will “do my thing” from almost any point 
of departure, any basic premises, you might choose: logical 
positivism, subjective idealism, scientific naturalism, critical 
realism, or pragmatism; psychoanalysis, behaviorism, or hu- 
manistic psychology: and, theologically, from the varying 
standpoints of Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism, Judaism, Islam, 
or Christianity. 

I like to use all these points of departure as views or ap- 
proaches to the hub of a wheel from differing places on the 
rim. I try to explain each separate approach to the hub in 
such a way that it will be clear and unconfused, and that the 
reader will be able to understand the unity in terms of max- 
imum diversity. 

It is the same with the art of life itself. for I agree with 
Shakespeare that “all the world’s a stage” and that “one man 
in his life plays many parts.’ 

And who or what is that one? I will give you the Zen koan: 


When the many are reduced to the one, 
to what shall we reduce the one? 


22 


Alay WwaMs 


suppose the most fascinating question in the world is: 

Who or What, am I? The seer, the knower, the one you 
are, is the most inaccessible of all experiences, completely 
mysterious and hidden. 

We talk about our egos. We use the word I I've always been 
tremendously interested in what people mean by the word 
I because it comes out in curious ways in speech. For instance, 
we dont say, “I am a body” We say, “I have a body” Somehow 
we don't seem to identify ourselves with all of ourselves. I 
say, “my feet” “my hands,’ “my teeth,” as if they were 
something outside me. And as far as I can make out, most 
people feel that they are something about half way between 
the ears, and a little behind the eyes, inside the head, and 
from this center the rest of them sort of dangles. And the 
governing principle in there is what you call the ego. That's me! 

But I just can't get rid of the idea that it’s a hallucination. 
That's not what you are at all. And it’s a very dangerous 


27 


Ego 


hallucination because it gives you the idea that you are a 
center of consciousness, energy, and responsibility that stands 
over, against, and in opposition to everything else. You are 
the principle inside your own body as if your body were an 
automobile and you the chauffeur. You feel caught in a trap 
because your body's something of a mess. It gets sick, tired, 
hurts, and eventually wears out and dies. You feel caught in 
the thing because you feel different from it. 

Furthermore, you feel the world outside your body is an 
awful trap, full of stupid people, who are sometimes nice to 
you but mostly aren't. Theyre all out for themselves, like you 
are, and therefore there's one hell of a conflict going on. The 
rest of it, aside from people, is absolutely dumb — animals, 
plants, vegetables and rocks. Finally, behind the whole thing 
there are blazing centers of radioactivity called stars, and out 
there there's no air, theres no place for a person to live. 

We have come to feel ourselves as centers of very, very 
tender, sensitive, vulnerable consciousness, confronted with 
a world that doesn't give a damn about us. And therefore, 
we have to pick a fight with this external world and beat it 
into submission to our wills. We talk about the conquest of 
nature; we conquer everything. We talk about the conquest 
of mountains, the conquest of space, the conquest of cancer, 
etc., etc. We're at war. And it's because we feel ourselves to 
be lonely ego principles, trapped in, somehow inextricably 
bound up with, a world that doesn’t go our way unless 
somehow we can manage to force it to do so. 

I feel this sensation of ourselves as an ego is a hallucina- 
tion. A completely false conception of ourselves as an ego 
inside a bag of skin. What we really are is, first of all, the 
whole of our body. Although the body is bounded by a skin 
(I can differentiate between my outside and my inside) my 


28 


Ego 


body cannot exist except in a certain kind of natural environ- 
ment. Obviously it requires air, and that air must be near a 
certain temperature; it requires nutrition, it requires that it 
be on a certain kind of planet near a certain kind of warm 
star spinning regularly around it in a harmonious and 
thythmical way so that life can go on. That arrangement is 
just as essential to the existence of my body as to its own 
internal organs — my heart, my brain, my lungs, and so forth. 
So there really is no way of separating myself as a physical 
body from the natural environment in which 1 live. 

Now, that means that I as a body go with my natural en- 
vironment in the same way exactly as bees go with flowers. 
Bees look very different from flowers. The flower grows out 
of the ground, colors and perfumes the air The bee is indepen- 
dent and buzzes around and flies. But where there are bees, 
there are flowers, and where there are no flowers, there are 
no bees. They go together'and, in that sense, they make up 
a single system. Substitute for the word system the word 
organism, a single life form, a single individual. bees and 
flowers, however different they look. Naturally, my feet look 
very different from my head. Of course, a string is joining 
them and therefore we say, “Well. it's all one, obviously.” They 
are very different but they're both me. The feet and the head, 
though different, are like the bees and the flowers — they go 
with each other 

Therefore, to define myself in a scientific way, to make a 
Clear description of my body, my organism, my behavior, and 
describe what it’s doing, I must also describe the environ- 
ment, the surroundings in which it is doing it. In other words, 
it would be meaningless to describe myself as walking if I 
didn't describe the ground. Because if I didn't describe the 
ground, my description of walking would simply be of a per- 


29 


Ego 


son swinging his legs in empty space. That wouldn't be walk- 
ing — I have to describe the ground on which I walk. 

What I am is a transaction or an interaction between this 
organism and its surrounding environment. They go together 
and constitute what we call in physics, a unified field. And 
that’s what I am from a purely physical, scentific point of 
view. It may involve many more things than that, but I am 
an organism/environment. 

But that’s not what my ego feels like. That's not the average 
commonsensical conception of J. Because J is associated with 
the organism and not with the environment. It is opposing 
the environment, and it is not associated with all of the 
organisms. As I said, the ego tends to regard the rest of the 
organism as the chauffeur does the automobile. 

How do we get this false sensation of being an ego? Well, 
it seems to me that it's made up of two things — and the first 
thing we have to understand is that. in the course of civiliza- 
tion, we confuse our ideas and words and symbols about the 
world with the world itself. The General Semantics group, 
founded by Dr. Alfred Korzybski, have a little song: “Oh, the 
word is not the thing, the word is not the thing, hi, ho, the 
derry-o, the word is not the thing” Obviously you can't get 
wet from the word water. The image, the idea, the symbol, 
the word is not the reality. The ego, what we feel as I, con- 
sists of the image or idea of ourselves as if seen in a mirror, 
or as if heard played back on a tape recorder or television. 

When I was a little boy I remember I had a friend up the 
street called Peter, and I admired him very much. Sometimes 
I came home and imitated Peter's behavior My mother would 
say to me, “Alan, that's not you, that's Peter.” You see, she 
was giving me an image of myself. When I did anything terzi- 
ble she would say, “Alan, it’s just not like you to do that.’ She 


30 


Ego 


— ———— |) i=] 


was busy building in me an image, an idea of the kind of 
act I was supposed to put on, the kind of person I was sup- 
posed to be. 

The word person comes from the Latin persona, which 
means that through which (per the sound (sona) goes. It re- 
ferred originally to the masks wom by actors in classical 
drama, because those masks had megaphonic mouths, so that 
in the open-air theater they would project the sound. So the 
persona, the person, is the mask, the role youre playing, And 
all your friends and relations and parents and teachers are 
busy telling you who you are, what your role in life is; and 
there are only a certain number of acceptable roles you can 
play. 

First of all then, your sense of J is your sense of who you 
are, whether youre tinker, tailor, soldier, sailor, rich man, poor 
man, beggarman, thief, whether you're a clown, strong and 
silent, a clinging vine — we can name dozens of them — you 
identify yourself with a certain way of acting. It's quite com- 
plicated, but nevertheless there's a certain way of acting with 
which you identify yourself and which constitutes your image. 

The image that you have of yourself is a social institution 
— in the same way as it is, for example, a social institution 
to divide the day into twenty-four hours, or to divide the foot 
into twelve inches, or to draw lines of latitude and longitude 
which are purely imaginary over the surface of the earth. It's 
very useful to do that because these lines are the means of 
navigation, but there are no lines of latitude and longitude 
on or over the earth — they are imaginary. You cannot, for 
example, use the equator to tie up a package, because it's an 
abstract, imaginary line. And in just the same way, your im- 
age of yourself as an ego is an imaginary concept that is not 
the organism and furthermore, is not this organism in its in- 


31 


Ego 


separable relationship to its whole physical and natural 
environment. 

The image that you have of yourself is simply a caricature! 
A caricature is an excellent example: When we make a carica- 
ture of Adolf Hitler, we pull down the hair and put a comb 
under his nose instead of a mustache. In the same way, our 
image of ourselves is a caricature of ourselves because it does 
not indude almost all the important things about ourselves; 
it does not include all the goings-on inside the physical or- 
ganism. Oh, we get belly-rumbles; occasionally we're aware 
of our breathing; occasionally we're aware that it hurts some- 
where. But for the most part were totally unconscious of 
everything going on inside us. Were unconscious of our brains 
and how they work. We're unconscious of our relationships 
to the external world, many of our relationships to other peo- 
ple are completely unconscious. We depend on telephone 
operators, electricians supplying our electricity, on all kinds 
of service that we never even think about. We don't think 
about air pressure. We don't think about the chemical com- 
position of the air we breathe, we don't think about cosmic 
rays, gamma rays, X rays, the output of the sun. All these 
things are absolutely essential to our life but they are not in- 
cluded in the ego image. 

So the ego image is very incomplete. In fact, it’s an illu- 
sion. But we say, “Now, look, it can't be that way, because I 
feel I, 1 mean, it's not just an image of myself I have; I have 
a solid feeling behind the word I, when I think J, I feel there's 
something there” What is that? Interesting question. Because 
if your brain is your ego, you have very little in the way of 
direct sensation of your brain. In fact, operations can be per- 
formed on the brain with only surface anesthesia — there's 


32 


Ego 


no feeling in the brain itself. Therefore, the brain cannot be 
the sensation of ego. 

When your eyes are functioning well you don't see your 
eyes. If your eyes are imperfect you see spots in front of them. 
That means there are some lesions in the retina or wherever, 
and because your eyes aren't working properly, you feel them. 
In the same way, you don't hear your ears. If you have a ring- 
ing in your ears it means there’s something wrong with your 
ears. Therefore, if you do feel yourself, there must be 
something wrong with you. Whatever you have, the sensa- 
tion of J is like spots in front of your eyes — it means some- 
thing's wrong with your functioning. That's why you feel 
you're there, why you feel you as being different from, some- 
how cut off from, all that you really are, which is everything 
you're experiencing. The real you is the totality of everything 
you're aware of and a great deal more besides. 

But what is this thing that we feel in ourselves when we 
say, “That is the concrete, material me!” Well, I'll tell you what 
it is. When you were a little child in school. you were pick- 
ing your nose and looking out the window or flicking spit 
balls or something, suddenly the teacher rapped the desk, 
“Pay attention!” Now, how did you pay attention? Well, you 
stared at the teacher, and you wrinkled your brow, because 
that’s how you look when you pay attention. And when the 
teacher sees all the pupils in the class staring and frowning. 
then the teacher is consoled and feels the class is paying at- 
tention. But the class is doing nothing of the kind. The class 
is pretending to pay attention. 

You're reading a book; there's some difficult book you have 
to read because it’s required. You're bored to death with it, 
and you think, “Well, I've really got to concentrate on this 


33 


Ego 
Saas eee) 


book.” You glare at it, you try to force your mind to follow 
it’s argument, and then you discover you're not really reading 
the book — you're thinking about how you ought to read it. 
What do you do if I say to you, “Look, take a hard look at 
me, take a real hard look” Now what are you doing? What's 
the difference between a hard look and a soft look? Why, with 
your hard look, you are straining the muscles around your 
eyes, and you're starting to stare. If you stare at a distant im- 
age far away from you, you'll make it fuzzy. If you want to 
see it clearly you must close your eyes, imagine black for 
awhile, and then lazily and easily open them and you'll see 
the image. The light will come to you. And what do you do 
if I say, “Now, listen carefully, listen very carefully to what 
I'm saying.” You'll find you're beginning to stcain yourself 
around the ears. 

I remember in school there was a boy who couldn't read. 
He sat next to me in school, and he wanted to convince the 
teacher that he really was trying to read. He would say, 
“Rrruuunnn, Ssspppooottt, rruuunnn.” He was using all his 
muscles, What have they got to do with reading? What does 
straining your muscles to hear have to do with hearing? Strain- 
ing your muscles to see, what's that got to do with seeing? 
Nothing. 

Supposing someone says, “OK now, you've got to use your 
will, you've got to exercise strong will” That's the ego, isn't 
it? What do you do when you exercise your will? You grit your 
teeth, you clench your fists. You pull your stomach in, or hold 
your breath, or contract your rectal muscles. But all these ac- 
tivities have absolutely nothing to do with the efficient func- 
tioning of your nervous system. Just as staring at images 
makes them fuzzy, listening hard with all this muscular ten- 
sion distracts you from what you're actually hearing; gritting 


34 


Ego 


i—) 


—) 


your teeth has nothing to do with courage, all this is a total 
distraction. And yet we do it all the time: we have a chronic 
sensation of muscular strain, the object of which is an attempt 
to make our nervous system, our brains, our sensitivity func- 
tion properly — and it doesn't work. 

It's like taking off in a jet plane. You're going zooming down 
the runway and you think, “This plane has gone too far down 
the runway and it isn't up in the air yet.” so you start pulling 
at your seatbelt to help the thing up. It doesn't have any ef- 
fect on the plane. And so, in exactly the same way, all these 
muscular strains we do and have been taught to do all our 
lives long, to look as if were paying attention,.to look as if 
were trying, all this is futile. 

But the chronic sensation of strain is the sensation to which 
we are referring as I. 

So our ego is what? An illusion married to a futility. It’s 
the image of ourselves, which is incorrect, false, and only a 
caricature, married to, combined with, a futile muscular ef- 
fort to will our effectiveness. 

Wouldn't it be much better if we had a sensation of 
ourselves that was in accord with the facts? The facts, the real- 
ity of our existence, is that we are both the natural environ- 
ment, which ultimately is the whole universe, and the organ- 
ism playing together Why don't we feel that way? Why, ob- 
viously because this other feeling gets in the way of it. This 
socially induced feeling which comes about as a result of a 
kind of hypnotism exercised upon us throughout the whole 
educational process has given us a hallucinatory feeling of 
who we are, and therefore we act like madmen. We don't 
respect our environment; we destroy it. But you know, ex- 
ploiting and destroying your environment, polluting the water 
and the air and everything, is just like destroying your own 


35 


Ego 


body. The environment is your body. But we act in this crazy 
way because we've got a crazy conception of who we are. Were 
raving mad. 

“Well” you ask, “how do I get rid of it?” And my answer 
to that is, that’s the wrong question. How does what get rid 
of it? You can't get rid of your hallucination of being an ego 
by an activity of the ego. Sorry, but it can't be done. You can't 
lift yourself up by your own bootstraps. You can't put out fire 
with fire. And if you try to get rid of your ego with your ego, 
you'll just get into a vicious circle. You'll be like somebody 
who worries because they worry, and then worries because 
they worry because they worry, and you'll go round and round 
and get crazier than ever. 

The first thing to understand when you say, “What can I 
do about getting rid of this false ego?" is that the answer is 

“Nothing; because you're asking the wrong question. You're 
asking, “How can I, thinking of myself as an ego, get rid of 
thinking of myself as an ego?” Well, obviously you can't. Now, 
you say, "Well then, it’s hopeless.” It isn't hopeless. You haven't 
got the message, that's all 

If you find out that your ego feeling, your will and all that 
jazz, cannot get rid of that hallucination, you've found out 
something very important. In finding out that you can't do 
anything about it, you have found out that you don't exist. 
That is to say, you as an ego, you dont exist — so obviously 
you can't do anything about it. So you find you can't really 
control your thoughts, your feelings, your emotions, all the 
processes going on inside you and outside you that are hap- 
penings. There's nothing you can do about it. 

So then, what follows? Well, there's only one thing that 
follows: You watch what's going on. You see, feel, this whole 
thing happening and then suddenly you find, to your amaze- 


Ego 


ment, that you can perfectly well get up, walk over to the table, 
pick up a glass of milk and drink it. There's nothing standing 
in your way of doing that. You can still act, you can still move, 
you can still go on in a rational way, but you've suddenly 
discovered that you're not what you thought you were. You're 
not this ego, pushing and shoving things inside a bag of skin. 

You feel yourself now in a new way as the whole world, 
which indudes your body and everything that you experience, 
going along, It's intelligent. Trust it. 


SS.) 


The Individual 
CS 


Man/World 


Ay wars 


here is a colossal disparity between the way in which 

most individuals experience their own existence, and 
the way in which the individual is described in such sciences 
as biology, ecology, and physiology. The nub of the difference 
is this: the way the individual is described in these sciences 
is not as a freely moving entity within an environment, but 
as a process of behavior which is the environment also. If 
you will accurately describe what any individual organism 
is doing, you will take but a few steps before you are also 
describing what the environment is doing. To put it more 
simply, we can do without such expressions as “what the in- 
dividual is doing” or “what the environment is doing,’ as if 
the individual was one thing and the doing another, the en- 
vironment one thing and its doing another If we reduce the 
whole business simply to the process of doing, then the do- 
ing, which was called the behavior of the individual, is found 
to be at the same time the doing which was called the 


41 


The Individual as Man/World 


behavior of the environment. In other words, it is quite im- 
possible to describe the movement of my arm except in rela- 
tion to the rest of my body and to the background against 
which you perceive it. The relations in which you perceive 
this movement are the absolutely necessary condition for your 
perceiving at all. More and more, a “field theory” of man's 
behavior becomes necessary for the sciences. 

Yet this is at complete variance with the way in which we 
are trained by our culture to experience our own existence. 
We do not, generally speaking, experience ourselves as the 
behavior of the field, but rather as a center of energy and con- 
sciousness which sometimes manages to control its environ- 
ment, but at other times feels completely dominated by the 
environment. Thus there is a somewhat hostile relationship 
between the human organism and its social and natural en- 
vironment, which is expressed in such phrases as “man's con- 
quest of nature,’ or “man’s conquest of space,’ and other such 
antagonistic figures of speech. 

It would obviously be to the advantage of mankind if the 
way in which we feel our existence could correspond to the 
way in which existence is scientifically described. For what 
we feel has far more influence upon our actions than what 
we think. Scientists of all kinds are warning us most urgently 
that we are using our technology disastrously, eating up all 
the natural resources of the earth, creating incredibly beautiful 
but wholly non-nutritious vegetables by altering the bio- 
chemical balances of the soil, spawning unbelievable amounts 
of detergent froth which will eventually engulf cities, over- 
populating ourselves because of the success of medicine, and 
thus winning our war against nature in such a way as to defeat 
ourselves completely. All this advice falls on deaf ears, because 
it falls on the ears of organisms convinced that war against 


42 


The Individual as Man/World 


[—] _—! 


i 


nature is their proper way of life. They have to be uncon- 
vinced, and can be, to some extent, by intellectual propa- 
ganda, scientific description, and clear thought. But this moves 
relatively few people to action. Most are moved only if their 
feelings are profoundly affected. We need to fee! this view 
of our individual identity as including its environment, and 
this must obviously concern scientists who are trying to find 
ways of controlling human feelings. 

This problem has an important historical background. It 
is curious how the ancient philosophical debates of the 
Western world keep coming up again and again in new forms. 
Any question of the definition of the individual always 
becomes involved with the old argument between nominal- 
ism and realism. I do not wish to insult the intelligence of 
this learned audience, but, just to refresh your memories, the 
realistic philosophy of the Middle Ages and of the Greeks 
was not what today we call realism. It was the belief that 
behind all specific manifestations of life such as men, trees, 
dogs, there lies an archetypal, or ideal, form of Man, of Tree, 
of Dog, so that every particular man is an instance of that 
archetypal form, and that behind all men is something which 
can be called Man with a capital M, or the “substance” of man, 
of “human nature.” 

The nominalists argued that this was a mere abstraction, 
and that to regard Man (capital M) as possessing any effec- 
tive existence was to be deluded by concepts. There are only 
specific, individual men. This idea is carried on in one of the 
most remarkable forms of modern nominalism, General Se- 
mantics, which argues that such abstractions as “The United 
States,’ “Britain,” or “Russia;’ are so much joumalistic 
gobbledygook. 

Most people working in the sciences tend to be nominalists. 


3 


The Individual as Man/World 


But if you carry nominalism to its logical conclusion, you are 
involved in awkward problems. Not only would there be no 
such thing as Man, Mankind, or Human Nature, but it would 
also follow that there are no individual men, because the in- 
dividual man is an abstraction, and what really exists is only 
an enormous amalgamation of particular molecules. If you 
pursue this further and inquire about the individual entities 
composing the molecules, there is an interminable array of 
nuclear and sub-nuclear realities, and if these in tum are to 
be regarded as the only realities, then the reality which we 
call a man is simply the association of discontinuous particles. 
This is the reductio ad absurdum of nominalism carried too 
far. The nominalist and realist viewpoints are actually limits 
— to borrow a term from mathematics. | have often thought 
that all philosophical debates are ultimately between the par- 
tisans of structure and the partisans of “goo.” The academic 
world puts a heavy emphasis on structure: “Let's be definite, 
let's have rigor and precision, even though we are studying 
poetry.” But the poets will reply: “We are for goo, and you 
people are all dry bones, rattling in the wind. What you need 
is essential juices, and therefore more goo is necessary to liven 
you up: But when we want to know what goo is, and examine 
it carefully, we eventually tum up with a structure, the 
molecular or atomic composition of goo! On the other hand. 
when we try to examine the structure itself to study the 
substance of its bones, we inevitably come up with something 
gooey. When the microscope focus is clear, you have struc- 
ture. But when you reach beyond the focus and what con- 
fronts you is vague and amorphous, you have goo because you 
cannot attain clarity. Structure and goo are essential limits of 
human thought: similarly, the nominalist-structural and the 
Tealist-gooey will always be essential limits in our thinking. 


The Individual as Man/World 


We must be aware that today, the particular academic and 
scientific fashion leans heavily in the direction of structure 
and nominalism. 

To take a specific example, we all know that in modern 
medicine nominalism and structuralism hold the field. When 
you go through a process of examination by specialists work- 
ing upon you from different points of view, they will treat 
you as a non-person, from the very moment you enter You 
are immediately put in a wheelchair — a symbol of the fact 
that you are now an object. You will be looked at piecemeal, 
X rays will be taken of various organs, and special tests will 
be made of their functioning. If anything is wrong, you will 
use his equivalents of wrenches, screwdrivers and blowtorches 
to make certain mechanical alterations in your organism, and 
it is hoped you will get along fairly well with these repairs! 

But the opposite, minority school of medicine will say: “This 
is all very well, and the services of the surgeon are sometimes 
greatly welcomed, but man must be considered as a whole. 
He has complicated metabolic and endocrine balances, and 
if you interfere with him seriously at one point, you will af 
fect him unpredictably at many others, for man is an organic 
whole” Such are accused of being woolly-minded, old- 
fashioned doctors, mostly from Europe, with a kind of nature- 
cure background, who will use diet, complicated fasts, and 
massage. The poor layman doesn't know whether to deliver 
himself over to these old-fashioned naturalistic doctors or to 
Mr Sawbones with his very up-to-date qualifications. 

Fortunately, precise science is coming to the rescue of our 
man-as-a-whole. More recent studies are showing just how 
diseases formerly regarded as specific entities, or afflictions 
of a particular organ or area, are actually brought about by 
responses of the central nervous system, acting as an in- 


45 


The Individual as Man/World 


tegrated whole. We are beginning to see how man, as a com- 
plex of organs, is not an addition of parts, like an automobile. 
His various organs are not to be treated as if they were 
assembled together, but by seeing the physical body as a 
unified or integrated pattern of behavior — which is just what 
we mean when we talk about an entity or thing. What hap- 
pens when we have the feeling that we understand 
something, when we say, “Oh, I see’? If a child asks, “Why 
are the leaves green?” and you answer, “Because of the 
chlorophyll,” and the child says, “Oh!” that is pseudo 
understanding. But when the child has a jigsaw puzzle and 
sees how it all fits together, then the “Oh!” has a different 
meaning from the “Oh!” following the chlorophyll explana- 
tion. To understand anything is to be able to fit various parts 
into a system which is an integrated whole, so that they “make 
sense.” 

As organic diseases are fitted into a whole, and problems 
of crime or psychosis in individual behavior are fitted in with 
a pattern of social behavior that makes sense, that is consis- 
tent with those kinds of behaviors, we say “Aha! — now | seel” 

Fascinating work is being done in studying the ways in 
which the individual as a system of behavior is related to his 
biological and social environments, showing how his behavior 
may be explained in terms of those environments. One of 
the people who has done very important work in this sphere 
is our distinguished colleague, BF. Skinner I cite his work 
because it brings out these ideas in a marvellously clear, 
crucial, and provocative way, and because it is evidence for 
conclusions which he himself does not seem to have real- 
ized. One of his most important statements is in his book, 
Sdence and Human Behavior: 


INew York: Macmillan, 1953, pp. 447-448. 


46 


The Individual as Man/World 


i——} i= 


i=) 


The hypothesis that man is not free is essential to the 
application of scientific method to the study of human 
behavior The free inner man who is held responsible 
for the behavior of the external biological organism is 
only a prescentific substitute for the kinds of causes 
which are discovered in the course of a scientific 
analysis. 


He is talking, of course, about the chauffeur inside the body, 
or what Wittgenstein called the little man inside the head: 
this is for him a prescientific substitute for the kinds of causes 
for behavior which are discovered in the course of scientific 
analysis. He continues: 


All these alternative causes lie outside the individual. 
The biological substratum itself is determined by prior 
events in a genetic process, Other important events are 
found in the nonsodal environment and in the culture 
of the individual in the broadest possible sense. These 
are the things which make* the individual behave as 
he does. For them he is not responsible and for them 
it is useless to praise or blame him. It does not matter 
that the individual may take it upon himself to control 
the variables of which his own behavior is a function 
or in a broader sense, to engage in the design of his own 
culture. He does this only because he is the product of 
a culture which generates® self-control or cultural design 
as a mode of behavior The environment determines the 
individual even when he alters the environment. 
[*Emphasis mine ~— AWW.] 


I am not going to quarrel with this finding. I am not a 
clinical or experimental psychologist and am therefore un- 
qualified to critidze Skinner's evidence. Let's take it for Gospel, 
simply for the sake of argument. 


47 


The Individual as Man/World 


But there is a rather heavy emphasis upon the individual 
being the puppet. "All these alternative causes,’ ie., the kinds 
of causes discovered in the course of scientific behavior, “lie 
outside the individual,’ ie., outside this wall of flesh and bag 
of skin. The individual is therefore passive. This is psychology 
in terms of Newtonian physics. The individual is a billiard 
ball upon which other balls impinge, and his seemingly ac- 
tive behavior is only a passive response. Skinner admits the 
individual does and can alter the environment, but when he 
does so, he is being made to do so. This is put forth in such 
a way as to make the individual appear passive and the things 
really controlling his behavior outside him. 

But the reciprocal relationship between the knower and 
the known, common to all the sciences, is set aside here 
although he mentions it elsewhere. 


A laboratory for the study of behavior contains many 
devices for controlling the environment and for record- 
ing and analyzing the behavior of organisms. With the 
help of these devices and their associated techniques. 
we change the behavior of an organism in various ways, 
with considerable precision. But note that the organism 
changes our behavior in quite as precise a fashion. Our 
apparatus was designed by the organism we study, for 
it was the organism which led us to choose a particular 
manipulandum, particular categories of stimulation, par- 
ticular modes of reinforcement, and so on, and to record 
particular aspects of its behavior Measures which were 
successful were for that reason reinforcing and have 
been retained, while others have been, as we say, extin- 
guished. The verbal behavior with which we analyze 
our data has been shaped in a similar way: order and 
consistency emerged to reinforce certain practices which 


48 


The Individual as Man/World 


j=} j= 


i=} 


were adopted, while other practices suffered extinction 
and were abandoned. (All scientific techniques, as well 
as sdentific knowledge itself, are generated in this way. 
A cydotron is “designed” by the particles it is to con- 
trol, and a theory is written by the particles it is to ex- 
plain, as the behavior of these particles shapes the 
nonverbal and verbal behavior of the scientist.)? 


In one of his essays, he has a cartoon of one mouse saying 
to another, “Boy, have I got that guy up there fixed! Every time 
I press this bar, he gives me some food!” 

Although Skinner seems in general to be stressing heav- 
ily the point of view that the individual is the puppet in the 
field in which he is involved, he is nevertheless stating here 
the opposite point, that the individual organism, mouse, or 
guinea pig, in the experiment is nevertheless determining the 
environment even when, as in a laboratory, the environment 
of a rat running in a barn is not designed to control the rat, 
but the more it is so designed, the more the rat is involved 
in and shaping its environment. He writes elsewhere that 
what he has been saying 


does not mean that anyone in possession of the 
methods and results of science can step outside the 
stream of history and take the evolution of government 
into his own hands. Science is not free, either It cannot 
interfere with the course of events; it is simply part of 
that course. It would be quite inconsistent if we were 
to exempt the scientist from the account which scence 
gives of human behavior in general.? 


*The Design of Cultures.” Daedalus, Summer 1961. p. 543. 
3Sdience and Human Bebavior, p. 446. 


49 


The Individual as Man/World 


Now we might well object: “Look, Professor Skinner, you say 
we are completely conditioned behavior-systems. We cannot 
change anything. At the same time, you are calling upon us 
to embark upon the most radical program of controlling 
human behavior How can you write Walden II, a utopia? Are 
you not a monstrosity of inconsistency by calling for respon- 
sible human action and at the same time saying that we have 
no freedom?” But is this actually a contradiction? He is say- 
ing two things, both of which can be valid, but he does not 
provide a framework in which the opposed points of view 
can make sense. Similarly, the physicist says light can be con- 
sidered as a wave or as a particle system. These sound mu- 
tually exclusive to the non-physicist. In the same way, the ad- 
vocacy of a planned development of human resources and 
potentials, coupled with the idea that the individual is not 
a self-controlling, skin-encapsulated ego, needs some further 
concept to help it along. The following passage clinches the 
problem. 


Just as biographers and critics look for external in- 
fluences to account for the traits and achievements of 
the men they study, so scence ultimately explains 
behavior in terms of “causes” or conditions which lie 
beyond the individual himself. As more and more causal 
relations are demonstrated, a practical corollary be 
comes difficult to resist: it should be possible to pro- 
duce behavior according to plan simply by arranging the 
proper conditions.‘ 


There is a contradiction which necessarily arises in a 


“Freedom and the Control of Men,” The American Scholar, Vol. 25, No. 1, Winter 
1955-56, p. 47. 


50 


The Individual as Man/World 


i—] [—) 


i=] 


psychology with a language system which incorporates into 
present scientific knowledge an outmoded conception of the 
individual — the individual as something bounded by skin. 
and which is pushed around by an environment which is 
not the individual. Skinner is naturally aware that his em- 
phasis on our passive relationship to conditioning causes is 
rather unpalatable. 


The conception of the individual which emerges from 
a scientific analysis is distasteful to most of those who 
have been strongly affected by democratic philosophies 
...it has always been the unfortunate task of science 
to dispossess cherished beliefs regarding the place of 
man in the universe. It is easy to understand why men 
so frequently flatter themselves — why they characterize 
the world in ways which reinforce them by providing 
escape from the consequences of criticism or other 
forms of punishment. But although flattery temporar- 
ily strengthens behavior, it is questionable whether it 
has any ultimate survival value. If science does not con- 
firm the assumptions of freedom, initiative, and re- 
sponsibility in the behavior of the individual, these 
assumptions will not ultimately be effective either as 
motivating devices or as goals in the design of culture. 
We may not give them up easily, and we may, in fact, 
find it difficult to control ourselves or others until alter- 
native principles have been developed.’ 


There the book ends, and there is no suggestion as to what 
those principles might be, even though they are implied in 
his conclusions. 


’Sdence and Human Behavior, p. 449. 


51 


The Individual as Man/World 


When an individual conspicuously manipulates the vari- 
ables of which the behavior of another* individual is 
a function, we say that the first individual controls the 
second, but we do not ask who or what controls the 
first. When a government conspicuously controls its 
citizens, we consider this fact without identifying the 
events which control the government. When the in- 
dividual is strengthened as a measure of counter-control, 
we may, as in democratic philosophies, think of him as 
a starting point. [*My emphasis — AWW.] 


Isn't this political nominalism? 


Actually, however, we are not justified in assigning to 
anyone or anything the role of prime mover Although 
it is necessary that science confine itself to selected seg- 
ments in a continuous series of events, it is to the whole 
series that any interpretation must eventually apply.‘ [My 
emphases — AWW] 


Suppose, then, it becomes possible for us to have a new 
sense of the individual, that we all become conscious of 
ourselves as organism-environment fields, vividly aware of 
the fact that when we move, it is not simply my self moving 
inside my skin, exercising energy upon my limbs, but also 
that in some marvelous way the physical continuum in which 
I move is also moving me. The very fact that I am here in 
this room at all is because you are here. It was a common 
concurrence, a whole concatenation of circumstances which 
go together, each reciprocally related to all. Would such an 
awareness be significant? Would it add to our knowledge? 


‘Ibid., pp. 448-449. 


52 


The Individual as Man/World 


Would it change anything, make any difference? Seriously, 
I think it would because it makes an enormous difference 
whenever what had seemed to be partial and disintegrated 
fits into a larger integrated pattern. It will of course be im- 
possible finally to answer the question, “Why does that satisfy 
us?:” because to answer this question exhaustively I would 
have to be able to chew my own teeth to pieces. In the pur- 
suit of scientific knowledge, always watch out for that snag. 
You will never get to the irreducible explanation of anything 
because you will never be able to explain why you want to 
explain, and so on. The system will gobble itself up. The Godel 
theory has roughly to do with the idea that you cannot have 
any system which will define its own axioms. An axiom in 
one system of logic must be defined in terms of another sys- 
tem, etc., etc. You never get to something which is complete- 
ly self-explanatory. That of course is the limit of control, and 
the reason why all systems of control have ultimately to be 
based on an act of faith. 

The problem confronting all sciences of human behavior 
is that we have the evidence (we are staring at it) to give us 
an entirely different conception of the individual than that 
which we ordinarily feel and which influences our common 
sense: a conception of the individual not, on the one hand, 
as an ego locked in the skin, nor, on the other, as a mere 
passive part of the machine, but as a reciprocal interaction 
between everything inside the skin and everything outside 
it, neither one being prior to the other, but equals, like the 
front and back of a coin. 


53 


The 
Drama of 
It All 


Agywaits 


want you to think of the curious sensation of nothing 
that lies behind ourselves. Think of the blank space behind 
the eyes, about the silence out of which all sound comes, and 
about empty space, out of which all the stars appear I liken 
this curious emptiness behind everything to God, an image- 
less, non-idolatrous God of which we can have no concep- 
tion at all. Basically, when you really get down to it, that 
emptiness is yourself. 
Now it sounds very odd in our civilization to say, “Therefore, 
1 am God or for that matter, “You are God.” But this is exactly 
what Jesus Christ felt. And he was crucified for it, because 
in his culture God was conceived as the royal monarch of the 
universe, and anybody who got up and said, “Well. Iam God,’ 
was blasphemous. He was subversive. He was claiming to be, 
if not the boss himself, at least the boss's son, and that was 
a put-down for everybody else. But Jesus had to say it that 
way because, in his culture, they did not have, as the Hindus 


57 


The Drama of It All 


have, the idea that everybody, not only human beings, but 
animals and plants, all sentient beings whatsoever, are God 
in disguise. 

Now, let me try to explain this a little more clearly. I can- 
not help thinking of myself as identical with, continuous with, 
one with the whole energy that expresses itself as this uni- 
verse. If the universe is made up of stars, a star is a center 
from which energy flows. In other words there's the middle, 
and all the rays come out from it. And so I feel that, as the 
image of the whole thing, all energy is a center from which 
rays come out and, therefore, each one of us is an expression 
of what is basically the whole thing. 

In the Jewish, Christian, and Islamic religions we think of 
God not only as a monarch but as the maker of the world, 
and, as a result of that, we look upon the world as an artifact, 
a sort of machine, created by a great engineer. There's a dif: 
ferent conception in India, where the world is not seen as 
an artifact, but as a drama. And therefore God is not the 
maker and architect of the universe but the actor of it, and 
is playing all the parts at once, and this connects up with the 
idea of each one of us as persons, because a person is a mask, 
from the Latin persona, the mask wom by the actors in Greco- 
Roman drama. So this is an entirely different conception of 
the world, and as I think I shall be able to show you, it makes 
an amazing amount of sense. 

So we start with the premise that you are God, and you 
don't know how you grow your body, how you make your 
nervous system work, how you manage to emerge in this en- 
vironment of nature. All this is unknown to you, the you that 
is not you, the you that is not the ego. This is God — that 
is to say, not the cosmic boss, but the fundamental ground 


58 


The Drama of It All 


of being, the reality that always was, is, and will be, that lies 
at the basis of reality, That's you. 

Now. let's go into a more mythological kind of imagery. Sup- 
pose you're God. Suppose you have all time, eternity, and all 
power at your disposal. What would you do? I believe you 
would say to yourself after awhile, “Man, get lost.” It’s like 
asking another question which amounts to supposing you 
were given the power to dream any dream you wanted to 
dream every night. Naturally, you could dream any span of 
time — you could dream seventy-five years of time in one 
night, ahundred years of time in one night, a thousand years 
of time in one night — and it could be anything you wanted 
— because you make up your mind before you go to sleep, 
“Tonight I'm going to dream of so-and-so’ Naturally, you would 
start out by fulfilling all your wishes. You would have all the 
pleasures you could imagine, the most marvelous meals, the 
most entrancing love affairs, the most romantic journeys; you 
could listen to music such as no mortal has heard, and see 
landscapes beyond your wildest dreams. 

And for several nights, oh, maybe for a whole month of 
nights, you would go on that way, having a wonderful time. 
But then, after a while, you would begin to think, “Well, I've 
seen quite a bit, let's spice it up, let's have a little adventure.’ 
And you would dream of yourself being threatened by all sorts 
of dangers. You would rescue princesses from dragons, you 
would perhaps engage in notable battles, you would be a hera 
And then as time went on, you would dare yourself to do 
more and more outrageous things, and at some point in the 
game you would say, “Tonight I am going to dream in such 
a way that I don't know that I'm dreaming” and by so doing 
you would take the experience of the drama for complete real- 


59 


The Drama of It All 


ity. What a shock when you woke up! You could really scare 
yourself 

And then on successive nights you might dare yourself to 
experience even more extraordinary things just for the con- 
trast when you woke up. You could, for example, dream your- 
self in situations of extreme poverty, disease, agony. You could, 
as it were, live the essence of suffering to its most intense 
point, and then, suddenly, wake up and find it was after all 
nothing but a dream and everything's perfectly OK. 

Well, how do you know that's not what you're doing al- 
ready. You, reading, sitting there with all your problems, with 
all your whole complicated life situations, it may just be the 
very dream you decided to get into. If you don't like it, what 
fun it'll be when you wake up! 

This is the essence of drama. In drama, all the people who 
see it know it's only a play. The proscenium arch, the dnema 
screen tells us, “Well, this is an illusion, it is not for real.” In 
other words, they are going to act their parts so convincingly 
that they're going to have us sitting on the edge of our seats 
in anxiety, they're going to make us laugh, they're going to 
make us cry. they're going to make us feel horror And all the 
time, in the back of our minds we have what Germans call 
hintergedanken which is a thought way, way. way in the back 
of our minds, that we're hardly aware of but really know all 
the time. In the theater, we have a hintergedanken that it's 
only a play. But the mastery of the actors is going to almost 
convince us that it’s real. 

And, so, imagine a situation in which you have the best 
of all possible actors, namely God, and the best of all possi- 
ble audiences ready to be taken in and convinced that it's 
real, namely God, and that you are all many, many masks 


Che Drama of It All 


which the basic consciousness, the basic mind of the universe, 
is assuming. To use a verse from GK. Chesterton: 


But now a great thing in the street 
Seems any human nod 

Where shift in strange democracy 
The million masks of God. 


It is like the mask of Vishnu, the preserver of the universe, 
a multiple mask which illustrates the fact that the one who 
looks out of my eyes and out of everyone's eyes is the same 
center. So, when I look at another human being, and I look 
straight into their eyes, I don't like doing that, there's some- 
thing embarrassing about looking into someone's eyes too 
closely. Don't look at me that closely because I might give 
myself away! You might find out who I really am! And what 
do you suppose that would be? Do you suppose that another 
person who looks deeply into your eyes will read all the things 
you're ashamed of, all your faults, all the ae you are guilty 
of? Or is there some deeper secret than 

The eyes are our most sensitive organ, and ae you look 
and look and look into another person's eyes you are look- 
ing at the most beautiful jewels in the universe. And if you 
look down beyond that surface beauty, it's the most beautiful 
jewel in the universe, because that's the universe looking at 
you. We are the eyes of the cosmos. So that in a way, when 
you look deeply into somebody's eyes, you're looking deep 
into yourself, and the other person is looking deeply into the 
same self, which many-eyed, as the mask of Vishnu is many- 
faced, is looking out everywhere, one energy playing myriads 
of different parts. Why? 


61 


The Drama of It All 


It's perfectly obvious, because if you were God, and you 
knew everything and were in control of everything, you would 
be bored to death. It would be like making love to a plastic 
woman. Everything would be completely predictable, com- 
pletely known, completely clear, no mystery, no surprise 
whatever 

Look at it another way. The object of our technology is to 
control the world, to have a superelectronic pushbutton 
universe, where we can get anything we want, fulfill any 
desires simply by pushing a button. You're Aladdin with the 
lamp, you rub it, the jinni comes and says, “Salaam, I'm your 
humble servant, what do you wish? Anything you want.’ 

And after a while, just as in those dreams I described you 
would decide one day to forget that you were dreaming, you 
would say to the jinni of the lamp, “I would like a surprise.” 
Or God, in the Court of Heaven, might tum to his vizier, and 
say, “Oh, Commander of the Faithful, we are bored.” And the 
vizier of the Court would reply, “Oh King, live forever, surely 
out of the infinitude of your wisdom you can discover some 
way of not being bored” And the King would reply, “Oh vizier, 
give us a surprise.” That's the whole basis of the story of the 
Arabian Nights. Here was a very powerful sultan who was 
bored. And therefore he challenged Scheherazade to tell him 
a new story every night so that the telling of the tales, get- 
ting involved in adventures, would never, never end. 

Isn't that the reason why we go to the theater, why we go 
to the movies, because we want to get out of ourselves? We 
want a surprise: and a surprise means that you have to other 
yourself. That is to say, there has to enter into your experience 
some element that is not under your control.’ 

So if our technology were to succeed completely, and 
everything were to be under our control, we should even- 


62 


The Drama of It All 


tually say, “We need a new button.” With all these control 
buttons, we always have to have a button labeled SURPRISE, 
and just so it doesn't become too dangerous, well put a time 
limit on it — surprise for 15 minutes, for an hour, for a day, 
for a month, a year, a lifetime. Then, in the end, when the 
surprise circuit is finished, we'll be back in control and well 
all know where we are. And welll heave a sigh of relief, but, 
after a while, we'll press the button labeled SURPRISE once 
more. 

You will notice a curious rhythm to what I have been ex- 
plaining, and this rhythm corresponds to the Hindu idea of 
the course of time and the way evolution works, an idea 
drastically different from ours. First of all, Hindus think of 
time as circular, as going round — look at your watch, it goes 
round. But Westerners tend to think of time in a straight line, 
a one-way street, and we got that idea from Hebrew religion, 
and from St. Augustine. 

There is a time of creation, then a course of history which 
leads up to final, eschatological catastrophe, the end of the 
world, and after that, the judgment, in which all things will 
be put to right, all questions answered, and justice dealt out 
to everyone according to his merits. And that'll be that! 
Thereafter the universe will be in a way, static; there will 
be the eternally saved and the eternally damned. 

Now, many people may not believe that today, but that has 
been a dominating belief throughout the course of Western 
history, and it has had a tremendously powerful influence 
on our culture. But the Hindus think half of the world is go- 
ing round and round for always, in a rhythm. They calculate 
the rounds in periods that in Sanskrit are called kalpas, and 
each kalpa lasts for 4,320,000 years. And so a kalpa is the 
period or manvantara during which the world as we know 


63 


The Drama of It All 


it is manifested. And it is followed by a period, also a kalpa 
long, 4,320,000 years, which is called pralaya, and this means 
when the world is not manifested anymore. 

And these are the days and nights of Brahma, the godhead. 
During the manvantara when the world is manifested, 
Brahma is asleep, dreaming that he is al] of us and everything 
that’s going on, and during the pralaya, which is his day, he's 
awake, and knows himself, or itself (because it's beyond sex), 
for who and what he’shelit is. And then, once again, presses 
the button — surprise! As in the course of our dreaming, we 
would very naturally dream the most pleasant and rapturous 
dreams first and then get more adventurous, and experience 
and explore the more venturesome dimensions of experience, 
in the same way, the Hindus think of a kalpa of the mani- 
fested universe manvantara as divided into four periods. These 
four periods are of different lengths. The first is the longest, 
and the last is the shortest. They are named in accordance 
with the throws in the Hindu game of dice. There are four 
throws and the throw of four is always the best throw, like 
the six in our game, the throw of one, the worst throw. 

Now, therefore, the first throw is called Arita and the epoch, 
the long, long period for which this throw lasts, is called a 
yuga. So we will translate yuga as an “epoch,” and we will 
translate kalpa as an “eon.” Now the word krita means "done’’ 
as when we say, “well done’ and that is a period of the world's 
existence that we call the Golden Age when every thing is 
perfect, done to perfection. When it comes to an end, we get 
treta-yuga that means “the throw of three,’ and in this period 
of manifestation there's an element of the uncertain, an ele- 
ment of insecurity, an element of adventure in things. It's like 
a three-legged stool is not as secure as a four-legged one — 
you're a little more liable to be thrown off balance. 


The Drama of It All 


That lasts for a very long time, too, but then we get next 
what is called dvapara-yuga. In this period, the good and the 
bad, the pleasurable and the painful, are equally balanced. 
But, finally, there comes kali-yuga. Kali means "the worst 
throw’ and this lasts for the shortest time. This is the period 
of manifestation in which the unpleasurable, painful. 
diabolical principle finally takes over — but it has the shortest 
innings. 

And at the end of the kali-yuga, the great destroyer of the 
worlds, God manifested as the destructive prindple Shiva, 
does a dance called the tandava, and he appears, blue-bodied 
with ten arms, with lightning and fire appearing from every 
pore in his skin, and does a dance in which the universe is 
finally destroyed. The moment of cosmic death is the wak- 
ing up of Brahma, the creator, for as Shiva turns round and 
walks off the stage, seen from behind, he is Brahma, the 
creator, the beginning of it all again. And Vishnu is the 
preserver, that is to say, the going on of it all, the whole state 
of the godhead being manifested as many, many faces. So, 
you see, this is a philosophy of the role of evil in life which 
is rational and merciful. 

If we think God is playing with the world, has created it 
for his pleasure, and has created all these other beings and 
they go through the most horrible torments — terminal cancer, 
children being burned with napalm, concentration camps, the 
Inquisition, the horrors that human beings go through — how 
is that possibly justifiable? We try by saying, "Well, some God 
must have created it; if a God didn't create it, there's nobody 
in charge and there's no rationality to the whole thing. It's 
just a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury signifying 
nothing, It’s a ridiculous system and the only out is suicide” 

But suppose it's the kind of thing I've described to you, sup- 


65 


The Drama of It All 


posing it isn't that God is pleasing himself with all these vic- 
tims, showing off his justice by either rewarding them or 
punishing them — supposing it’s quite different from that. Sup- 
pose that God is the one playing all the parts, that God is 
the child being bumed to death with napalm. There is no 
victim except the victor. All the different roles which are be- 
ing experienced, all the different feelings which are being felt, 
are being felt by the one who originally desires, decides, wills 
to go into that very situation. 

Curiously enough, there is something parallel to this in 
Christianity. There's a passage in St. Paul's Epistle to the Philip- 
pians in which he says a very curious thing: “Let this mind 
be in you which was also in Christ Jesus, who being in the 
form of God, did not think identity with God a thing to be 
clung to, but humbled himself and made himself of no repu- 
tation, and was found in fashion as a man and became obe- 
dient to death, even the death of the cross.’ Here you have 
exactly the same idea, the idea of God becoming human, suf- 
fering all that human beings can suffer, even death. And St. 
Paul is saying, “Let this mind be in you,” that is to say, let 
the same kind of consciousness be in you that was in Jesus 
Christ. Jesus Christ knew he was God. 

Wake up and find out eventually who you really are. In 
our culture, of course, they'll say you're crazy or you're 
blasphemous, and they'll either put you in jail or in the nut 
house (which is the same thing). But if you wake up in India 
and tell your friends and relations, "My goodness, I've just 
discovered that I'm God,’ they'll laugh and say, “Oh, con- 
gratulations, at last you found out” 


66 


The Morte 
Things Change 


Alaywans 


S 
NG 
y, The More S 


Things Change 


am going to relate three fantasies, all of which have 
something in common that will be evident to you at the 
end. The first fantasy is about reproduction. We use the word 
reproduction in two principal ways: We talk about the bio- 
logical reproduction of a species, and we also speak of repro- 
duction in terms of a painting, a photograph, a recording, a 
movie, or a videotape. Now what is reproduction in the lat- 
ter all about? Well, hundreds of years ago, kings of Europe 
formed feudal alliances by marrying the princesses of far-off 
states. Before entering into a marriage contract they would 
have painters send portraits of the lady in question to see 
if his majesty approved of her On one such occasion Henry 
the Eighth of England was badly cheated in this procedure 
by a too flattering portrait of Anne of Cleves. 
Therefore, there developed a kind of moral code among 
artists in the European tradition beginning with the mar- 
velous work of the Renaissance, and later the Flemish painters. 


71 


The More Things Change 


Finally, with the art offidale of the nineteenth century, we 
got what we now call photographic realism. 

At that time they said, “Isn't there some more scientific way 
of doing this?’ And so they discovered the camera. First there 
were those brownish daguerrotypes. People said, “Well, that 
is pretty, it really looks like grandpa, doesn't it?’ “But,” they 
said, "something, several things are missing; it isn't colored 
for one thing.” So they tinted them. 

And then they said, “Why, it's real lifelike, but you know, 
there are some people whose whole style of life. whose whole 
personality is in the way they move, and if you just take a 
static shot like that the personality isn't there” So they invented 
a way of making the images move — movies. I remember 
when the first movies came out they were all moving in a 
jerky way. They smoothed it out and everyone said, “Now 
that’s real lifelike” 

But after awhile they said, “But there's another thing miss- 
ing which is sound; a whole lot of the personality is in the 
voice, so can’t we have them talking at the same time that 
they move?" And someone invented the talkies; eventually 
they added color to them, and everyone said, “Wow, now 
we're really getting somewhere! Then to make it even more 
real they put them in a three-dimensional process which re- 
quired that you wear special spectacles to see. 

But then people said, “Why is it that every time we want 
to see one of these things we have to go down to the center 
of town? Can't we have it all at home?" And so television was 
introduced; they started out with black and white and look- 
ing, as Robert Benchley once described the cuts in French 
newspapers, as if they had been made on bread. 

They improved it, colored it, and that’s where we are now. 


72 


The More Things Change 


i—) 


i=) 


cc 


Not quite. Because somebody has developed a thing that we 
shall all be seeing soon — the hologram — a television image 
produced by laser beams in which you see a three-dimen- 
sional figure out in the air in front of you. Soon welll all say, 
“Now, isn't that marvelous!” But, of course, when you go up 
to it and put your hand on it, your hand goes right through 
it. You can’t touch it. And, you see, that is the trouble with 
television — you look at whatever you're seeing behind a 
screen: but it’s intangible, it doesn’t smell, and it won't relate 
to you. 

$0 there are future problems to be solved in the techniques 
of electronic reproduction — and they'll do it. They'll manage 
a way in which the electronic emission source can solidify 
and make the air vibrate so that you can touch the figure. 
You won't be able to push your hand through it because the 
air will be going faster than your hand. Imagine that! If there's 
a beautiful dancer on television, you'll actually be able to go 
up and embrace her But she won't know youre there, she 
won't respond to you. And you'll say, “Well, that’s not very 
lifelike” just as people once said, “If the photograph doesn’t 
move it's not very lifelike, if it doesn't talk it’s not very lifelike.’ 
They'll next say if the tangible, three-dimensional reproduc- 
tion doesn’t respond, it’s not very lifelike, so they'll have to 
figure out a technique for doing that. 

Will our technology be able to develop such a technique? 
Of course they will) Sitting in your home you will watch the 
scene on a kind of stage, not a screen, and there will be a 
TV camera observing you. That TV camera will report back 
everything you do into a computer and the computer will 
manage each bit of information going into the image that 
you're looking at, and will immediately decide what is the 


B 


The More Things Change 


appropriate response to your approach to the image — and 
won't that be great! She may slap you in the face, or she may 
kiss you. You never know. 

But eventually you'll say, “This is still not really the kind 
of reproduction I wanted. What I want is to be able to iden- 
tify with one of the characters in the scene” We want not 
only to watch the drama that is being performed on the stage 
but actually to get into it. We will want to be wired in with 
electrodes on our brains that will actually allow us to feel 
the emotions of the people acting on the stage. Eventually 
we will get absolutely perfect reproductions and be able to 
see that image so vividly that we shall become it. 

And so the question arises — could that be where we are 
already? Are we a reproduction which over the centuries of 
evolution has worked out to be a replica of something else 
that was going on and we are where we always were? 

The second fantasy presents the idea that every living be- 
ing thinks it’s human, and that means a plant, a worm, a virus, 
a bacterium, a fruit fly, a hippopotamus, a giraffe, a rabbit. 
All beings whatever they feel out from, as we feel out from 
our bodies, feel that they're in the center That is to say, 
wherever you look, you turn your head around and you feel 
you're the center of the world, you feel you're the center of 
the universe. Also, a rabbit or a fruit fly feels that it is the 
center And it has around it a company of assodates who look 
like it and therefore this creature knows that these are the 
right people, just as we know when we look at human be- 
ings they're the right people, they are one of us. Only, of 
course, we have to make distinctions because you never really 
know that you are you and are really in the right place unless 
you can compare and contrast yourself with some other peo- 
ple who are after all not quite in the right place and some 


74 


The More Things Change 


other people who are very much in the wrong place. Through 
having this succession of comparisons, you know that you're 
OK. 

Other animals and insects have exactly the same under- 
standing of this arrangement. “Well.” you say. “insects and 
things like fishes, they don't have any culture; what do you 
mean fishes are entitled to consider themselves in the same 
way as humans?” Let me present the argument from the fishes’ 
point of view. Fishes think, “Human beings are a mess; look 
at what they do; they can’t exist without cluttering themselves 
and carrying around all kinds of things outside their bodies; 
they have to have houses and automobiles and books and 
records and television and hi-fi equipment and stuff, endless 
stuff, and they litter the earth with rubbish.” 

Consider a dolphin's point of view (he isn't really a fish but 
a mammal) of the human race. Dolphins spend most of their 
time playing: they don't work because the grocery is right 
there in the ocean, whatever they need. A dolphin will catch 
up with a ship and get on the wake, putting its tail at an ex- 
act angle of 26°, and be carried along. The dolphin will make 
circles around the ship just for fun, playing all its life in the 
water We know that a dolphin’s brain is as big if not bigger 
than ours, that it is incredibly intelligent, and that it has a 
language which we can't decipher The person who knows 
most about dolphins, Dr John Lilly, is a friend of mine and 
he said he came to the conclusion that dolphins were too 
smart to tell us their language. So he abandoned this proj- 
ect. He said he would no longer keep such a highly civilized 
being in the concentration camp of a zoo, and that it should 
go back to the ocean. The point is, that every being, not only 
dolphins, but every organism that has any sensitivity in it 
whatsoever, eersiders itself to be the center of the universe. 


75 


The More Things Change 


i=) 


i—) 


i—] 


Now this idea has its problems. There is a Zen poem which 
says, ‘The moming glory which blooms for an hour differs 
not at heart from a giant pine that lives for a thousand years’ 
In other words, an hour is a long life to a morning glory, and 
a thousand years is a long life to a pine. And our four score 
and ten years or, as the insurance companies’ actuarial tables 
put it, somewhere between 65 and 70 years as an average 
human life, seems about the right length of life. There are 
people who want to go on and on, who are impressed with 
immortality and have their bodies frozen in case there should 
develop in the future some technique by which they could 
be revived. 

But I really don’t agree with that idea because nature has 
mercifully arranged the principle of forgettery as well as the 
principle of memory. If you always and always remembered 
everything, you would be like a piece of paper which has been 
painted over and over until there was no space left and you 
wouldn't be able to distinguish between one thing and 
another Or like a bunch of people screaming and making 
more and more noise until you can hear nobody. And in the 
same way one's memories become screams. Nature mercifully 
arranges for the whole thing to be erased so you can begin 
again. 

It doesn’t matter in what form you begin, whether you 
begin again as a human being, or as a fruit fly, or a beetle, 
or a bird, for it feels the same way that you feel now. So were 
really all in the same place, we all have above us things much 
higher than ourselves, and we all have below us things that 
we feel are much lower than we. There are things out there 
on the left and things out there on the right, and things in 
front and things behind. You're the middle, you're the mid- 
dle everywhere, always. 


16 


The More Things Change 


My third fantasy. It seems to me that nobody has really 
seriously asked the questions, “How do the stars begin?” 
“Why?” “How out of space do these enormous radioactive 
centers arise?" I'm going to solve this problem by using the 
analogy of the egg and chicken and say, “The chicken is one 
egg’s way of becoming other eggs.” And if you understand my 
second fantasy you know how that could be true. Now, let's 
suppose that a planet is one star's way of becoming another 
star Stars, when they explode, send a lot of goo out into space 
and some of this goo solidifies into balls which get into orbit 
and spin round the star. And in one chance in a thousand, 
maybe, one of those balls will evolve like the planet Earth 
and slowly upon it will arise what some people might call 
a disease, the bacteria of intelligent life. And with them comes 
a notion, these things that we call alive, that they ought to 
go on. They have fixed ideas in their heads that they should 
keep on doing whatever it is they're doing and they should 
always be doing it better They divide themselves into dif- 
ferent species and these species compete with each other in 
order to, as it were, flex their muscles and get better and bet- 
ter at whatever it is they are. And they go on doing this until 
one species really establishes itself as top species on the par- 
ticular planet just as we human beings, Homo sapiens, have 
established ourselves as top species on Earth, whatever top 
means. 

Then, when we have a little leisure and don't have to spend 
all our time finding food to put into our mouths, we start ask- 
ing questions. We look around at each other and everything 
and say, “What is this? What is going on here?" Some people 
say, “That's a stupid question to ask. Why don't you just go 
on doing your work. Go hunting, go farming, go do your 
business.” But we persist, “No, there are higher things” And 


77 


The More Things Change 


[==] 


— 


thereby create a special class of people who in India are called 
Brahmans, among us philosophers, scientists, theologians, 
thinkers. And because they go into the question of why we 
are here they are allowed to stop farming, to stop hunting, 
to stop mining, to stop scrubbing floors, and they go to very 
special places called universities where they can sit around 
and think about what is going on. They do what is called 
philosophy, which means they try to say what it means. What 
does the word be mean, what does the word exist mean? 
What do we mean when we say we're here? They find they 
can't discuss that very far because the word stops meaning 
anything, it sort of becomes a noise. 

They say, “Now, were not really getting to the point, what 
we've got to do is instead of thinking all the time, theorizing 
and talking words about what's going on, we've got to inves- 
tigate it experimentally. We've somehow got to look into this 
stuff that we call reality, the material world, and find out what 
it is’ So they start chopping it up. They dissect flowers, they 
chop up seeds and look into the middle of them. They find 
something there and then they have to get a magnifying glass 
to examine that and break it down into smaller and smaller 
pieces and reason they must eventually come to some parti- 
cle called an atom. In Greek, atomos, or atom, means non- 
cuttable, what you can't split any further So they come down 
to the atomos, that than which there is no whicher — they 
thought! But then they found they could split the atom, they 
could find the electron, the positron, the meson, etc., etc., 
etc., forever. 

Eventually they determined that every atomos of matter 
contains immense energy and that such energy could be 
released. The trouble with intellectual people is that anything 
that can be done must be done. And in the necessary course 


78 


The More Things Change 


i} 


——————_—_—_—_—_——_[_==_=_=EOE———— |) 


of the development of nature they found out how to blow 
the Earth to pieces and tum it into a star 

So that may be how stars originate. They have planets like 
chickens have eggs, and the eggs burst and tum into chickens. 
And planets burst through the agency of intelligent life and 
tum into stars which throw out other mudballs, some of 
which stand a reasonable chance of giving rise to new in- 
telligent life, about as reasonable a chance as any male sper- 
matozoan stands when it enters the female womb of becom- 
ing a baby — one in a million. 

Now you may think this is a rather unpleasant fantasy. You 
may feel that things are going the wrong way, the wrong direc- 
tion. If the whole point of life, this tender biological substance 
with all its tubes and filaments and nerves which are so very 
sensitive, if all this is to end up in fire, into an absolute blaze 
of light, won't that be a shame? Is that the way it all ends? 

Many people say they want to see the light, they want to 
be enlightened, they want to dissolve into the light of God. 
Then when they've succeeded in doing just that (all over again) 
the process goes on, and the exploding Earth/star blows out 
those mudballs, and planets are created and once again you're 
a baby, youre a child, the flowers are brilliantly colored, the 
stars are gorgeous, the smell of the earth, the sound of the 
rain, everything is marvelous once again. And once again you 
see the other, the man, the woman that you love as if it had 
never happened before, it all starts over again. 

And as it goes on it gets more and more intense, the prob- 
lems get more and more problematic, you find you are wres- 
tling with something you can't control. You've got to control 
it, but you absolutely can't control it. Like all the problems 
of the world at the present time, the whole scene is completely 
out of hand. We feel we are going to our doom because once 


79 


The More Things Change 


again we are going towards the birth of a star which is the 
most creative thing there is. 

Now think about these for awhile, these three fantasies 
which all have a cyclic quality. And to them I want to add 
a note about biological reproduction. When I think back to 
my grandfather whom I knew fairly well, when I was a little 
boy, he was something extraordinarily impressive. He looked 
like King Edward VII. He was a very, very elegant man with 
a little goatee beard. He didn't have sideburns as I do, and 
he had shorter hair — a very elegant fellow, dressed beauti- 
fully. And I thought he was the very image of God. Here I 
am the same age as he was when | first knew him, and I have 
five grandchildren, and I am no longer impressed by grand- 
fathers! I'm one of them tool And this is the same idea of 
the cycle that we are almost perpetually in the same place 
as the French proverb says, Plus ca change, plus cest la meme 
chose — The more it changes, the more it’s the same. 

That means then that existence, the feeling of being, is a 
sort of spectrum just as light is a spectrum, at one end red 
and at the other end violet, and you have these extremes in 
order to have color at all, in order to know light. So you see, 
likewise we have to have the experience that there is 
somebody else, something else going on altogether out of our 
contro] in order to have the experience of being me. And so 
in order to feel good, to feel that life is worthwhile, that ex- 
istence is worth going on with, in order to bring out that feel- 
ing just as the red brings out the violet, there has to be in 
the back of our minds, maybe very far away, the comprehen- 
sion that there is something that could happen, that absolutely 
must not happen, that is the horrors, that is the screaming- 
meemies-at-the-end-of-the-line. 

We have to know that's there, as just before he died the 


The More Things Change 


British novelist Amold Bennett said, “I feel somehow that 
everything is absolutely wrong.” And so the possibility, even 
the imagination, that there could be such an experience in 
the back of our heads is the background which gives intensity 
to the sense that we call feeling good, feeling that it’s all right. 

So if you understand that you are, really and truly, always 
in the same place, just as every creature thinks it’s a human 
being and just as every being tums out to be a reproduction 
by some interesting technology, whether it’s electronic or 
biological makes very little difference, then you understand 
the nature of life. And just as planets may be stars’ ways of 
becoming other stars, you're always in the same place. And 
what is that place? You can ask yourself very, very — I won't 
say seriously because it really isn’t serious, it's sincere — ask 
yourself very sincerely, if that is so, if the place in which you 
are now is the place where everything and everybody else 
teally is, 

Only there's an arrangement to pretend that you ought to 
be somewhere else, so the place where you are is the place 
where you are always pretending you ought to be somewhere 
else, This is the nature of life, this is the pulse. J ought to be 
somewhere else. If you discover that that’s the trick you're 
playing on yourself, you become serene and you don't en- 
tirely give up the game because you've seen through it. You 
say, “Hmm, it really might be fun to go on playing” 


8l 


Work 
As Play 


Agywans 


LY, 


g 


D2 
e 
£ 


RS 


ae he Tibetans use a wooden cylinder mounted on an axis 
for saying prayers. They sit comfortably and spin it 
around with little effort and their prayers are said for them 
by this prayer wheel and they relax for the few minutes it 
takes. Westerners think this is a superstition, a meaningless 
heathen ritual. It doesn't require any great effort; it's nothing 
like work or duty; and there's no expression of humility or 
unworthiness. Any child would enjoy doing it. It’s curious; 
it's fascinating. 

I happen to like archery — not for killing things, but as a 
sport. What I like most of all is to set an arrow free like a 
bird. It climbs high into the sky, then suddenly tums and 
drops. 

What is it that fascinates us about that? We are delighted 
by it because it's not useful. It doesn't really achieve anything 
that we would call purposive work. It is simply what we call 
play. But in our culture we make an extremely rigid division 


85 


Work as Play 


between work and play. You are supposed to work in order 
to earn enough money to give you sufficient leisure time for 
something entirely different called having fun or play. 
This is a most ridiculous division. Everything that we do, 
however tough it is, however strenuous, can be tured into 
the same kind of play as shooting an arrow into the sky or 
spinning a prayer wheel. Let’s, for example, take the situa- 
tion that I ran into a little while ago: I was in the New York 
subway at 59th Street near Columbus Circle, and I wanted 
to get my shoes shined. (Actually, I don’t wear shoes except 
on the East Coast. There one dresses respectably. On the West 
Coast I wear Indian moccasins because it's the only comfort- 
able shoe I can wear.) I found a place to get my shoes shined 
and there was a man who was making shoe-shining a real 
art. He used his doth to beat out a rhythm. He had just the 
same fascination in shining shoes as one has in spinning a 
prayer wheel or shooting an arrow. Imagine if you were a bus 
driver. A bus driver is ordinarily considered a totally harassed 
person. He's got to watch out for all the laws, all the com- 
peting traffic, the people coming on board giving their fares, 
and he has to make change. And if he has it in his head that 
this is work, it will be hell. But let’s suppose he has a dif- 
ferent thing in his head. Suppose he has the idea that mov- 
ing this enormous conveyance through complicated traffic is 
a very, very subtle game; he has the very same feeling about 
it that you might have if you were playing the guitar or danc- 
ing. And so he goes through that traffic avoiding this and 
avoiding that and taking fares, and he makes a music of the 
whole thing, Well. he's not going to be tired out at the end 
of the day. He's going to be full of energy when he gets through 
with his job. . 
Suppose you're condemned to be a housewife, which is 


86 


Work as Play 


the most lowly of all occupations, and you have to clean up. 
There are only four fundamental philosophical questions. The 
first is “Who started it?” The second is “Are we going to make 
it?’ The third is “Where are we going to put it?” And the fourth 
is “Whos going to dean up?” And this, the cleaning up, is the 
lowliest of all occupations, the housewife who washes the 
dishes and the garbage collector who takes away the stuff. 
Supposing the housewife about to dean up approaches 
washing dishes in an entirely different spirit. And don't think 
I'm some sort of male chauvinist who's trying to talk women 
into the idea of staying in their place. I'm perfectly willing 
to wash dishes too, because the art of washing dishes is that 
you only have to wash one at a time. If you're doing it day 
after day you have in your mind's eye an enormous stack of 
filthy dishes which you have washed in years past and an 
enormous stack of filthy dishes which you will wash in future 
years. But if you bring your mind to the state of reality which 
is only now, this is where we are, you only have to wash one 
dish. It’s the only dish you'll ever have to wash. You ignore 
all the rest, because in reality there is no past and there is 
no future. There is just now. So you wash this one. And in- 
stead of thinking “Have I got it really dean as my mother 
taught?” you tum the cleaning movement into a dance, you 
swing that plate around, you let the rinsing water run over 
it, and you put it in the rack — you get a rhythm going. 
When I was a little boy and went to school in England I 
had to learn the piano. They called it playing the piano, but 
actually they said, “You must play” We had, also in England, 
compulsory games. They used to post notices on the bulletin 
board in the school that said, “This afternoon everyone will 
go for a run’ And if you didn't go for a run and it was found 
out, you were flogged! So everybody hated going for a run 


87 


Work as Play 


because they were under compulsion to play. It’s like the 
whole game of life were involved in. It’s only a game, but 
everybody has got to belong. 

I remember one day I was out on a run and I was trying 
to enjoy myself, running on the balls of my feet, dancing along. 
A fellow came up behind me who was running on his heels. 
He was jogging, and going dunk-dlunk-dunk-dlunk-dlunk, and 
I said to him, “What's the matter with you? You're running 
on your heels and you are jarring your whole body all the 
way through.” He shrugged, stuck to it, and became the cham- 
pion long-distance runner of the school. But he didn't enjoy 
it! It was work! All he enjoyed was the suffering that he en- 
dured. It made him feel he had really contributed to the 
human race by suffering so much. He identified his existence 
and his worth with his suffering. Now really great runners 
dance when they run. They don't necessarily follow a straight 
course; they may weave. A great example of this occurred in 
1970 in the World Cup Championship of soccer The winning 
team from Brazil played soccer in a most extraordinary way: 
They played it like basketball: they danced. The way we 
leamed soccer in school when I was a boy was very, very 
formal and orderly, and we didn't really enjoy it. But these 
fellows were bounding balls off their shoulders, off every mus- 
cle, and they had astonishing teamwork, and at the same time 
they were dancing, The sports writer in The London Times 
said, “They danced their way to victory.” So the point is that 
you can do everything you have to do in this spirit. Don't make 
a distinction between work and play, and don't imagine for 
one minute that you've got to be serious about it. 

Let's take, for example, the rest of the world rather than 
ourselves. Think for amoment: What are plants doing? What 
are plants all about? They serve human beings by being 


88 


Work as Play 


[—=} SS OSS ————_—_=SS==—= a 


decorative, but what is it from its own point of view? It’s us- 
ing up air: it’s using up energy. It’s really not doing anything 
except being omamental. And yet here's this whole vegetable 
world, cactus plants, trees, roses, tulips, and edible vegetables, 
like cabbages, celery, lettuce — they're all doing this dance. 
And whats it all about? Why are they doing it? Well. we say, 
one must live. It’s necessary to survive. You know you really 
must go on. It's your duty. It’s your duty to your children. 
If you bring up your children that way and tell them they 
should be grateful because you are doing your duty towards 
them, they will learm to bring up their children in the same 
way — and everybody will be depressed. There really is no 
necessity to go on living, It’s part of Western philosophy, this 
drive to survive. We must go on living because some big 
daddy said to us, “You've got to go on living, see? And you'd 
better make it or else!” Well, the fear of death is completely 
absurd. Because if you're dead you've got nothing to worry 
about! This plant, I'm quite sure, doesn't say to itself, “You 
ought to go on living.” You've got, just as it has, an instinct 
to survive which is something other than yourself and which 
you have to obey. 

I don't think of my own instincts as drives, which is the 
proper psychological term for them nowadays. I think of my 
instincts as myself. I don't say, “Excuse me, but I have an un- 
fortunate desire to reproduce myself; would you please ac- 
commodate me.” I don't say, “Excuse me, but I have to eat: 
it's absolutely necessary that I eat.” 1 say, “Hooray! I am this 
desire to make love, and I am this desire to eat’ It’s not 
something else that pushes me around; it’s me. It doesn't have 
to go on. If it were to stop, if I were to die, that would be 
another scene; that would be a different form of the dance. 

If I'm in pain, people say don't scream, don't ay. But scream- 


89 


Work as Play 


ing or crying is a perfectly natural reaction to pain. When a 
baby is first bom they cut the umbilical cord and someone 
smacks it on the bottom and the baby cries. That's the first 
thing in the world. There is in Zen Buddhism a koan that says 
when the Buddha was bom he suddenly stood up and an- 
nounced, “Above the heavens and below the heavens, I alone 
am the world-honored one.’ Well, everybody would say that’s 
an extremely proud thing to say. So they give this to students 
of Buddhism as a problem: How could it be that the Buddha 
as a little baby was so proud as to make this pompous state- 
ment when he was bom? And if you understand the problem 
correctly, you cry like a newborn baby. Because that is the 
perfectly natural response to the painful event of being bom 
into this world. But thereafter we say, “Baby, don’t you cry! 
Shut up!" And therefore we stamp out in human beings their 
natural release from the problem of pain. If you're in pain, 
cry. And if you can't do that, then pain is your problem. But 
if you can cry, if you can let go in that way, pain is no prob- 
lem. And if you get the shudders at death, the idea of death, 
the idea of not being here anymore, just get those shudders 
and dig them. Isn't it curious? You really get the shivers of 
delight! 

So all these emotions that we have, the emotions of up- 
tightness, dread, shivers, horrors, can be interpreted in other 
ways. But we interpret them in a negative way so long as we 
are under the sense that you absolutely must go on living. 
Now, you see, living is something spontaneous. In Chinese 
the word for nature is chi Jan, which means that which hap- 
pens of itself, not under any control of an outside entity. And 
they feel that all the world is happening of itself: it's spon- 
taneous. And you stop this spontaneous flowering of nature 
cold if you tell it it must do it. It's like saying to someone, 


90 


Work as Play 


“You must love me.” Well it’s ridiculous. If I were to ask my 
wife, “Darling, do you really love me?” and, she says, “I'm try- 
ing my best to do so,” that not the answer I want. I want her 
to say, “I can't help loving you. I love you so much I could 
eat you.” And that’s what the plant feels in growing. It doesn't 
feel it must grow; it’s not under orders. It does this spon- 
taneously so that when you try to command this spontaneous 
process, you stop it. 

There is a belief in India that if you think of a monkey while 
youre taking medicine it won't work. Next time you take your 
vitamins or pills try not to think of a monkey. You will com- 
pletely tie up the spontaneous process, and it won't work. 
So all the things that we say to our children — “You must have 
a bowel movement every day after breakfast”; ‘Try, darling, 
to goto sleep”; “Stop pouting and take that look off your face”; 
“Oh, you're blushing” — they all make you feel guilty. All those 
things are attempts to say this one thing, “Darling little child. 
you are required to do what will be acceptable only if you 
do it voluntarily” On this account, everybody is completely 
mixed up because we are trying to force genuine behavior 
Weall admire artists; we say they're unselfconscious, they're 
so natural, they seem to dance or paint or talk or play the 
piano so effortlessly. Of course, a lot of work has gone into 
it, but if you are a great artist your periods of practice will 
not be effective unless they are a pleasure for you. You have 
to come to the point where going over it again and again is 
a dance. 

One of my friends is a great Hindu musician who has the 
most extraordinary technique of playing an instrument called 
the sarod. It’s like an extremely sophisticated Hindu guitar. 
His name is Ali Akbar Khan and he is generally acknowledged 
to be the leading master of Northem Indian music. He once 


91 


Work as Play 


told me that the comprehension of music is in understanding 
one note. He can sit for hours and hours working on only 
one note at a time. He gets into that note and listens. He really 
listens, gets into the sound. It simply doesn't matter that it 
takes a long time, that he has to do this for many hours, 
because he's completely absorbed in listening to the sound 
he is now making. Hes going with that vibration, as when 
you chant as they do in yoga, “OM.” You can chant for hours 
and be absolutely fascinated by the vibration in the same way 
as I am fascinated shooting an arrow into the sky. 

This is the real secret of life — to be completely engaged 
with what you are doing in the here and now. And instead 
of calling it work, realize it is play. 

In Hindu philosophy the whole creation is regarded as the 
Vishnu Lila, the Play of Vishnu. Lila means dance or play. 
Also, in Hindu philosophy, they call the world an illusion: 
and in Latin the root of the word illusion is Judere. to play. 
All that is going on, the spinning of the prayer wheel, the 
pattern in which the flower grows, is just the living, And if 
you take it seriously and say, “Are you doing anything useful?’ 
Useful for what? Useful for going on? But if you have to be 
useful for going on. going on becomes a drag, survival 
becomes a sweat, and it's not worth it. And if you teach this 
to your children, they'll imitate you. They'll treat survival as 
an ordeal which they have to undergo. They have to keep 
going on and they'll teach their children to do it, and the 
whole continuation of the human race will be a drag which 
is in fact what it has become. And this is the reason we have 
invented the atomic bomb and are preparing to commit 
suicide. We think we must happen, and, to the degree to 
which we think we must happen, we hate it, and are going 
to bring it to an end. 


92 


Work as Play 


So I sincerely suggest that (I'm talking with you; I'm not 
preaching) as GK. Chesterton once said, “The angels fly be- 
cause they take themselves lightly. How much more so than 
he-she who is Lord of the Angels? The whole world is three 
for a penny, three for a pound, it’s love that makes the world 
go round.” Or in the words of Dante: 


That my own wings were not to flutter 
Were not for such a flight 
Except that smiting through the mind of me 
There came fulfillment in a flash of light. 
That my volition now and my desires 
Were moved like wheel-revolving evenly 
By love that moves the sun in starry sky. 


Thither my own wings could not carry me, 
But that a flash my understanding clove, 
Whence its desire came to it suddenly. 
High fantasy lost power and here broke off; 
Yet, as a wheel moves smoothly, free from jars, 
My will and my desire were turned by love, 
The love that moves the sun and the other stars. 


End of Canto XXXIII Paradise 


93 


Time 


Aaywars 


se What is time? 


St. Augustine of Hippo when asked, “What is time?” said, 
“I know what it is, but when you ask me I don't” Yet it is 
absolutely fundamental to our life: “Time is money" “I don't 
have enough time.” “Time flies.’ “Time drags.’ 

I think we should question what time is, because of our 
ordinary common sense we think of it as a one-way motion 
from the past through the present and on into the future. That 
carries with it the impression that life moves from the past 
to the future in such a way that what happens now and what 
will happen is always the result of what has happened in the 
past. In other words, we seem to be driven along. 

Once it was fashionable in psychology for people to speak 
of man’s instincts, the instinct for survival, an instinct to make 
love, and so on. But nowadays that word has become un- 
fashionable and psychologists tend instead to use the word 
drive, and to speak of the need for food as a drive, the need 


97 


Time 


for survival or for sex as drives. That's a very significant word 
because it's brought out by people who feel driven. Personally, 
if I feel hungry I don't feel driven: if I feel lusty I don't feel 
driven; I don't say, “Oh, excuse me but I have to eat,” or, “Ex- 
cuse me but I need to fulfill my sexual urges.” I say, “Hooray!” 
1 identify myself with my drives. They are me, and I don't 
take a passive attitude towards them and apologize for them. 
So the whole idea of our being driven is connected with the 
idea of causality, of life moving under the power of the past. 
That is so ingrained in our common sense that it's very dif- 
ficult to get rid of it. But I want to turn it round completely 
and say the past is the result of the present. 

From one point of view that is very obvious. For example, 
let us suppose that this universe started with a big bang as 
some cosmologists believe. Now when that bang happened, 
it was the present, wasn't it? And so the universe began in 
what we will call a now moment, then it goes on doing its 
stuff. When any event that we now call past came into be- 
ing, it came into being in the present and out of the present. 
That's one way of seeing it. 

But before we get further involved in this, 1 want to draw 
your attention to a fallacy in the very commonsense idea of 
causality — events are caused by previous events from which 
they flow or necessarily result. To understand the fallacy of 
that idea, we have to begin by asking, “What do you mean 
by an event?” Let's take the event of a human being coming 
into the world. Now when does that event begin? Does it oc- 
cur at the moment of parturition when the baby actually 
comes out of its mother? Or does the baby begin at the mo- 
ment of conception? Or does a baby begin when it is a gleam 
in its father's eye? Or does a baby begin when the spermatozoa 
are generated in the father or the ova in the mother? Or could 


98 


Time 


you say a baby begins when its father is born or when its 
mother is born? All these things can be thought of as begin- 
nings, but we decide for purposes of legal registration that 
a life begins at the moment of parturition. And that is a purely 
arbitrary decision; it has validity only because we all agree 
about it. 

Let me show you the same phenomenon in the dimen- 
sion of space instead of the dimension of time. Let's ask, “How 
big is the sun?” Are we going to define the sun as limited by 
the extent of its fire? That's one possible definition. But we 
could equally well define the sphere of the sun by the extent 
of its light. And each of these would be reasonable choices. 
We have arbitrarily agreed to define the sun by the limit of 
its visible fire. But you see in these analogies that how big 
a thing is or how long an event is, is simply a matter of 
definition. 

Therefore, when by the simple definition for purposes of 
discussion we have divided events into certain periods ~ the 
First World War began in 1914 and it ended in 1918 (actually, 
all those things which led up to the First World War started 
long before 1914, and the repercussions of that war continued 
long after 1918) — we sort of forget we do it. We have a puz- 
zle, “How do events lead to each other?’ 

In reality there are no separate events. Life moves along 
like water, it's all connected as the source of the river is con- 
nected to the mouth and the ocean. All the events or things 
going on are like whirlpools in a stream. Today you see a 
whirlpool and tomorrow you see a whirlpool in the same 
place, but it isn't the same whirlpool because the water is 
changing every second. 

What is happening is not really what we should call a 
whirlpool, but rather a whirlpooling. It is an activity, not a 


99 


Time 


thing. And indeed every so-called thing can be called an event. 
We can call a house, housing, a mat, matting, and we could 
equally call a cat, a catting. So we could say, “The catting sat 
on the matting” And we could thereby have a world in which 
there were no things but only events. To give another illustra- 
tion: A flame is something we say, “There is a flame on the 
candle” But it would be more correct to say, “There is a flam- 
ing on the candle,’ because a flame is a stream of hot gas. 

Let's take another amusing example. Fist is a noun and fist 
looks like a thing, but what happens to the fist when I open 
my hand. I was fisting, now I'm handing, handing it to you. 
So every kind ofso-called thing can be spoken of as an event 
and because events flow into each other the fisting flows into 
the handing, we cannot say exactly where one ends and the 
other begins. 

So, therefore, we do not need the idea of causality to ex- 
plain how a prior event influences the following event. Con- 
sider it this way: Suppose I'm looking through a narrow slit 
in a fence, and a snake goes by. I've never seen a snake before, 
so it is mysterious. Through the fence I see first the snake's 
head, then I see a long trailing body, and then finally the tail. 
Then the snake turns around and goes back. Then I see first 
the head, and then after an interval the tail. Now if call the 
head one event and the tail another, it will seem to me that 
the event head is the cause of the event tail. And the tail is 
the effect. But if I look at the whole snake I will see a head- 
tail snake and it would be simply absurd to say that the head 
of the snake is the cause of the tail, as if the snake came into 
being as a head first and then a tail. The snake comes into 
being out of its egg as a head-tail snake. And in exactly the 
same way all events are really one event. We are looking, 


Time 


= 


i—) 


i—_—} 


when we talk about different events, at different sections or 
parts of one continuous happening. 

Therefore, the idea of separate events, which have to be 
linked by a mysterious process called cause and effect, is com- 
pletely unnecessary. But having thought that way, we think 
of present events as being caused by past events, and tend 
to regard ourselves as the puppets of the past, driven along 
by something that is always behind us. 

It's very simple to overcome this impression. You begin with 
an experiment in meditation — approach the world through 
your ears. If you shut your eyes and make contact with real- 
ity purely with your ears, you will realize that the sounds you 
are hearing are all coming out of silence. It’s curious isn't it 
because you hear all the realities, the sounds suddenly com- 
ing out of nothing. You don’t see any reason for them to begin, 
they just appear and then they echo away through the cor- 
ridors of the mind which we call memory. 

Now if you open your eyes, it's a little harder to see this 
because unlike sound, the eyes sound static or rather, they 
see static. Everything looks still to your eyes, but you must 
understand that the world you are looking at is vibrating. All 
material things are vibrating and they are vibrating on your 
ears. In other words, the present world that you see is a vibra- 
tion coming out of space just as the sound comes out of 
silence. It is coming out of nothing straight at you and echo- 
ing away into the past. 

So the course of time is really very much like the course 
of aship in the ocean. The ship leaves a wake behind it, and 
the wake fades out and tells us where the ship has been in 
just the same way as the past and our memory of the past 
tell us what we have done. But as we go back into the past, 


101 


Time 


i=] 


=) 


and we go back and back to prehistory and we use all kinds 
of instruments and scientific methods for detecting what hap- 
pened, we eventually reach a point where all record of the 
past fades away in just the same way as the wake of a ship. 

Now the important thing to remember in this illustration 
is that the wake doesn't drive the ship anymore than the tail 
wags the dog. The power, the source of the wake, is always 
in the ship itself, which represents the present. You can't in- 
sist that the wake drives the ship. You can plot the course 
of the ship on graph paper and calculate a trend by seeing 
over what number of squares the ship has been doing its wig- 
gling, and make predictions as to where it will go next. This 
would give you a trend as to where the ship is going and you 
might say, “Because we can plot the trend from the pattern 
which the ship has followed, we can tell where it is going 
and, therefore, we are inclined to think that where it has been 
will determine where it will go” But that is not actually the 
case. Where it has been is determined not by where it will 
go but where it is going. To put that more accurately, where 
it has been does not determine where it is going; where it 
is going determines where it has been. 

If you insist that your present is the result of your past, 
you are like a person driving your car looking always in the 
rearview mirror. You are not, as it were, open to the future, 
you are always looking back over your shoulder to find out 
what you ought to do. And this is something absolutely 
characteristic of us and this is why human beings find it dif- 
ficult to learn and difficult to adapt themselves to new situa- 
tions. Because we are always looking for precedents, for 
authority from the past for what we are supposed to do now, 
that gives us the impression the past is all-important and is 
the determinative factor in our behavior 


102 


Time 


i=] 


i—) 


a 


It isn't anything of the kind. The life, the creation, comes 
out of you now. In other words, don't look for the creation 
back here at the beginning of where the wake fades out. Don't 
look for the creation of the universe at some very far-distant 
point in time behind us. The creation of the universe is now 
in this present instant. This is where it all begins! And it trails 
away from here and eventually vanishes. 

Now of course we have a method of passing the buck in 
all matters of responsibility by saying, “Well, the past is 
responsible for me.” For instance, when dealing with a dif- 
ficult child, we are apt to say, “Well, bang him about, beat 
him up, and maybe he'll change” But then we say, “No, that’s 
not fair to the child to beat him up, because it was his parents’ 
fault; they didn't bring him up properly.” And so then we say, 
“Well, punish the parents.” But the parents say, “Well, excuse 
me, but our parents were neurotic, too, and they brought us 
up badly so we couldn't help what we did” And since the 
grandparents are dead we can't get at them, and if we could 
we would pass the whole blame back to Adam and Eve. We 
would say, “No, the serpent tempted me and | did eat.” Then 
it was the serpent's fault! 

When God asked Eve, “Didst thou eat the fruit of the tree 
whereof I told thee thou shouldst not eat?” she said, “Oh, 
but the serpent tempted me and I did eat:’ And God looked 
at the serpent, and the serpent didn’t make any excuse. He 
probably winked — because the serpent, being an angel, was 
wise to know where the present begins. 

So you see, if you insist on being moved, being determined 
by the past, that’s your game. But the fact of the matter is 
it all starts right now. But we like to establish a connectivity 
with the past because that gives other people the impression 
that we're sane. People ask, for example, why you do some- 


103 


Time 


thing. Now that's a ridiculous question. A child finds out that 
to irritate its parents it can always put the word why after 
any answer to a question. “Why does the sun shine?” and 
he gets an astronomical explanation, “Well, why does nuclear 
heat generate in star bodies?” “Oh, because it reaches a critical 
mass.” “Well, why does it reach a critical mass?” And you can 
go on and on and on asking why until papa says, “Oh, shut 
up and suck your lollipop.” 

The question “why,” because it can be asked interminably, 
never leads to any interesting answers. If you ask me then 
why am I proposing this, I could say, “Well, Im making a liv- 
ing this way, or I have a message I want to get across to you.” 
But that’s not the reason. I am talking for the same reason 
that birds sing and the stars shine. I dig it. Why do I dig it? 
I could go on answering all sorts of questions about human 
motivation and psychology, but they wouldn't explain a thing, 
because explaining things by the past is really a refusal to 
explain them at all. All you're doing is postponing the expla- 
nation. You're putting it back and back and back and that 
explains nothing. 

What does explain things is the present. Why do you do 
it now? Now this is a slight cheat because that doesn't explain 
it either, because what happens now, just as the sound comes 
out of silence, all this comes out of nowhere. All life suddenly 
emerges out of space — Bang! Right nowl 

And to ask again why does it happen is an unprofitable 
question because the interesting thing is not why but what. 
What happens? Not, why does it happen? I can say, “Well, I 
am doing this now because I did that then:’ and so I am pro- 
ducing for you a continuous line of thought, but actually I 
am doing it backwards. I'm doing it always from now and 


Time 


| La] 


i—!) 


connecting up what I do now with what I did so that you 
can see a consistent story. 

Now another interesting thing about this is that I can show 
you how the present changes the past. Let's take for exam- 
ple the order of words. Now words are strung out in a line 
just like we think events in time are strung out in a line and 
I can change a past word by a future word. If I say (taking 
a line from the poet Thomas Hood), “They went and told 
the sexton, and the sexton tolled the bell” You don’t know 
what the first told means until you get the sexton; you don't 
know what the second tolled means until you get the word 
bell. And so the later event changes the meaning of the former 
Or you can say for example, “The bark of the tree.” and the 
word bark has a certain meaning. Then I say “The bark of 
the dog” and the later word has changed the meaning of the 
former one. 

And so, in this way, when we write history we find that 
writing history is really an art. The historian keeps putting 
a fresh interpretation on past events and in that sense he is 
changing it. He is changing their meaning just like we were 
changing the meaning of a former word by a later word by 
saying, “They went and told the sexton and the sexton tolled 
the bell.” 

In this way you can experience a curious liberation from 
what the Hindus and the Buddhists call karma. The word 
karma in Sanskrit actually means doing, action. Karma comes 
from the root kri which simply means todo. When something 
happens to me, an accident or an illness, a Buddhist or a 
Hindu will say, “Well, it was your karma.” In other words, 
you had done something in the past and you reap the unfor- 
tunate consequence in a later time. Now that's not the real 


105 


Time 


meaning of karma. Karma does not mean cause and effect. 
It simply means doing, In other words, you are doing what 
is happening to you. And that, of course, depends upon how 
you define the word you. For example, consider breathing; 
am I doing it or is it happening to me? I am growing my hair; 
am I doing it or is it happening to me? You can look at it either 
way. I am being sick, or I am being destroyed in an accident 
— if I define myself as the whole field of events, the organism- 
environment field which is the real me, then all the things 
that happen to me may be called my doing. And that is the 
real sense of karma. 

But when we speak about freedom from karma, freedom 
from being the puppet of the past, that simply involves a 
change in our thinking, It involves getting rid of the habit 
of thought whereby we define ourselves as the result of what 
has gone before. We instead get into the more plausible, more 
reasonable habit of thought in which we don't define 
ourselves in terms of what we've done before but in terms 
of what were doing now. And that is liberation from the 
ridiculous situation of being a dog wagged by its tail. 


106 


Oniental 
“Omnupotence”’ 


Ay wans 


ince the latter part of the nineteenth century there has 
been an enormous growth of Western interest in the 
philosophical and spiritual traditions of Asia. Today this in- 
terest seems to be widening in such a way as to amount to 
a major “cultural invasion,’ so that it is possible for so serious 
a historian as Amold Toynbee to speak of the future growth 
of religion in terms of a fusion of Christianity and Buddhism. 
Much of this popular interest in Asian spirituality has been 
focussed upon those aspects of it which have to do with para- 
psychology, with the development of what are called in San- 
skrit siddhi, or supernormal powers. By no means all of this 
interest in siddhi is at the unfortunate level of those so-called 
yogis who give public instruction in Raja or Hatha Yoga in 
the great metropolitan cities. . 
The studies and experiments which have been made in 
this area by such people as Pitirim Sorokin of Harvard, Mircea 
Eliade, C.G. Jung, Roger Godel, and others less well-known 


111 


Onental "Omnipotence” 


i= J 


i—} 


i—} 


are of a serious and sober character Nonetheless, it is an area 
fraught with misunderstanding, especially as concerns the 
relationship of parapsychology to the primary purposes of 
such ways of life as Buddhism, the Vedanta, and Taoism. 

One must remember that a great deal of Western interest 
in Asian philosophy stems from the wide influence exercised 
by the Theosophical movement in the early part of this cen- 
tury, by the work of H.P Blavatsky, Annie Besant, Rudolph 
Steiner, G.R.S. Mead, and many others. Although, at the pres- 
ent time, Theosophy has little of its former prestige, it did 
much to lay down the general lines of Western interest in 
Asian spirituality, where this interest was not of a purely 
academic nature. But in so doing it propagated some serious 
confusions. For its sources of information about these mat- 
ters were principally the labors of Western scholars who had, 
as then, hardly come to grips with the subject, and who had 
confused communication between East and West with — 
perhaps inevitably — misleading dictionaries of Sanskrit, 
Chinese, and Tibetan. 

The main misunderstanding which emerged from this early 
interest had to do with the kind of knowledge which, in 
Buddhism or the Vendanta, would be called “supreme 
knowledge.’ “enlightenment; or “awakening” — or sometimes 
even “omniscience” (sarvajnana). This is the kind of knowledge 
which the Oriental philosophies hold to be characteristic of 
the highest form of man, of a Buddha or “awakened one,” or 
of a jivan-mukta — one who is liberated from bondage to the 
conventional world of ordinary perception. Perhaps the chief 
reason for the misunderstanding was that this type of 
knowledge was confused with the omniscience and conse- 
quent omnipotence attributed to God in Christian theology. 


112 


Oriental “Omnipotence” 


For when we think about omniscience in the context of 
Christian theology, we tend to think of a knowledge which 
is infinitely encyclopedic and of power which is infinitely 
magical or “technological.” We think of God as being ex- 
haustively informed about all facts and events whatsoever, 
and as being in conscious and voluntary control of absolutely 
everything which happens. Consequently God has a conscous 
and technical mastery of the world of nature such that he 
can at any moment alter its normal and expected course by 
performing miracles. Such miracles are not violations of 
nature, but actions which proceed, like those of the scien- 
tist, from an extraordinary knowledge of its processes. 

With such ideas of omniscience in mind, it is easy to see 
how Western people might credit the “divine men” of Asia 
with powers like those of the Christian God. To complicate 
the problem — this is by no means a purely Western mis- 
conception. All over the world, men’s minds are fascinated 
by prospects of unusual power To complicate it still more — 
there are Hindus and Buddhists who train themselves in 
disciplines which do, in fact, produce some quite extraor- 
dinary psychophysical powers. But this latter fact must not 
be considered out of context. 

We must begin by showing the difference between Western 
and Eastern ideas of omniscience and omnipotence. A Chi- 
nese Buddhist poem says: 


You may wish to ask where the flowers come from, 
But even the God of Spring doesn't know. 


A Westerner would expect that, of all people, the God of 
Spring would know exactly how flowers are made. But if he 


113 


Oriental “Omnipotence” 


doesn't know, how can he possibly make them? A Buddhist 
would answer that the question itself is misleading since 
flowers are grown, not made. Things which are made are 
either assemblages of formerly separate parts (like houses) 
or constructed by cutting and shaping from without inwards 
(like pots of clay or images). But things which are grown for- 
roulate their own structure and differentiate their own parts 
from within outwards. 

Thus it would be absurd, in a Buddhist's view, to ask, “Who 
made the world?” because the world as a whole is not con- 
sidered as an artifact, a structure made by putting formerly 
distinct pieces together — pieces which were originally shaped 
by an external agency from some kind of material. No analogy 
is felt to exist between natural growth and human 
manufacture. 

If, then, the God of Spring does not make the flowers, how 
does he produce them? The answer is that he does so in the 
same way that you and I grow our hair, beat our hearts, struc- 
ture our bones and nerves, and move our limbs. To us, this 
seems a very odd statement because we do not ordinarily 
think of ourselves as actively growing our hair in the same 
way that we move our limbs. But the difference vanishes when 
we ask ourselves just how we raise a hand, or just how we 
make a mental decision to raise a hand. For we do not know 
— or, more correctly, we do know but we cannot describe how 
it is done in words. 

To be more exact: the process is so innate and so simple 
that it cannot be conveyed by anything so complicated and 
cumbersome as human language, which has to describe 
everything in terms of a linear series of fixed signs. This 
cumbersome way of making communicable representations 


114 


Oriental “Omnipotence" 


of the world makes the description of certain events as com- 
plicated as trying to drink water with a fork. It is not that 
these actions or events are complicated in themselves: the 
complexity lies in trying to fit them into the dumsy in- 
strumentality of language, which can deal only with one thing 
(or “think”) at a time. 

Now the Western mind identifies what it knows with what 
it can describe and communicate in some system of symbols, 
whether linguistic or mathematical — that is, with what it can 
think about. Knowledge is thus primarily the content of 
thought, of a system of symbols which make up a very ap- 
proximate model or representation of reality. In somewhat 
the sare way, a newspaper photograph is a representation 
of a natural scene in terms of a fine screen of dots. But as 
the actual scene is not a lot of dots, so the real world is not 
in fact a lot of things or “thinks.” 

The Oriental mind uses the term knowledge in another 
sense besides this — in the sense of knowing how to do ac- 
tions which cannot be explained. In this sense, we know how 
to breathe and how to walk, and even how to grow hair, 
because that is just what we dol 

This kind of “knowing how” does not apply to voluntary 
acts alone. Buddhist psychology does not admit our rather 
rigid distinction between the voluntary and the involuntary. 
For if voluntary acts are those preceded by a decision or 
choice, is decision itself voluntary? Were it so, every decision 
would have to be preceded by a decision to decide, and so 
on in an infinite regression. 

This is not to say that all acts are involuntary. The point 
is that an act is voluntary or involuntary, not in itself, but ac- 
cording to the point of view from which it is regarded. In itself, 


115 


Oriental “Omnipotence” 


every act is said to be happening shizen or mushin, that is, 
spontaneously. This is expressed in the poem: 


The wild geese do not intend to cast their reflection; 
The water has no mind to retain their image 


We are now in a position to see what Buddhism might 
mean by the siddhi or marvelous power of omnipotence. So 
longas I identify myself with my conscious, intentional, and 
voluntary mind, I feel that I am in control of relatively few 
events. But I can realize that this identification is after all a 
matter of opinion, of social convention, of an acquired way 
of describing myself to myself. Both Buddhist and Hindu 
disciplines of spiritual growth (i.e., meditation or yoga), con- 
sist primarily in exploring the question, “What am I?” 

This leads to the discovery that the accepted way of con- 
ceiving myself — as this consciousness, this body, or this par- 
ticular series of experiences — is simply conventional, just one 
among many possible ways of describing myself. Then what 
am I in reality? The answer, from one side, is “no-thing” or 
“nothing special” (muy), But since it is written that “between 
the All and the Void is only a difference of name’ it appears 
possible to identify myself as all, as the total process of shizen, 
or “things-happening-spontaneously-by-themselves.’ 

In this sense, I fee] that “I” am shining the stars and blow- 
ing the clouds above my head in just the same way that “I” 
am growing my hair, breathing, and walking. This is omnis- 
cience and omnipotence, but as the God of Spring does not 
know where the flowers come from, so “I” cannot, or rather, 
words cannot describe how all this is done. 

We are now in a position to discuss the production of 
psychophysical acts which are out of the ordinary. In the first 


116 


Onfental “Omnipotence” 


—| 


= 


—) 


place it must be understood that such acts are no more 
necessarily connected with Buddhist “omniscience” than any 
ordinary feat of scientific or artistic skill. Qualitatively, 
telepathy is not different from acquiring the knack of wig- 
gling one’s ears or shooting a bow and arrow, and one of the 
best discussions of this whole problem in a Buddhist setting 
is Eugen Herrigel's marvelous little book Zen in the Art of 
Archery (Pantheon Books, New York) — in which he relates 
how he learned to let the bowstring go shizen. by itself. It 
took him five years to learn the knack. five years to overcome 
the obsession that decisive motions of this nature must be 
felt as forced choices, and not as happening by themselves. 

However, as soon as he learned the feeling of his hand 
releasing the bowstring by itself, he discovered the due 
to an extraordinary and indeed supernormal mastery of the 
art of archery. Similarly, when one learns the feeling of 
thoughts and mental impressions coming and going of them- 
selves, one has discovered the clue to a mastery of the men- 
tal art which could, if so desired, be applied to experiments 
in parapsychology. 

But such experiments would be a sideline, having no more 
intrinsic connection with Buddhist wisdom than any other 
type of scientific or artistic research. To be aware of phenom- 
ena on “higher planes of vibration” is, in prindple, no different 
from visiting Australia or the moon. One who is a fool here 
will also be a fool on the moon, and a fool in the sensible 
world will likewise be a fool in the suprasensible world, and 
a very dangerous fool by consequence. 

The connection between the shizen feeling and the acquisi- 
tion of supernormal skills is simply that the ordinary, egocen- 
tric way of feeling our actions arouses tensions which block 
and hinder their efficiency. For example, I am late in catching 


117 


Oriental “Omnipotence” 


a train, so I try as hard as possible to hurry. But the effortful 
tension hinders my freedom and elasticity of movement in 
such a way that I stumble and fumble. My anxiety not to be 
late makes me tremble and dither in such a way that I get 
later and later and thus still more anxious, creating a vidous 
circle which deprives me of freedom of movement. To act in 
this way sets up all kinds of unnecessary limitations to the 
possibilities of human action, but that we do not know what 
the human organism might achieve if it behaved otherwise. 

Just as there is no fixed and necessary reason why man 
should regard himself as identical with his conscious will or 
his body, there is likewise no reason other than habit and 
convention why he should regard his human nature as hav- 
ing rigidly circumscribed possibilities of thought and activity. 

But a Western approach to Oriental wisdom based largely 
on the peculiarly Western urge for the extension of human 
power will neglect the main thing which this wisdom has 
to offer, and of which we stand so tremendously in need — 
and that is deliverance from the egocentric way of feeling the 
world, from our titanic anxiety to control everything and to 
obliterate the limits of time and space, from that will-to-power 
which makes our culture such a menace to life on this planet. 


118 


0S. _—=—E—=—e—o=oao=E=E=Seeeeeeeeeeeeeee—e— eee SSS O ————eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee eee 


Psychotherapy 
and 


Eastern Religion 


Aaywans 


P erhaps I should first explain that I have been in- 
volved with psychotherapy for years, and talking to the 
staffs of psychiatric institutions has been one of the main 
things I do. Something that has constantly worried me about 
almost all the schools of psychotherapy is what I'm going to 
call a lack of metaphysical depth, a certain shallowness which 
results from having a philosophical unconsciousness which 
has not been examined. Now, I'm a philosopher, and as a 
philosopher I am grateful to some of the great pioneers in 
psychotherapy like Freud, Jung and Adler. for pointing out 
to us philosophers the unconscious emotional forces which 
underlie our opinions. In a way, I'm also a theologian, but 
not a partisan theologian. I don't belong to any particular 
religion because I don't consider that to be intellectually 
respectable. We are grateful for their showing us how our un- 
conscious and unexamined emotional tendendes influence 
the ideas which we hold. It's a very valuable insight. But we, 


123 


Psychotherapy and Eastem Religion 


in our turn, are interested in the unconsdous intellectual 
assumptions which underline psychotherapy. 
Psychotherapy is a product of the philosophy of nature of 
the nineteenth century. From my point of view, that is not 
an exact scence but a mythology which is taken for granted. 
The philosophy of nature of the nineteenth century has 
become the common sense of the twentieth century, and is 
widely accepted in the medical profession, in the psycho- 
therapeutic professions, and in sodology. From the point of 
view of a physicist or an advanced mathematician or biologist, 
however, there is a serious question as to whether psychiatry 
is a genuine scence, and even whether medicine is a genuine 
science. These professions have not caught up with quantum 
theory and are still holding Newtonian views of the universe, 
thinking about their subjects in terms of mechanical models. 
We hear constant reference to “unconscious mental mechan- 
isms.” What on earth are we talking about? Psychoanalysis 
is to a very large degree psychohydraulics — an analogy or 
model of the behavior of the so-called psyche based on New- 
ton's analysis of the mechanics of water — and so we hear 
of a basic notion of psychic energy as libido. Now libido means 
“blind lust.’ and it operates according to the pleasure prind- 
ple which comes into conflict with something else called the 
reality prindple. One of the difficulties of the human being 
is that the whole length of the spinal cord separates the brain 
from the genitals, and so they're never quite together... . 
We are looking at the basic models underlying the prac- 
tice of psychotherapy. There are exceptions to this and you 
must always understand that I'm going to make exaggerations 
and outrageous generalizations for purposes of discussion 
rather than laying down the law. Our practice is based on 
the world view of nineteenth-century scientific naturalism, 


124 


Psychotherapy and Eastem Religion 


(— 


[—] 


i—} 


which has as its fundamental assumption that the energy 
which we express is basically stupid — blind energy, libido 
— and it’s called the unconscious. The assumption of this 
philosophy of nature was that the psychobiology of human 
nature was a stupid mechanism, a fluke that had arisen in 
a mechanical universe, and that if we were to maintain this 
fluke and its values, it would be necessary for us to enter into 
a serious fight with nature. Scientific naturalism was in fact 
against nature, believing nature to be foolish and blind, and 
therefore in need of being dominated by our intelligence 
which, paradoxically enough, was the product of this fool- 
ishness. But the fluke had happened. 

Let's go back into the history of this idea. Western man, 
whether he was a Jew, a Moslem or a Christian, had always 
considered the natural universe to be an artifact, something 
made, and a child in this culture very naturally seems to ask 
its parents, How was! made? To make something is to create 
an artifact; you make a table out of wood or a sculpture out 
of stone. This is the basic mythology underlying our common 
sense. We are mostly unconscious of the basic images in 
which we think. That is why I say that we have an intellec- 
tual unconscious. We are mostly unconscious of the basic be- 
lief systems within which we think and behave. So here is 
this basic belief system — we are all made. It would be un- 
natural for a Chinese child to ask, How was I made? He might 
instead ask, How did I grow? The idea of our being manufac- 
tured objects is basic to almost all Western thought. In the 
course of history, when we got rid of the idea of God as the 
maker, we were stuck with the idea of the universe as a 
mechanism. 

People today who believe in God don't really believe in 
God; they believe that they ought to believe in God, and 


125 


Psychotherapy and Eastern Religion 


therefore are somewhat fanatical about it because of their 
doubt. The strong believer always profoundly doubts what 
he believes and therefore wants to compel other people to 
believe, to bolster up his own courage. A person who truly 
believes in God would never try and thrust the idea on anyone 
else, just as when you understand mathematics, you are not 
a fanatical proponent of the idea that two and two are four 
.... Nevertheless, we have been stuck with the assumption 
that the universe is a mechanical construct. 

Now, what is the difference between a mechanism and an 
organism? A mechanism is an arrangement of parts that are 
put together, gathered, as it were, from separate places and 
assembled. No organism comes into being that way. An or- 
ganism starts as a seed, or a cell, a little small... I'm at a loss 
for words, because I won't call it an object, and I won't call 
it a thing, and I won't even call it an entity. All these words 
misdescribe what an organism is. Anyway, it starts tiny, and 
it swells, and as it swells, it becomes more complicated, not 
by the addition of parts that are screwed on or welded to- 
gether, but it has this marvelous capacity of growth. . .and 
that’s how we came into being. An organism is incredibly in- 
telligent, and its intelligence surpasses anything we might call 
mechanical intelligence. In physics, where there are millions 
of variables, we manage to understand them by statistical 
methods and then predict what will happen. But in the or- 
dinary situations of life where we are dealing with perhaps 
several hundred thousand variables, we haven't the ghost of 
a notion how to handle them. 

For example, you can't possibly keep up with the literature 
that you need to know in the field of psychotherapy. It’s end- 
less, and most of it boring. We all become scanning lines, be- 
cause conscious attention is the brain's radar, and you know 


126 


Psychotherapy and Eastern Religion 


i—} 


[—] 


i=] 


how radar works. It is the propagation of a beam with a 
bounce factor in it which feeds back to the scope, and you 
keep scanning the environment for changes. If a rock should 
come up, if a storm should come up, if another vehicle should 
come up, the radar picks it up. Our conscious attention is only 
a minimal part of our total psychic functioning, because the 
brain as a whole, the nervous system as a whole, regulates 
and organizes all kinds of psychic and physical functioning 
without thinking about it. You don't know you beat your heart. 
You don't know how you make a decision. You don't know 
how you breathe. You may, if you're a physiologist, have some 
idea of it, but that doesn’t enable you to do it any better than 
somebody who doesn't know. All this incredibly intricate func- 
tioning is carried on unconsdously. Oh, we say, it's by the 
brain. But what is the brain? Nobody really knows. 

One of my great friends is Kar] Pribram, who is a professor 
of neuropsychiatry at Stanford. He has a marvelous 
understanding of the brain, but he is the first person to ad- 
mit that he doesn't really understand it at all. He's fascinated, 
and he shows us most amazing things — how the brain creates 
the world which it sees. If you want a simple explanation 
of this, read J.Z. Young's book, Doubt and Certainty in Science. 
He begins with the brains of octopuses, which are very sim- 
ple brains and fairly easy to understand, and then he goes 
on to the human brain and shows how we are what we are 
by creating the kind of world that we think we live in. The 
brain, the nervous system, evokes the world, but is also 
something in the world. What an egg-and-hen situation that 
is! He is stating in very sophisticated language some ancient 
philosophical problems. When Bishop Berkeley explained that 
the world is entirely in our minds, he had a very vague idea 
of the mind. Everybody used to think that the mind was 


127 


Psychotherapy and Eastem Religion 


i—} 


[=] 


[=] 


something like space. It had no form of its own but was able 
to contain forms, like a mirror which has no color but reflects 
all colors, like the eye lens which has no color but is able to 
see all colors. This was a vague idea of the mind. Now the 
neurologist studying the brain gets a very precise idea of the 
mind. He can say it has all these neurons, dendrites and what 
have you, pathways. But in the end, he comes to exactly the 
same thing. He's saying, The world is what your brain evokes. 
So were back where we started, only in a more complicated 
and a more rigorous way. Nature is assumed to be complex. 
We say. The world is complicated. not only in its biology. in 
its geology, in its astronomy, but also in its politics, its 
economics. Actually the world isn’t complicated at all. What 
is complicated is the attempt to translate the world into linear 
symbols. 

What I'm developing is the idea that what we are physically 
is far more intelligent than what we are intellectually. Behind 
our minds and our books and our schedules and our laws 
and our mathematics, there is something far more intelligent 
than anything we can record. So naturally, when you get into 
the practice of psychotherapy, you have first of all gone 
through school, and you've read a lot of textbooks, and you've 
seen a lot of procedures and heard a lot of explanations. In- 
ddentally, do you know what “explained” means? It means 
“to lay out flat, to put it on a plain’ It’s like those slices peo- 
ple take of fetuses, and enlarge them and so on, to see what 
a fetus really is. You've got it explained. But a fetus “laid out 
flat” is no fetus, just like blood in a test tube is not the same 
process as blood in the veins — because it's out of context. 
Blood in the veins is in a certain situation. It is what it is 
because of its relationship to a vast system. But ina test tube 


128 


Psychotherapy and Eastem Religion 


where it’s isolated, it’s not the same thing. A thing is also 
where it is. 

Let's begin to realize that we have identified ourselves with 
a process of mentation or consciousness which is not really 
ourselves at all. Let’s have the humility to see that. We don't 
trust ourselves because of this, and therefore scientists are 
sometimes saying today, “Human civilization has come to the 
point where we've got to take our own evolution in hand. 
We can no longer leave it to the spontaneous processes of 
nature.” Well, these people are idiots. Like a conference of 
geneticists which I recently attended: they summoned for ad- 
vice several philosophers and theologians — that showed they 
were pretty desperate — and they said, “We have just real- 
ized that we're within reach of the power to control human 
character by genetic manipulation. We want to know what 
you people think about this. What sort of human character 
should we produce?” Wowee! There were various views of- 
fered, and I said, “Of course you can't know, because you 
yourself are genetically unregenerate. You yourself are the 
product of the random selection of nature, and therefore by 
your own showing, you must be a mess. You, as a mess, can- 
not decide what should be the proper order of things. The 
only thing you can do is to insure that there be as many dif- 
ferent kinds of human being as possible’ 

We don't know what kinds of human beings we need. At 
one period, we need people who cooperate and who are good 
teamworkers. At another period, we need rugged individu- 
alists who have their own ideas and go ahead and persuade 
everybody else to follow them. Were in a teamwork situa- 
tion right now. Everybody is always looking out of the cor- 
ner of their eye to see what everybody else is doing. What 


129 


Psychotherapy and Easter Religion 


[—J [=] 


[—J 


is the right way to proceed evolutionarily? We haven't the 
faintest idea. We all seem to agree that we should survive. 
I'm not at all sure about this. There are two schools of thought 
about life. Take the analogy of fire: some people think a good 
fire is a colossally bright blaze that is a flash, like lightning. 
Other people say, “Oh, no, no, that’s a waste of energy. Cool 
it. Keep it down to a dull glow which goes on for a long, long 
time, so that ‘this is the way the world ends, not with a bang 
but a whimper ” What should life be? Suppose you were con- 
fronted with a choice: you could spend one night with the 
most beautiful woman imaginable, or man, and have the most 
incredible orgiastic experience, and then die. Or, you could 
be with some rather indifferent, not very exciting companion 
for a long, long time, so that you would be bored. Which 
would you choose? We find that very difficult to decide. In 
the ordinary way, we are not really aware of life because we're 
using our conscious attention too much. We think we are our 
opinion of ourselves, our image of ourselves, and therefore 
feel reduced to linear symbolism, and that’s a kind of strung- 
out, skinny thing. It’s starved. It’s all skin and bones and no 
flesh. When you think of yourself as your ego, as your per- 
sonality, this is an entirely fictitious account of yourself, lacking 
in richness; if you are identified with that, you feel impover- 
ished, and you have to go to a psychiatrist. You say, I feel 
frustrated. Of course you do. The psychiatrist also feels frus- 
trated, because, by and large, he has the same opinion of him- 
self: he thinks he's an ego. 

Freedom is the only thing that works. If I don't trust you, 
I cant live with you. I've got to make the gamble, even though 
it will sometimes be betrayed. I've got to make the gamble 
of trusting you. I can't go out of my door without a funda- 
mental sense that I can trust my neighbors. So in the same 


130 


Psychotherapy and Easter Religion 


way. Icannot make a single decision without the fundamen- 
tal sense of trusting my own brain. If I don’t know how my 
brain works, how the hell do I know if I'm not crazy? I have 
no way of determining. I may be absolutely nutty as a fruit- 
cake, but nevertheless, I have to trust my brain. The trouble 
with most people we call crazy is that they can't trust them- 
selves, Clinically, one has somehow or other to get these peo- 
ple to trust themselves again. You can't do that if you're up- 
tight. If you, in the company of a so-called crazy person, feel 
ill-at-ease, and feel you've got to get this person to conform 
and do things according to the book, you're going to get no- 
where. You've got to be able, yourself, to be as crazy as a crazy 
person in order to be a therapist. 

The therapist must, above all things, have a basic trust in 
life, in the unconsdous. The unconsdous shouldn't be a noun. 
It's a verb, the unconscious aspect of process, of nature. If you 
don't trust it, you get clutched up in the situation where you 
can't really do anything, Our technology is basically a mis- 
trust of nature and, clever as it is, it's not going to work in 
the long run. Our technology is going to destroy us, unless 
we upend it, and base it on trust in the processes of life. 

The basis of what were going into is what I have called 
the intellectual unconscious. Nowadays it's customary, espe- 
Cally in psychological circles, to put down intellectual con- 
siderations. Such words are used as being “over-cerebral;’ as 
being on a “head trip,’ as dismissing it all as “a lot of talk: 
but the fact remains that those comments on intellectualiza- 
tion are an expression of a philosophy — and at that, an unex- 
amined one. You will often come across a type who says, “I'm 
just a practical businessman. | don't give a shit about phi- 
losophy. I've got to get things done.” And so that fellow is ad- 
vertising himself as a member of a particular philosophical 


131 


Psychotherapy and Easter Religion 


[=] 


a 


i—] 


school called pragmatism. He doesn't know this, and because 
he doesn't know it, he's a bad pragmatist. He says, “I want 
to get things done.” Or, he's the sort of person who says, “You 
can't stop progress.’ But what is being practical? This is a very. 
very undecided question, and for a lot of people. their only 
idea of what is practical is what enables them to survive. Well, 
this can be thoroughly called into question. 

I mean, is it a good idea to survive? Most people have never 
thought about that at all. Albert Camus, in his book The Myth 
of Sisyphus, starts out by saying, “The only serious 
philosophical question is whether or not to commit suidde.” 
Now. in your profession, suicide is a major evil. I once went 
to a conference held by the American Academy of Psycho- 
therapists on the subject of “Failure in Psychotherapy:’ and 
various papers were presented. The first paper contained a 
case study of someone who had been under therapy for five 
years and then committed suicide. So I said, “This is rather 
a funny case because, after all, you kept the guy alive for five 
years, and in the treatment of cancer that would have been 
counted as a cure. The statistics on cancer treatment always 
reckon five year's survival as a cure, What's so bad about 
suicide? After all, we're over-populated, and if someone doesn't 
want to be around anymore, that’s their privilege. All I'm say- 
ing is that that assumption is questionable, Furthermore, what 
are you afraid of about death?” 

This is a real hospital hangup. We don’t know how to treat 
dying people. The literature on the psychotherapy of the dy- 
ing has only just begun to come into existence, and a doctor 
is in a very tough position because he's supposed to keep you 
alive, at all costs. The most heroic measures are used to keep 
people alive, and there they suffer, linked up with all kinds 
of tubes and kidney machines and various systems — because 


132 


Psychotherapy and Easter Religion 


at all costs while there is life there is hope, and often while 
there is life there is pain. The doctor is sort of out of role when 
he knows in his heart that the patient will not live, and then 
all kinds of lying starts up. He may tell the patient's relatives 
that the case is hopeless, but he says to them, “Don't tell the 
patient.” For some reason, knowing that you're going to die 
is supposed to be bad for you. It’s supposed to depress you. 
It’s supposed to perhaps cut down the recuperative forces of 
nature that are at work in your organism. 

But the most important thing for anybody to know is that 
he's going to die. Oh, we can put it off and say, “Well, well 
think about that later” But we don't realize that the certainty 
of death is an extremely liberating experience. I've never been 
a doctor of medicine, but I've been a “doctor of divinity” 
_ under rather strange circumstances. I've often been called 
in when people are dying, because when the doctor gives 
up. he calls the clergyman, and the clergyman feels in role 
at this point, although he may be a silly idiot and make all 
sorts of consolations and tell you about heaven and hell and 
such things. But that’s not the way to work. Dying is a splen- 
did opportunity, and the sooner one can realize fully the cer- 
tainty of death the better 

The hospital is, by and large, a terrible place, although its 
intentions are very good, But the last place I would send any- 
one is to a mental hospital, and if possible, not even to a 
physical hospital. I had a friend recently who was dying of 
cancer — he had a brain tumor And here he was in a Kaiser 
Hospital, in the most horrible surroundings. You know what 
hospital rooms are — colorless, healthy, hygenic, awful. And 
here he was, you know. he could hardly look out of the win- 
dow even. And I said to him, Harry, listen, I don't know, I 
haven't talked to your doctor, and I don't know what your 


133 


Psychotherapy and Eastern Religion 


i=} 


i=) 


condition really is, so don’t take anything I say about your 
condition as being true, but let's just suppose for the sake 
of argument that it’s hopeless. Suppose you're going to die. 
You may not be, but suppose it is so, Now you know enough. 
because you're well-educated in Oriental philosophy, to realize 
that the best thing that could possibly happen to you is to 
lose your ego and be liberated. After all, that's what you've 
been concerned with all your life, the sense of transcending 
the narrow bounds of self-conscousness and feeling one with 
the universe, with the eternal energy behind all this, and the 
only way to get that feeling is to give yourself up. I said, Here's 
the opportunity. There's no question of holding on to yourself 
anymore, because it's going to go away, and nothing can stop 
it, so get with it. Just give up, and get out of this place, and 
rent yourself a beach cottage and look at the ocean, and stop 
all this concern to hang on. 

Hanging onto oneself is self-strangulation. It’s like smother- 
love. When a mother hangs on to her child too long and 
doesn't let it be independent because of her concer. or 
alleged love, the child becomes warped. Well it's the same, 
you can smother-love yourself. You can hang on. You can be 
full of anxiety. I know and you know, for many people this 
is a regular program. They're anxious because they don't have 
enough money, and they think, If only I could double my 
income, everything would be okay. And they succeed. They 
do it. So they have plenty of money. Then the next thing they 
worry about is their health. They go to a doctor and they get 
a complete medical examination, and the doctor says, “As far 
as I can see, youre all right’ Well, they think there's something 
probably wrong, because this person is a born worrier and 
maybe should go to a psychiatrist. So he looks you over and 
says, “I can't see anything wrong,” Well, then you worry about 


134 


Psychotherapy and Easter Religion 


politics. Is the revolution coming? Are the tax people going 
to take away all your money? Will you be robbed? I mean, 
there are endless contingences you can worry about. 

And finally, death. Am I going to die? Of course. How soon? 
Does that matter? What are you waiting for? There's a song, 
you know, which used to go. . "There's a good time coming, 
be it ever so far away,’ and everybody thinks there is one far 
off divine event to which all creation moves, and maybe that'll 
turn up between now and your death. . .or even perhaps after 
death. Everybody's looking for that thing somewhere else than 
now. But if you accept death, a funny thing happens — you 
discover how good now is, and that's really where you're sup- 
posed to be, Very often people may get into these states when 
they're threatened by death, when they've given themselves 
up for dead, or sometimes, too, in convalescing from a long 
illness, In those transformed states of consciousness in which 
we see this, there's a sudden enlightenment about now. 

When you see that the whole point of life is this moment, 
most other people seem objects of pity. You're rather sorry 
for them. Because they are rushing around, madly intent on 
something. They look insane on the streets. Going some- 
where, Wow, it’s important to get there. And their noses seem 
to be longer than usual, sort of prodding into the future, and 
their eyes staring, They rush about in cars. Looking out of 
the window I see all these cars streaming down Lake Shore 
Drive into Chicago. 

They're intent on something. What? Well. we have to go 
to work, Why? Well, to make money. Why? Well, I mean one 
must live. You must? If you say to any spontaneous process 
— and life is a spontaneous process — “You must happen,’ 
it’s like saying to someone, “You must love me.’ But we all 
do that to our children, The basic rule for bringing up a child 


135 


Psychotherapy and Easter Religion 


— which every child learns — is, “You are required and com- 
manded to do that which will be acceptable only if you do 
it voluntarily” This is known as the double-bind. So we say 
to our spouses, “You must love me.” and if I don't feel like 
loving my spouse anymore, I'm made to feel guilty, and when 
I feel guilty, I feel I have to make an effort to be loving — but 
nobody wants to be loved on purpose. I don't want to be loved 
out of somebody's sense of duty, I want them to love me be- 
cause they can't help loving me. Then I feel it’s okay. 

Ever so many people are thoroughly confused by being 
commanded to do that which is only any good if it’s natural 
— and living is such a thing. If I say to myself, “I must live.” 
then life is a drag, Or I say, “I must live because I have children 
and I'm responsible.” But then all I do is teach my children 
to have the same feeling, and they will teach their children 
to have the same feeling, and life will continue to be a drag 
for everybody concerned. So life can only not be a drag when 
you understand it’s gravy. That is to say, it happens un- 
necessarily, not under orders, but for kicks, Then you are free 
from the oppressive duty to go on living. And so the physi- 
Gan, and especially the psychiatrist, should be the first per- 
son to understand this, Jung once made a joke, “Life is a 
disease with a very bad prognosis, It lingers on for years and 
invariably ends with death”. . .So, death is most important, 
but of course, Westerners, particularly, are scared of it. It’s the 
one awful awful that mustn't happen, because, well. . .why 
are we afraid of it? Some of us say, “It’s not death I'm afraid 
of, it's dying” Well that makes sense, but then medicine 
doesn't help: medicine prolongs dying. It doesn't really pro- 
long life, I mean, it does sometimes, but for old people par- 
ticularly, it prolongs dying. Terminal cancer is prolonged dying, 

Still, there is something real spooky about death. Even if 


136 


Psychotherapy and Eastem Religion 


= co 


i=) 


youre not religious and you don't believe in an afterlife which 
might be awful, I mean, who knows? But supposing death 
is like going to sleep and never waking up. That's quite some- 
thing to think about. I find thinking about death is one of 
the most creative things one can do, To go to sleep and never 
wake up. Fancy that. It won't be like going into the dark for- 
ever. It won't be like being buried alive forever There'll be 
no problems at all; there's nothing to regret. It will be as if 
you had never existed at all, and not only you, but everything 
else as well. It never was there, No further problems, But wait 
a minute. I seem to remember something like that. That was 
just the way it was before I was bor. And yet, here I am. 
I exist, and once, I didn't. Nor did anything else, so far as I'm 
concemed. And I always figure in life that a thing that hap- 
pened once can always happen again. So I came out of noth- 
ing, But we say, “You couldn't have done that, because there's 
nothing in nothing to produce something, and we believe in 
the Latin precept, ex nihilo nihil fit, which means, ‘Out of 
nothing comes nothing’ ” But it’s not true. It’s a fault in our 
logic If you had Chinese logic, you would see it differently. 
You would see that you have to have nothing in order to have 
something, because the two go together 

Well, isn't that obvious? Where would the stars be without 
space? There would be nowhere for them to be. . .and they 
shine out of space. Physicists are just beginning to realize that 
it is precisely space which is the creative matrix, the womb 
of creation. So in the same way, look at your head. What color 
is it? I can't even find mine, You all have heads, but I don't: 
I can't see my head. And I also don't feel with my eyes that 
there is a black blob in the middle of everything I experience. 
It isn't even fuzzy. It just isn't there, although neurologically 
speaking, all that I call outside is a state of optic nerves which 


137 


Psychotherapy and Eastem Religion 


are located in the back of the head. So I'm looking at the in- 
side of my head. It's pretty weird. So out of this nothingness 
comes my sight. Out of space come the stars, So, you can 
regard death as the origin of life, for how would you know 
you are alive unless you had once been dead. Think that one 
over We think we're alive, don't we? — something we can't 
quite put our finger on, but we know there is such a thing 
as reality, as existence. Were here. And everything we know 
is known by contrast. You know you can see light against a 
background of darkness, hot as compared with cold, pain 
compared with pleasure. So we know were alive. Obviously 
we must have once been dead, This seems to me very plain. 

So, you say, "Well now, wait a minute. When I come back 
again, if this does happen again, this sense of existence, in 
what form will I come back? I hope I could be a human being 
again, or an angel, but perhaps I'll come back as a fruitfly, 
or a hippopotamus.” But be assured it won't make a difference. 
All beings think they're human. We don't like to admit that 
because we think we're top species, but that doesn't follow 
at all. That's just our opinion, and were very conceited. We 
say of somebody who is very ill, “Oh, it’s too bad. He's just 
become a vegetable’. . with the most extraordinary ignorance 
of vegetables. We think vegetables are unintelligent, unfeeling, 
but vegetables are highly intelligent organisms, and tests with 
electroencephalograms show that they feel. Now, if you came 
back as a vegetable, you would have vegetable consciousness, 
and you would think that was entirely normal.. .in fact. 
dvilized, the usual thing, the regular thing. You would under- 
stand your fellow vegetables and the bees that visited you. 
and that would be the normal routine. You would think hu- 
man beings were ridiculous. Human beings, in order to con- 
sider themselves civilized, have to accumulate enormous 


138 


Psychotherapy and Eastem Religion 


quantities of rubbish. They have to have clothes, cars, libraries, 
houses. . . all this junk. Whereas, look at us vegetables — our 
bodies are our culture, and were not ashamed of them. Look 
at the flower Isn't that something? Fish would have the same 
view. We think sharks are terrible, but they at least stay in 
the ocean. Human beings go everywhere, into the sky, into 
the ocean, and all over the earth catching their prey. But the 
civilized shark stays in the water at least. Look at the dolphins. 
Why, they are quite probably more intelligent than we. But 
they decided that our game was stupid. Stay in the water 
because the groceries are right there, and you can spend most 
of your time playing. And so that's just what dolphins do. 
They gambol all over the place, and, for example, they'll follow 
a human ship and swim dicles around it: then theyll set their 
tail at a twenty-six degree angle and let the bow-wake carry 
them. No effort, see. . just keep your tail that way and the 
ship will take you along. Where to? Who cares? 

Everywhere is the place to go, to be at. It's like a king. When 
a king walks, he is stately. Why? Because he has nowhere to 
go to. Because he is where it’s at. He's the place, wherever 
he moves. So he walks in a stately way. He doesn’t march, 
he doesn’t hurry — he's there. Everybody must leam, then, 
to walk like a king. You can remember this because, in San- 
skrit, your real self is called the atman. Making a pun which 
scholars would deplore, that means the “man where it’s at.’ 
and where it’s at is where you are. But were all under the 
illusion that we should be someone and somewhere else. So 
were not seated properly. That's why, when you practice yoga, 
the first thing you have to lear is to sit in such a way that 
youre really there. So, by acceptance of death, one overcomes 
the necessity for a future, and that in both senses of the word 
is a present. 


139 


Psychotherapy and Easter Religion 


You can see this more clearly perhaps if you would imagine 
what it would be like to regress, as it’s called in psychothera- 
peutic language, to babyhood. And, here you are. You really 
don't know anything about anything. All you know is what 
you feel. You've no sense of time. You don’t know the differ- 
ence between who you are and what you see. You're in what 
Freud called the “oceanic state” You don’t know anything. You 
don't know any language, no words in your head. Now con- 
sider what it would be like to stop thinking, stop talking to 
yourself, and simply be aware. You hear all the sound going 
on but you don’t put names on them. You see all these colors 
and forms buzzing at you, but you don't call them anything. 
You just experience. 

That's a pretty crazy state of consciousness because there's 
no past, there's no future, there's no difference between you 
and what you're aware of. It’s all one, or none, or both, or 
neither — there are no words. You would be in a state which 
in yoga is called nirvikalpa samadhi, a very high consdousness 
in which illusions vanish — Eternal Now. Inddentally, a very 
therapeutic state of consciousness. But that is a kind of 
metaphorical death. It is the death of your self-image, your 
idea of yourself, your concept of yourself. Literal death, or 
the immediate prospect thereof, can bring a person into that 
state of consciousness. This state of consciousness is highly 
invigorating, because all the energy which you were wasting 
on worrying is now available for other things. All the energy 
you were wasting on trying to hold onto yourself is now 
available for things that can be done, and so people, paradox- 
ically it would seem, are very pepped up by the acceptance 
of death in its various senses. So a hospital, where many peo- 
ple are in one way or another dying, should be a place of 
immense joy. But we don't allow it to be that, because we 


Psychotherapy and Eastem Religion 


=) 


=) 


=) 


have the fixed idea that people in the hospital are in trouble, 
and we show them by the way in which we attend and relate 
to them emotionally: “Yes, you are in trouble.’ Well then, of 
course they feel in trouble. They have to play that role. 

There is nothing which causes more trouble to people than 
helping them. There's a famous saying, “Kindly let me help 
you or you'll drown,” said the monkey, putting the fish safely 
up a tree. The moment you take this attitude of, “You are sick” 
people lear to eat pity, and thrive on it, and play sick as a 
profitable role for getting attention, sympathy, care, and to 
indulge in the masochism of gaining a sense of identity 
through being in peril, in misfortune. It's like the phrase, 
“nursing a grievance.’ I once had a woman come to me who 
had had a very serious tragedy. Her husband had died of a 
heart attack and a year later her son was struck by lightning 
and killed. She was beside herself with grief. Understanda- 
bly. Well, at the time, I was a clergyman. And I took a look 
at this woman and | thought, I'm not going to give her any 
bullshit, she's too intelligent. So I asked her to explore grief. 
What is it to grieve? Where do you feel grief? What part of 
your body is it in? What sort of a feeling is it? What images 
are connected with it? In every way we explored grief. And 
by God, she got over it. Because eventually, concentrating on 
it as a sensation, she stopped talking to herself and saying, 
“Poor little me, I've lost my son, I've lost my husband,” and 
repeating all these words over and over which hypnotize you 
and perpetuate the feeling of being important because you're 
in a state of grief. And she became an extremely creative and 
active person. 

So it seems to me that anybody in the hospital professions, 
the healing professions, must get the hang of this somehow, 
and stop running desultory institutions. There's no reason why 
hospitals should be designed the way they are, Hospitals 


141 


Psychotherapy and Eastem Religion 


should be arranged in such a way as to make being sick an 
interesting experience. One learns a great deal sometimes 
from being sick. Dying only happens to you once, so it should 
be a great event. Special sanitariums, not hospitals — “sani- 
tarium” means “a place of sanity” — should be arranged for 
different methods of dying. How would you like to die? Do 
you want a very, very marvelous religious ceremony? Do you 
want to invite all your friends to a champagne party? Do you 
want to be among flowers? How would you like to die if you 
really had your choice? Would you like to be drowned in a 
barrel of wine? You could take an extremely positive attitude 
to death as the greatest opportunity you'll ever have to ex- 
perience what it’s like to let go of yourself. . .than which there 
is no greater bliss. 


142 


