oe Ae aNe WW OWA DT cS 


NATURE, 
MAN ANG 
WOMAN 


"The theme is profoundly 
important, and the treatment 
accorded to it in this learned and 
yet lively and subtle book is 
worthy of the theme.” 
—Aldous Huxley 


ALSO BY ALAN W. WATTS 


The Art of Contemplation 
Behold the Spirit 

Beyond Theology 

The Book 

Cloud-Hidden, Whereabouts Unknown 
Does It Matter? 

In My Own Way 
Psychotherapy East and West 
The Supreme Identity 

Tao 

This Is It 

The Way of Zen 

The Wisdom of Insecurity 


NATURE, MAN 
AND WOMAN 


ALAN W. WATTS 


VINTAGE BOOKS 
A Division of Random House, Inc. 
New York 


Vintage Books Edition, March 1991 


Copyright © 1958 by Pantheon Books, Inc. 
Copyright renewed 1986 by Mary Jane Watts 


All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright 
Conventions. Published in the United States by Vintage Books, a division of 
Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada by Random 
House of Canada Limited, Toronto. Originally published by Pantheon Books, 
Inc., in 1958. 


Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 90-50166 
eISBN: 978-0-307-82298-7 


v3.1 


To the beloved company of the stars, the moon, and the sun; 
to ocean, air, and the silence of space; 

to jungle, glacier, and desert, 

soft earth, clear water, and fire on my hearth. 

To a certain waterfall in a high forest; 

to night rain upon the roof and the wide leaves, 

grass in the wind, tumult of sparrows in a bush, 

and eyes which give light to the day. 


Contents 


I 


II 


Cover 

Other Books by This Author 
Title Page 

Copyright 

Dedication 


Preface 
Introduction 


MAN AND NATURE 

1 Urbanism and Paganism 
2 Science and Nature 

3 The Art of Feeling 

4 The World as Ecstasy 

5 The World as Non-Sense 


MAN AND WOMAN 

6 Spirituality and Sexuality 
7 Sacred and Profane Love 
8 Consummation 


Bibliographical References 
About the Author 


Preface 


As I LOOK AROUND MY LIBRARY I AM OFTEN Strangely troubled by the way 
in which my books fit so snugly into categories. Most of my books 
have to do with philosophy, psychology, and religion, and they 
represent points of view from every great culture of the world. 
Yet with an absolutely oppressive monotony they fit themselves 
into the stale dualities of philosophical and theological argument, 
varied from time to time with sensible and uninspiring 
compromises. Volume after volume is so easily identified as 
supernaturalist or naturalist, vitalist or mechanist, metaphysical 
or positivist, spiritualist or materialist, and the compromise 
volumes are usually so watered down as to be compilations of 
platitudes and sentimentalities. 

Underlying all these dualities there seems to be a basic division 
of opinion about those two great poles of human thought, spirit 
and nature. Some people stand plainly “for” one and “against” 
the other. Some stand mainly for one but give the other a 
subordinate role. Others attempt to bring the two together, 
though human thinking moves in such firm ruts that it usually 
turns out that they have settled inadvertently for one or the 
other. It is doubtless foolhardy for any philosopher to claim that 
he has broken loose from these ruts and at the same time said 
anything meaningful. Discussion is so much a matter of juggling 
with categories that to start breaking up the categories is usually 
to break up the discussion. 

But this is not just a matter of categories, logic, and 
philosophical argument. The opposition of spirit and nature is 
also a matter of life and feeling. Ever since I began to study these 
matters I have been puzzled by the way in which exponents of 
the life of the spirit do not seem to be at home in nature and in 
their bodies, for even when they do not identify the natural with 
the evil they damn it with faint praise. So often I have 
sympathized with bold pagan rebellion against this bodiless 
spirituality, and yet never joined it because the final word of this 


“gather ye rosebuds while ye may” philosophy is always despair 
—or some fatuous utopianism which, because it is only a matter 
of time, comes to the same thing. For the congenitally sick, the 
victims of accident, the impoverished, and the dying this 
philosophy has no message. 

But is the alternative to joy in the body delight in the 
discarnate spirit? I have been realizing more and more that 
partisans to opposed philosophies share the same premises, which 
are usually unconscious. Furthermore, these premises are 
transmitted by such social institutions as the structure of 
language and the learning of roles, influencing us in ways of 
which we are hardly aware. Thus the conventional saint and the 
conventional sinner, the ascetic and the sensualist, the 
metaphysician and the materialist may have so much in common 
that their opposition is quite trivial. Like alternating heat and 
cold, they may be symptoms of the same fever. 

Unconscious premises of this kind come to light when we try to 
understand cultures very far removed from our own. They too 
have their hidden assumptions, but when we compare these 
cultures with our own the basic differences must at last become 
obvious. This is peculiarly true of the cultures of the Far East, 
because they are high civilizations which arose in isolation from 
the West, developing patterns of thought and language startlingly 
different from those of the Indo-European strain. Thus the value 
of the study of Chinese language and thought is not simply that 
we ought to be able to communicate with the Chinese people, 
important as this is. It is rather that Chinese studies tell us so 
much about ourselves, for the very reason that of all the 
advanced cultures of the world this is the most unlike our own in 
its ways of thinking. 

Thus it was always such a delight to me that Chinese 
philosophy would never quite fit into the ruts of Western, and 
even Indian, thought, and this was pre-eminently true of the 
problem of spirit and nature. For there were no categories of 
Chinese thought corresponding to spirit and nature as we 
understand them. Here was a culture in which the conflict 
between spirit and nature hardly existed, a culture where the 
most “naturalistic” painting and poetry were precisely the most 
“spiritual” of its art forms. 

This book is not, however, a formal account of the Chinese 


philosophy of nature. I have discussed this at length in my 
previous book, The Way of Zen, and it has been marvellously 
illuminated by Joseph Needham in his Science and Civilization in 
China. My object here is not to expound and compare 
philosophical systems; it is to reflect upon a great human problem 
in the light of the Chinese view of nature, especially as it was 
expressed by Lao-tzu and Chuang-tzu. The urgency of the 
problem of man’s relation to nature and the general intent of this 
book are, I think, sufficiently discussed in the Introduction which 
follows. Here I have also explained why the problem of man’s 
relation to nature raises the problem of man’s relation to woman 
—a matter about which the spiritually-minded members of our 
own culture have been significantly squeamish. 

Because this book is one in which I am frankly “thinking out 
loud,” I would like to repeat some remarks from the Preface to 
my Supreme Identity. “I am not one who believes that it is any 
necessary virtue in the philosopher to spend his life defending a 
consistent position. It is surely a kind of spiritual pride to refrain 
from ‘thinking out loud,’ and to be unwilling to let a thesis appear 
in print until you are prepared to champion it to the death. 
Philosophy, like science, is a social function, for a man cannot 
think rightly alone, and the philosopher must publish his thought 
as much to learn from criticism as to contribute to the sum of 
wisdom. If, then, I sometimes make statements in an authoritative 
and dogmatic manner, it is for the sake of clarity rather than from 
the desire to pose as an oracle.” 

There is the prevalent belief in the West that intellectual and 
philosophical pursuits are unessential ornaments of culture of far 
less value than active and technological accomplishments. This 
attitude is in great danger of being confused with the Eastern 
view that real knowledge is nonverbal and beyond the reach of 
concepts. But our actions are almost invariably directed by a 
philosophy of ends and values, and to the extent that this is 
unconscious it is liable to be bad philosophy with disastrous 
active consequences. The so-called “nonintellectuality” of the East 
lies as far above thought as mere activism lies below it. Such 
knowledge cannot be reached by making one’s concepts 
unconscious under the impression that one is sacrificing the 
intellect. Distorting premises can be abandoned only by those 
who go down to the roots of their thinking and find out what 


they are. 

ALAN W. Watts 
Mill Valley, California 
February, 1958 


Introduction 


A FLOOR OF MANY-COLORED PEBBLES LIES beneath clear water, with fish at 
first noticed only by their shadows, hanging motionless or 
flashing through the liquid, ever-changing net of sunlight. We can 
watch it for hours, taken clear out of time and our own urgent 
history, by a scene which has been going on just like this for 
perhaps two million years. At times, it catches us right below the 
heart with an ache of nostalgia and delight compounded, when it 
seems that this is, after all, the world of sane, enduring reality 
from which we are somehow in exile. 

But the feeling does not last because we know better. We know 
that the fish swim in constant fear of their lives, that they hang 
motionless so as not to be seen, and dart into motion because 
they are just nerves, startled into a jump by the tiniest ghost of an 
alarm. We know that the “love of nature” is a sentimental 
fascination with surfaces—that the gulls do not float in the sky 
for delight but in watchful hunger for fish, that the golden bees 
do not dream in the lilies but call as routinely for honey as 
collection agents for rent, and that the squirrels romping, as it 
seems, freely and joyously through the branches, are just 
frustrated little balls of appetite and fear. We know that the 
peaceful rationality, the relaxed culture, and the easy normality 
of civilized human life are a crust of habit repressing emotions 
too violent or poignant for most of us to stand—the first resting 
place which life has found in its arduous climb from the 
primordial, natural world of relentless struggle and terror. 

But we think we know, for this robustly realistic, tough-guy 
picture is as much a re-creation of the natural world in our own 
image as the most romantic and escapist of country ecstasies. Our 
view of nature is largely a matter of changing intellectual and 
literary fashions, for it has become a world strangely alien to us. 
This estrangement is intensified in a time and a culture wherein it 
is widely believed that we must depart from the principles which 
have hitherto governed the evolution of life. For it is felt that the 


future organization of the world can no longer be left to the 
complex and subtle processes of natural balance from which life 
and man himself arose. When the process brought forth human 
intelligence, it introduced an entirely new principle of order. 
From now on, it is claimed, the organization of life cannot 
happen; it must be controlled, however intricate the task. In this 
task the human intellect will no longer be able to rely upon the 
innate and natural “wisdom” of the organism which produced it. 
It will have to stand alone, relying strictly upon its own 
resources. Whether he likes it or not, man—or rather the 
conscious intelligence of man—must henceforth rule the world. 

This is an astonishing jump to conclusions for a being who 
knows so little about himself, and who will even admit that such 
sciences of the intelligence as psychology and neurology are not 
beyond the stage of preliminary dabbling. For if we do not know 
even how we manage to be conscious and intelligent, it is most 
rash to assume that we know what the role of conscious 
intelligence will be, and still more that it is competent to order 
the world. 

It is this very ignorance of and, indeed, estrangement from 
ourselves which explains our feeling of isolation from nature. We 
are, as it were, cut asunder into a confined center of 
attentiveness, which is “I,” and a vast organic complexity which 
we know only in terms of indescribable and disquieting feelings, 
or abstract biological technicalities: and this is “myself.” 
Throughout his history, the type of man molded by the Western 
cultures has been peculiarly estranged from himself, and thus 
from the natural environment in which his organism inheres. 
Christian philosophy, which knows so much about the nature of 
God, has so little to say about the nature of man, for beside its 
precise and voluminous definitions of the Holy Trinity stand the 
vaguest and briefest descriptions of the human soul and spirit. 
The body, grudgingly admitted to be good because it is God’s 
handiwork, has in practice been viewed as territory captured by 
the Devil, and the study of human nature has been mostly the 
study of its foibles. In this respect the psychologists have 
faithfully followed the theologians. 

For the scientist, despite his theoretical naturalism, tends to 
regard nature, human and otherwise, as a world to be conquered 
and reordered, to be made subject to the technology of the 


rational intellect, which has somehow disowned and shaken off 
its roots in the very organism it now presumes to improve. In 
practice, the technical, rational consciousness is as alien to the 
natural man as was the supernatural soul. For both alike, nature 
and the natural man is an object, studied always by a technique 
which makes it external and therefore different from the 
subjective observer. For when no knowledge is held to be 
respectable which is not objective knowledge, what we know will 
always seem to be not ourselves, not the subject. Thus we have 
the feeling of knowing things only from the outside, never from 
within, of being confronted eternally with a world of 
impenetrable surfaces within surfaces within surfaces. No 
wonder, then, that our ideas of what nature is like on the inside 
are guesses at the mercy of fashion. 

In some ways, however, the temper of scientific thought is far 
less managing and imperious than it was at the beginning of this 
century, if only because greater knowledge brings with it an 
awareness of ignorance. At the same time, even from the most 
coldly intellectual point of view, it becomes clearer and clearer 
that we do not live in a divided world. The harsh divisions of 
spirit and nature, mind and body, subject and object, controller 
and controlled are seen more and more to be awkward 
conventions of language. These are misleading and clumsy terms 
for describing a world in which all events seem to be mutually 
interdependent—an immense complexity of subtly balanced 
relationships which, like an endless knot, has no loose end from 
which it can be untangled and put in supposed order. 

It is not that spirit has been reduced to nature, or to what 
“nature” used to mean, or that the mind has been reduced to the 
body. We have less and less use for words which denote stuffs, 
entities, and substances, for mind and matter have together 
disappeared into process. Things have become events, and we 
think of them in terms of pattern, configuration, or structure, no 
longer finding any meaning in the question, “Of what stuff is this 
pattern made?” But the important point is that a world of 
interdependent relationships, where things are intelligible only in 
terms of each other, is a seamless unity. In such a world it is 
impossible to consider man apart from nature, as an exiled spirit 
which controls this world by having its roots in another. Man is 
himself a loop in the endless knot, and as he pulls in one 


direction he finds that he is pulled from another and cannot find 
the origin of the impulse. For the mold of his thoughts prevents 
him. He has an idea of himself, the subject, and of nature, the 
object. If he cannot find the source of the impulse in either, he is 
confused. He cannot settle for voluntarism and he cannot settle 
for determinism. But the confusion lies in the tangle of his 
thoughts rather than the convolutions of the knot. 

Yet in the present atmosphere of Western thought the 
realization of man’s total involvement with nature is perhaps 
depressing. It is humiliating for a culture which always used to 
think of man as nature’s head and lord. Even now, despite ever 
louder voices of warning, the culture still revels in technical 
power. Contrary to its avowed philosophy of living for the future, 
its perspective is really no longer than the day after tomorrow, 
for it exploits the resources of the earth and the energies of 
radioactivity with only the most fragmentary knowledge of the 
complex relationships so disturbed. The apparently depressing 
thing is not merely that the universe is not to be pushed 
heedlessly around, but that the very state of mind in which we 
attempt to do so is an illusion. For if man is one with nature in a 
seamless unity, his beneficent ideals must after all be 
rationalizations of the great primordial forces of lust and terror, 
of blind striving for survival, which we believe to be the basic 
impulses of nature. 

But before we decide to be depressed we could learn to know 
nature from the inside. The discovery of our total involvement is 
momentous, so that the understanding of the character and inner 
working of the endless knot is the most important of all 
philosophical inquiries. As already suggested, we might find out 
that our notions of blind primordial urges are pure mythology. 
Might it not be that they are fashions in anthropomorphic 
thinking which have simply swung to the opposite pole from the 
older notion that the primordial impulse was the will of a 
personal and beneficent God? The very ideas of impulses, forces, 
motivations, and urges may be nothing more than abstract 
intellectual ghosts as impalpable as the mysterious “it” in the 
sentence, “It is raining.” The same grammatic convention which 
requires subjects for verbs may be the sole reason for urges and 
drives behind actions. Yet such a line of thought may be even 
more disturbing, since it suggests a universe of life which has no 


motive at all—not even survival—and surely an absolutely 
purposeless world would be the most depressing of all 
possibilities. 

But the idea of a purposeless world is horrifying because it is 
incomplete. Purpose is a pre-eminently human attribute. To say 
that the world has no purpose is to say that it is not human, or, as 
the Tao Té Ching puts it: 


Heaven and earth are not human-hearted [jen]. 
But it continues: 
The sage is not human-hearted. v 


For what is not human appears to be inhuman only when man 
sets himself over against nature, for then the inhumanity of 
nature seems to deny man, and its purposelessness to deny his 
purposes. But to say that nature is not human and has no purpose 
is not to say what it has instead. The human body as a whole is 
not a hand, but it does not for this reason deny the hand. 

It is obviously the purest anthropomorphism to assume that the 
absence of a human quality in bird, cloud, or star is the presence 
of a total blank, or to assume that what is not conscious is merely 
unconscious. Nature is not necessarily arranged in accordance 
with the system of mutually exclusive alternatives which 
characterize our language and logic. Furthermore, may it not be 
that when we speak of nature as blind, and of matter-energy as 
unintelligent, we are simply projecting upon them the blankness 
which we feel when we try to know our own consciousness as an 
object, when we try to see our own eyes or taste our own 
tongues? 

There is much to suggest that when human beings acquired the 
powers of conscious attention and rational thought they became 
so fascinated with these new tools that they forgot all else, like 
chickens hypnotized with their beaks to a chalk line. Our total 
sensitivity became identified with these partial functions so that 
we lost the ability to feel nature from the inside, and, more, to 
feel the seamless unity of ourselves and the world. Our 
philosophy of action falls into the alternatives of voluntarism and 
determinism, freedom and fate, because we have no sense of the 
wholeness of the endless knot and of the identity of its actions 


and ours. As Freud said: 


Originally the ego includes everything, later it detaches from 
itself the external world. The ego-feeling we are aware of now 
is thus only a shrunken vestige of a far more extensive feeling 
—a feeling which embraced the universe and expressed an 
inseparable connection of the ego with the external world. 


If this be true, we must not think of the hungers and fears of 

the plants and beasts in terms of our own exclusively egocentric 
style of awareness, for which the fate of the separated ego is the 
all-consuming interest because it is felt to be all that we are. Our 
difficulty is not that we have developed conscious attention but 
that we have lost the wider style of feeling which should be its 
background, the feeling which would let us know what nature is 
from the inside. Perhaps some intimation of this lost feeling 
underlies our perennial nostalgia for the “natural life,” and the 
myth of a golden age from which we have fallen. 
There may be no reason to believe that a return to the lost feeling 
will cost us the sacrifice of the individualized consciousness, for 
the two are not incompatible. We can see an individual leaf in all 
its clarity without losing sight of its relation to the tree. The 
difference between ourselves and the animals is possibly that they 
have only the most rudimentary form of the individualized 
consciousness but a high degree of sensitivity to the endless knot 
of nature. If so, the extreme insecurity of their lives is by no 
means as intolerable as it would be for us.2 Without some such 
compensation, it is hard to see how forms of life other than man 
could have found the game of life worth the candle for so many 
millions of years. 

In coming to an understanding of nature in which man is to be 
something more than a frustrated outsider one of our most 
valuable sources of insight is the Taoist tradition of Chinese 
philosophy, with its outgrowths in Zen Buddhism and Neo- 
Confucianism. In the second volume of his Science and Civilization 
in China Joseph Needham has indicated many points at which the 
Chinese philosophy of nature is of the utmost relevance to the 
inquiries of modern science and philosophy, and some of these 
need to be explored. The standpoint of Taoism is of special 
interest and value because it is a form of naturalism entirely 


different from our own mechanistic and vitalistic naturalisms, 
avoiding their antimetaphysical bias and their simplist reductions 
of nature to systems of abstraction which have absolutely nothing 
in common with what the Chinese mean by nature. 

Furthermore, the Taoist philosophy of nature is much more 
than a theoretical system—indeed, it is hardly this at all. It is 
primarily a way of life in which the original sense of the seamless 
unity of nature is restored without the loss of individual 
consciousness. It involves a new style of human action in relation 
to the environment, a new attitude to technical skills whereby 
man seems to interfere artificially with the natural world. It 
requires a fundamental revision of the very roots of our common 
sense, especially with respect to such matters as the instinct for 
survival, the pursuit of the good and the pleasurable to the 
elimination of the evil and painful, and of the function of effort 
and discipline, or will power, in creative action. 

For our purposes, however, the best way of exploring the 
Chinese philosophy of nature is not to embark upon a systematic 
and historical account of Taoism.3 It is better to introduce it as 
one goes along in a general discussion of the relation of man to 
nature which will also clarify the Western attitude to the 
problem. 

Of central importance in any such discussion are the actual 
means whereby awareness of the seamless unity may be 
discovered, since this whole inquiry is in the realm of feeling 
rather than thought, and is in the spirit of poetry rather than 
formal, intellective philosophy. But the so-called means of 
discovery are apparently problematic and paradoxical since the 
lost awareness is found by “no means.” Actions of the will or ego 
can only strengthen its divided mode of consciousness, and at 
first sight this is extremely frustrating for one who knows no 
other way of action. Yet we are familiar enough with the 
insincerity and contradiction of trying to be natural, the more so 
when it is most urgent that we should act naturally and without 
self-consciousness. The Taoist idea of naturalness goes far beyond 
the merely normal, or the simply unostentatious way of behaving. 
It is the concrete realization that all our experiences and actions 
are movements of the Tao, the way of nature, the endless knot, 
including the very experience of being an individual, a knowing 
subject. 


The Chinese phrase which is ordinarily translated as “nature” is 
tzu-jan, literally “of itself so,” and thus a better equivalent might 
be “spontaneity.” This is almost Aristotle’s idea of God as the 
unmoved mover, for nature in both whole and part is not 
regarded as being moved by any external agency. Every 
movement in the endless knot is a movement of the knot, acting 
as a total organism, though the parts, or loops, of the knot are not 
looked upon as passive entities moved by the whole. For they are 
parts only figuratively divided from the whole for purposes of 
recognition and discussion; in reality, the loops are the knot, 
differences within identity like the two sides of a coin, neither of 
which can be removed without removing the other.4 Thus all art 
and artifice, all human action, is felt to be the same as natural or 
spontaneous action—a world-feeling marvellously expressed in 
Chinese poetry and landscape painting, whose technique involves 
the fascinating discipline of the “controlled accident,” of doing 
exactly the right thing without force or self-conscious intention. 

The techniques of Far Eastern art are, however, somewhat 
exotic to serve as illustrations for Western people of the 
application of this philosophy of nature. Yet the specific 
application of the philosophy should be discussed, and, for a 
number of reasons, it has seemed that the most suitable subject 
for this discussion is the relationship of man and woman, 
especially in its sexual phase. For one thing, there is an obvious 
symbolic correlation between man’s attitude to nature and man’s 
attitude to woman. However fanciful this symbolism may 
sometimes be, it has in fact had an enormous influence upon 
sexual love in both Eastern and Western cultures. For another, 
sexual love is a troubled and problematic relationship in cultures 
where there is a strong sense of man’s separation from nature, 
especially when the realm of nature is felt to be inferior or 
contaminated with evil. Needless to say, the Christian, and 
particularly the Anglo-Saxon, cultures are preoccupied with 
sexuality in ways that strike outsiders as peculiarly odd, and we 
ourselves are well aware that we have “sex on the brain” to an 
extraordinary degree. We are not going to solve this 
preoccupation by trying to forget about it, which has been the 
advice of our moralists for two thousand years. Nor will it yield 
to treatment at a narrowly medical or psychiatric level, as if it 
were a purely biological affair. 


Above all, sexual love is the most intense and dramatic of the 
common ways in which a human being comes into union and 
conscious relationship with something outside himself. It is, 
furthermore, the most vivid of man’s customary expressions of his 
organic spontaneity, the most positive and creative occasion of 
his being transported by something beyond his conscious will. We 
need hardly wonder, then, that cultures in which the individual 
feels isolated from nature are also cultures wherein men feel 
squeamish about the sexual relationship, often regarding it as 
degrading and evil—especially for those dedicated to the life of 
the spirit. 

The disordered sexuality of the Western (and some other) 
cultures is surely due to the fact that the sexual relationship has 
never been seriously integrated with and illumined by a 
philosophy of life. It has had no effective contact with the realm 
of spiritual experience. It has never even achieved the dignity of 
an art, as in the Indian Kamasutra, and would thus seem to rank 
in our estimation far below cookery. Theoretically, the Christian 
sacrament of Holy Matrimony is supposed to sanctify the 
relationship, but in practice it does so only by indirection and by 
prohibitions. We have dubbed the relationship “animal,” and 
animal we have for the most part let it remain. Matrimony has 
not so much ennobled it as fenced it in, trusting naively that “true 
love” would somehow find a way to make the relationship whole 
and holy. And this might indeed have come to pass, without 
introducing any studied techniques, given the presence of certain 
other conditions. It might have come to pass of itself, 
spontaneously, if the culture had known anything of real 
spontaneity. But this was, and is, impossible when human 
personality is centered exclusively in the ego, which in its turn is 
set over against nature as the dissociated soul or mind. Generally 
speaking, the style of philosophy which we have followed and the 
type of spiritual experience which we have cultivated have not 
lent themselves to a constructive application to sexuality. 


It is good for a man not to touch a woman.... I say therefore 
to the unmarried and widows, “It is good for them if they 
abide even as I.” But if they cannot contain, let them marry; 
for it is better to marry than to burn.... But and if thou marry, 
thou hast not sinned; and if a virgin marry, she hath not 


sinned. Nevertheless such shall have trouble in the flesh [or, 
perhaps better, with the flesh].... But this I say, brethren, the 
time is short: it remaineth, that both they that have wives be 
as though they had none....I would have you without 
preoccupation. He that is unmarried careth for the things that 
belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord. But he that is 
married careth for the things that are of the world, how he 
may please his wife.s 


This grudging toleration of sexuality as an unbearable pressure 
which, sometimes and under strict conditions, has to be released 
puts it on the level of an urge to stool, of a regrettable vestige of 
animality, happily to be left behind in the Kingdom of Heaven. As 
such it has no positive relation whatsoever to the life of the spirit. 

But fortunately for the growth of Christian spirituality, St. Paul 
gave these words as advice and not as a commandment. For they 
are offset, in the sacred scriptures, with the Song of Songs, which 
has thus far been interpreted allegorically in terms of “the 
spiritual marriage betwixt Christ and his Church,” or between 
Christ and the soul. As we shall see, there are potentialities in the 
Christian heritage not only for the development of sexual love in 
matrimony as a means to the contemplative life, but also for 
resolving the basic rift between spirit and nature which has so 
troubled the Christian cultures of the West. 

The approved academic method of studying the sexual 
implications of the Taoist philosophy of nature would, 
presumably, be to investigate the erotic customs and literature of 
the Far East. But in place of such a difficult and time-consuming 
task there is a simple and practical short cut: to understand the 
basic principles of the philosophy and apply them directly to the 
problem. Other than this, there is no clear way of approach, for in 
the Far East the influence of Taoist philosophy upon the mass 
culture has always been indirect. Actual followers of the 
philosophy, as distinct from the organized Taoist religion, which 
is a very different affair, have been relatively few. Documents do 
indeed exist about Taoist sexual practices, but they savor more of 
the psychophysiological theories of the Taoist religion than of the 
nature philosophy of Lao-tzu and Chuang-tzu. Even so, the 
general tenor of these documents is approximately what one 
would imagine the sexual application of the Taoist philosophy to 


be. Furthermore, even at the mass level, sexual love in the Far 
Eastern cultures appears to be far less problematic than with us, 
for there is no doubt that the Taoist feeling of the naturalness of 
the human state has, however indirectly, had a wide influence 
upon the everyday life of the people. 

Other Asian traditions than the Taoist have much to contribute 
to both aspects of our inquiry. Various trends of Hindu 
philosophy, which seem, however, to be submerged in modern 
times, illuminate the theme with a marvellous symbology which 
has been interpreted with such deep insight in the works of 
Heinrich Zimmer. As to the crucial problem of realizing or feeling 
the seamless unity of nature, nowhere is there anything more 
direct, simple, and concrete than the approach of Zen Buddhism 
—the way of life which has contributed so much to the profound 
nature philosophy of the Japanese. 

It is tragic that at a time when these universally human insights 
nurtured in Asia “speak to our condition” so appropriately, the 
Asian peoples themselves are associated in our minds with 
rampant nationalisms which we are feeling as a serious political 
threat. Unhappily, it is probably far more serious than we have 
yet recognized. But is it of any use to point out that they have 
learned these political philosophies, by reaction, from us, and 
that, in their differing ways, Gandhi, Nehru, Nasser, Mao Tse- 
tung, and the other leaders of Asian nationalism are to a large 
degree Western in both personality and doctrine? Almost every 
one of them is a product of an educational system established by 
Western colonialism, and their political philosophies and 
ambitions are remote indeed from the principles of statecraft set 
forward in the Tao Té Ching. 

Less and less has the “wisdom of the East” anything to do with 
modern Asia, with the geographical and political boundaries of 
the world which such terms as East and West, Asia, Europe, and 
America, now represent. More and more “the East” as a source of 
wisdom stands for something not geographical but inward, for a 
perennial philosophy which, in varying forms, has been the 
possession of traditional, nonhistorical cultures in all parts of the 
world. For the spiritual contrast of East and West is really a 
contrast between two styles of culture, two radically different 
categories of social institutions, which never really corresponded 
to the contrast of Europe and Asia as geographical divisions. 


We might call these two types of culture progressive and 
historical on the one hand, and traditional and nonhistorical on 
the other. For the philosophy of the first is that human society is 
on the move, that the political state is a biological organism 
whose destiny is to grow and expand. Examining the record of its 
past, the progressive society reconstructs it as history, that is, as a 
significant series of events which constitute a destiny, a motion 
toward specific temporal goals for the society as a whole. The 
fabricators of such histories easily forget that their selection of 
“significant” events from the record is subjectively determined— 
largely by the need to justify the immediate political steps which 
they have in mind. History exists as a force because it is created 
or invented here and now. 

On the other hand, traditional societies are nonhistorical in 
that they do not imagine themselves to be in linear motion 
toward temporal goals. Their records are not histories but simple 
chronicles which delineate no pattern in human events other than 
a kind of cycling like the rotation of the seasons. Their political 
philosophy is to maintain the balance of nature upon which the 
human community depends, and which is expressed in public 
rites celebrating the timeless correspondences between the social 
order and the order of the universe. 

Thus the focus of interest in the traditional society is not the 
future but the present, “the still point of the turning world.” All 
their artifacts are made for the immediate material advantage of 
the thing itself, rather than for abstract monetary profit, or for 
such purely psychological byproducts as prestige or success. Such 
artifacts are therefore made unhurriedly through and through; 
they are not fine surfaces slapped together, with every imaginable 
short cut on the inside. On the other hand, the progressive 
workman has his eye on the clock—on the play which is to come 
when the work is over, on the leisure society which is to follow 
the completion of the Five-Year Plan. He therefore rushes to 
complete artifacts which, for that very reason, are not worth 
playing with when playtime comes. Like a spoiled child, he soon 
tires of his toys (which is exactly what most of his products are),« 
and is wooed back to work by the prospect of ever more 
sensational (as distinct from material) gimmicks to come. 

For it is strictly incorrect to think of the progressive cultures as 
materialistic, if the materialist is one who loves concrete 


materials. No modern city looks as if it were made by people who 
love material. The truth is rather that progressive man hates 
material and does everything possible to obliterate its resistances, 
its spatial and temporal limits. Increasingly his world consists of 
end-points, of destinations and goals with the times and spaces 
between them eliminated by jet propulsion. Consequently there is 
little material satisfaction in reaching the goal, since a life full of 
goals or end-points is like trying to abate one’s hunger by eating 
merely the two precise ends of a banana. The concrete reality of 
the banana is, on the contrary, all that lies between the two ends, 
the journey as it were, all that jet propulsion cuts out. 
Furthermore, when the time and space between destinations are 
cut out, all destinations tend to become ever more similar. The 
more rapidly we can travel to Hawaii or Japan or Sicily, the more 
rapidly the resort is, as tourists say, “spoiled,” which means that 
it is increasingly like Los Angeles, Chicago, or London. 

Once again, we see that the goals of progressive men are 
actually psychological and spiritual, the sensations, kicks, and 
boosts for which material realities are merely the unfortunately 
necessary occasions. His hatred of materiality is the continuing 
expression of the basic rift between his ego and nature. In the 
sexual sphere the goal is not so much the concrete personality of 
the woman as the orgasm which she provokes, and provokes not 
so much as an integral woman as an aggregation of stylized lips, 
busts, and buttocks—woman in the abstract rather than this or 
that particular woman. As de Rougemont has pointed out so 
clearly in his Love in the Western World,7 such love is not the love 
of woman but the love of being in love, expressing a dualistic, 
dissociated, spirit-loving and matter-hating attitude to life. But no 
less short-circuited and antinatural is the conception of love 
which makes future procreation its sole end, especially because 
what, in this conception, is to be procreated is another soul, willy- 
nilly attached to a body which it will never be really permissible 
to enjoy. Here, too, we see the essential continuity of the Western 
attitude from historical Christianity to modern “paganism.” 

Underlying this continuity is the fact that, as one might say, 
both God and the Devil subscribe to the same philosophy since 
both inhabit a cosmology where spirit stands against nature. 
Furthermore, the architects of this cosmology were unaware of 
the mutual interdependence, or correlativity, of opposites, which 


is the principal reason why they did not perceive the inner 
identity of spirit and nature, subject and object, and why they did 
not notice the hidden compact between God and the Devil to 
reproduce one another. They did not notice it even when, as the 
conceptions of the two became fully elaborated, they sometimes 
exchanged characters so that the image of God became diabolical 
and the image of the Devil divine. For as the image of God was 
composed of goodness piled on goodness, power piled on power, 
it became insufferable and monstrous. But in conceiving the 
image of the Devil there were no laws to be kept, and the creative 
imagination could run riot, emptying all its repressed and 
sensuous contents. Hence the persistent allure of Satanism and 
the fascination of evil. 

When the mutual interdependence of the opposites is not seen, 
it becomes possible to dream of a state of affairs in which life 
exists without death, good without evil, pleasure without pain, 
and light without darkness. The subject, the soul, can be set free 
from the concrete limitations of the object, the body. Thus in the 
Christian doctrine of the resurrection of the body, the body is 
usually considered to be so transformed by the spirit that it is no 
longer in any real sense a body. It is rather a fantasy-body from 
which all the really earthy qualities have been taken away— 
weightless, sexless, and ageless. The idea that the good can be 
wrested from the evil, that life can be delivered permanently 
from death, is the seed-thought of the progressive and historical 
cultures. Since their appearance, history seems to have taken a 
sudden leap forward, and, in a few centuries, the conditions of 
human life have been under radical and ever faster change, 
though hitherto they had remained relatively constant for 
millennia. 

However, it is not so much that history has taken a sudden leap 
forward as that, with the progressive cultures, history has come 
into being. The partisans of historical culture seem to 
congratulate themselves on having escaped from cyclic into linear 
time, from a static into a dynamic and “on-going” world order— 
failing to see that nothing is so cyclic as a vicious circle. A world 
where one can go more and more easily and rapidly to places that 
are less and less worth visiting, and produce an ever-growing 
volume of ever-less-nourishing food, is, to cite only the mildest 
examples, a vicious circle. The essence of a vicious circle is that 


one is pursuing, or running away from, a terminus which is 
inseparable from its opposite, and that so long as this is 
unrecognized the chase gets faster and faster. The sudden 
outburst of history in the last five hundred years might strike one 
as more of a cancer than an orderly growth. 

The foregoing might well seem the prelude to a doctrine of 
revolution. But it is nothing of the kind. Nothing is further from 
our intent than to advocate a return to the traditional style of 
culture and an abandonment of the progressive. The fallacy of all 
traditionalist or “back-to-nature” romanticisms is that they are 
themselves progressive, looking to a future state of affairs which 
is better than the present. Just as the ego can do nothing to 
overcome its own isolated mode of consciousness, the community 
can do nothing in order to deliver itself from the progressive 
fallacy, for this would be the contradiction of affected 
naturalness. The “goal” of a traditional culture is not the future 
but the present. That is to say, it lays its material and practical 
plans for food and shelter in the days and years to come, but no 
more. It does not aim at the psychological enjoyment which the 
future meals will bring. In a word, it does not pursue happiness. 

Furthermore, the wiser members of such cultures do not even 
seek enjoyment from the present moment. For in the instant that 
one grasps the moment to get something from it, it seems to 
disappear. The reason is perhaps that enjoyment is a function of 
nerves rather than muscles, and that nerves receive automatically 
and passively, whereas muscles grasp actively. Enjoyment is 
always gratuitous and can come no other way than of itself, 
spontaneously. To try to force it is, furthermore, to try to 
experience the future before it has arrived, to seek the 
psychological result of attending to the present experience and 
thus short-circuiting or cutting out the experience itself. 
Obviously, however, the person who attempts to get something 
from his present experience feels divided from it. He is the 
subject and it is the object. He does not see that he is that 
experience, and that trying to get something from it is merely 
self-pursuit. 

Ordinarily we think of self-consciousness as the subject’s 
awareness of itself. We would be far less confused if we saw that 
it is the subject-object’s awareness of itself. For the knower is 
what he knows in somewhat the same way as the seemingly two 


surfaces of the Mobius strip are one. Pushing the analogy a little 
further, conscious experiencing seems to be a field which, like the 
strip, twists back upon itself: 


It is not, then, that I know both other things and myself. It is 
rather that the total field I-know-this knows itself. 

While this problem of our awareness of the present will receive 
fuller attention at a later point, it is necessary at least to see the 
principle of it here so that we may understand the illusion of 
making an attempt to get something from life in the sense of a 
good, happy, or pleasant psychological state. For the point is not, 
in our accustomed egocentric mode of thinking, that it would be 
good to return to our original integrity with nature. The point is 
that it is simply impossible to get away from it, however vividly 
we may imagine that we have done so. Similarly, it is impossible 
to experience the future and not to experience the present. But 
trying to realize this is another attempt to experience the future. 
Some logician may object that this is a merely tautological 
statement which has no consequence, and he will be right. But we 
are not looking for a consequence. We are no longer saying “So 
what?” to everything, as if the only importance of our present 
experience were in what it is leading to, as if we should 
constantly interrupt a dancer, saying, “Now just where are you 
going, and what, exactly, is the meaning of all these 
movements?” 

There is, indeed, a place for commentary, for interpretations of 
nature and predictions of its future course. But we need to know 
what we are talking about, which requires a primary background 
of contemplation and inward silence, of watching without 
questions and jumping to conclusions. May we go back, then, to 
the floor of pebbles beneath the water and the fish in the 
sunlight’s rippling net ... and watch? 


1 Freud (1), p. 13. 


2 Do the rapid and “nervous” motions with which animals avoid danger 
indicate that they are actually afraid? Human city-dwellers are just as 
agile in dodging traffic and negotiating superhighways, yet carry on all the 
darting and twisting required with relative unconcern. And what about the 
numberless neural adjustments whose lightning action keeps us from 
falling when we walk or run, from choking when we eat, and from being 
concussed when we play ball games? 


3 Which would in any case be a rather un-Taoistic procedure, although it has 
been admirably done by Holmes Welch in his recent Parting of the Way, for 
which see Welch (1). 


4 An even better illustration might be the Mobius strip, a paper tape formed 
into a ring with a single twist. It clearly has two faces, and yet they are 
identical. 


5 St. Paul in 1 Corinthians, 7. 


6 The Cadillac or Thunderbird automobile of this date being essentially a toy 
rocket-ship rather than a convenient means of transportation. 


7 De Rougemont (1). At a later point it will be necessary to take issue with 
some of the historical aspects of this remarkable work, which has managed 
to foist upon historical Christianity a doctrine of love which is really a 
modern and novel development of Christianity that would probably have 
horrified the Patristic age. 


I: MAN AND NATURE 


1: Urbanism and Paganism 


WHEN CHRISTIANS FIRST DISTINGUISHED themselves from pagans, the word 
“pagan” meant “country-dweller.” For the first centers of 
Christianity in the Roman Empire were the great cities—Antioch, 
Corinth, Ephesus, Alexandria, and Rome itself. Furthermore, 
during the centuries in which Christianity was born and spread 
throughout the Empire, the growing mercantile wealth of Rome 
was attracting population to the cities, so that as early as 37 B.c. 
the government of the Emperor Augustus showed concern for the 
decline of agriculture. The Georgics of Vergil were a direct 
expression of this concern—poems written at the behest of the 
government in praise of the rural life: 


O fortunatos nimium, sua si bona norint Agricolas! 


Blest, aye, blest to excess, knew they how goodly the portion Earth 
giveth her farmers! 


That Christianity grew up in the cities, at a time when, as today, 
the big city was the center of economic and cultural attraction, is 
a circumstance which must have had a deep influence upon the 
whole character of the religion. For Christianity as a whole has a 
decidedly urban style, and this is true not only of Roman 
Catholicism but also of Protestantism, which first arose in the 
burgher cities of Western Europe. In evangelizing the West, the 
main difficulty which Christianity encountered was, for as long as 
fifteen hundred years, the competition of the tenacious nature 
religions of the peasantry. 

Perhaps it is easiest to express the effect of these circumstances 
upon Christianity in the form of a personal impression, not, I 
believe, at all peculiar to myself. For as long as I can remember, I 
have been puzzled by the fact that I can feel like a Christian only 
when I am indoors. As soon as I get into the open air, I feel 


entirely out of relation with everything that goes on in a church 
—including both the worship and the theology. It is not as if I 
disliked being in church. On the contrary, I spent much of my 
boyhood in the precincts of one of Europe’s most noble 
cathedrals, and I have never recovered from its spell. 
Romanesque and Gothic architecture, Gregorian chant, medieval 
glass and illuminated manuscripts, the smell of frankincense or of 
the mere must of ancient stone, and, above all, the ritual of the 
Mass—these are as magical for me as for the most ardent Catholic 
romanticist. Nor am I insensible to the profundities and splendors 
of Christian philosophy and theology, and I am well aware that 
early training implanted in me the bitter-sweetness of a Christian 
conscience. But all this is in a watertight compartment, or rather, 
in a closed sanctuary where the light of the open sky comes only 
through the symbolic jewelry of stained-glass windows. 

It is often said that the aesthetic atmosphere of Christianity is a 
mere irrelevance. The Christian life is not what one feels, but 
what one wills, usually in the teeth of one’s feelings. The 
contemplative mystic would say that to know God is precisely not 
to feel him; it is to know him by the love of the will in a “cloud of 
unknowing,” in the dark night of the spirit where, to sense and 
feeling, God is utterly absent. Therefore he who knows 
Christianity in terms largely of its aesthetic glamour knows it not 
at all. 


Illuminated missals—spires— 

Wide screens and decorated quires— 
All these I loved, and on my knees 

I thanked myself for knowing these 
And watched the morning sunlight pass 
Through richly stained Victorian glass 
And in the colour-shafted air 

I, kneeling, thought the Lord was there. 
Now, lying in the gathering mist, 

I know that Lord did not exist.1 


Yet this denial of feeling, while heroic, manly, and robust, is yet 
another symptom of what I am trying to express—of the fact that 
the Christian world, as we know it, is only a half-world in which 
the feeling and the symbolically feminine is unassimilated. 


Feeling, as a means of judgment and knowledge, is misleading to 
those who do not know how to use it, through lack of exercise 
and cultivation. Furthermore, in a milieu where feeling is 
underestimated or disregarded, its expressions are all the more 
revealing of the underlying state of mind. 

It has, then, been my impression that there is a deep and quite 
extraordinary incompatibility between the atmosphere of 
Christianity and the atmosphere of the natural world. It has 
seemed well-nigh impossible to relate God the Father, Jesus 
Christ, the angels, and the saints to the universe in which I 
actually live. Looking at trees and rocks, at the sky with its clouds 
or stars, at the sea, or at a naked human body, I find myself in a 
world where this religion simply does not fit. Indeed, it is a 
characteristically Christian attitude to confirm this impression, 
since “my kingdom is not of this world.” Yet if God made this 
world, how is it possible to feel so powerful a difference of style 
between the God of church and altar, for all his splendor, and the 
world of the open sky? No one would dream of attributing a 
landscape by Sesshu to Constable, or a symphony by Hindemith 
to Haydn. In the same way, I have found it a basic impossibility 
to associate the author of the Christian religion with the author of 
the physical universe. This is not a judgment as to the relative 
merits of the two styles; it is only to say that they are not by the 
same hand, and that they do not mix well together. 

This has, of course, been felt before, and there is an argument 
to explain it. It is said that whereas the beauty and the style of 
the physical world is natural, the beauty of Christianity is 
supernatural. The nearest thing in the physical world to 
supernatural beauty is the beauty of the human being, and more 
especially of the human mind. Christianity suggests the urban 
rather than rural atmosphere because in the former we are 
surrounded by works of the mind. While it is true that all 
creatures under the sky are the works of God, man, and even the 
works of man, are far higher works of God than anything else. 
They reveal more of the character of God than the sun, moon, 
and stars, for what we sometimes call the artificial is nearer to 
the supernatural than to the natural. 

It is easy, this argument would continue, to love the aesthetic 
surfaces of nature, so long as we do not have to contend with the 
ruthless heartlessness, the cold struggle for life, which underlies 


it. But it is in man alone that there have arisen ethical and moral 
ideas which, as it were, give nature a feeling heart—and this, 
again, goes to show that God is reflected in nature nowhere so 
clearly as in man. It is true that we sometimes need to seek relief 
from the hideousness of crowds and cities in the solitudes of 
nature, but this is only because the worst is the corruption of the 
best. The evil of man far exceeds the evil of the spider or the 
shark, but only because the goodness of man immeasurably 
exceeds the goodness of a spring landscape. One has only to 
consider how cold and desolate the fairest face of nature can 
seem to a man left utterly alone, willing to exchange the whole 
sum of natural beauty for a single human face. 

Making a still stronger point, the argument could go on to say 
that however poor the fit between Christianity and nature, 
nowhere is there a religion so perfectly in accord with human 
nature. By and large, the naturalistic religions hold out for man 
no greater hope than a philosophic acceptance of the inevitable, a 
noble but sorrowful resignation to the truth that nature is beyond 
good and evil, and that death is the necessary counterpart of life, 
as pain of pleasure. But this sacrifices the most human thing 
about man—his eternal, childlike hope that somehow, someday, 
the deepest yearnings of his heart will come true. Who is so 
proud and unfeeling that he will not admit that he would not be 
deliriously happy if, by some strange magic, these deep and 
ingrained longings could be fulfilled? If there were everlasting 
life beyond death after all? If there were eternal reunion with the 
people we have loved? If, forever and ever, there were the vision 
and the union of hearts with a God whose beatitude exceeds 
immeasurably the most intense joy that we have known— 
somehow including all the variety of form and color, uniqueness 
and individuality, that we value so much upon earth? Christianity 
alone, it would be argued, has the audacity to affirm this basic 
hope which the wisdom of the world represses, and so is the only 
fundamentally joyous religion. For it gambles, recklessly, upon 
the scheme of things turning out to be the best that we hope for, 
challenging man to put the whole might of his faith in the idea 
that his nature, at its most human, is made in the image of the 
ultimate reality, God.... And, it might be added, if we lose the 
gamble, we shall never know that we have lost. 

This is not, perhaps, the most profound version of the final 


ideal at which Christianity aims. It is, however, representative. 
For in discussing the attitude of Christianity to nature, I am not 
exploring as yet the deepest resources of the Christian tradition. I 
am trying to state the attitude of Christianity as it has been held 
by large numbers of intelligent people, and thus as it has been an 
influential force in Western culture. The individual Christian will 
sometimes protest in reading the following pages that this or that 
is not how he understands Christianity, and he may feel in 
particular that the presentation is theologically immature. But I 
have found that when Christian theologians become subtle and 
mystical, and sometimes when pressed in conversation to say 
what they really mean, it becomes increasingly difficult to tell the 
difference between Christianity and, say, Vedanta. Here, 
however, we are discussing the characteristics which make 
Christianity unique, and the majority of intelligent Christians who 
take their religion in a partisan way do indeed insist upon its 
uniqueness—even when their knowledge of other traditions is 
rudimentary. We are discussing, above all, the atmosphere, the 
quality of feeling, which Christianity involves, and which is so 
influential upon the culture. So powerful is the sway of this 
feeling quality that, in practice, the individual often yields to it 
even when his intellectual grasp of the faith is extremely mature. 
And the appeal of Christianity is to very human and very 
powerful feelings—the love of man for his own kind, the bedrock 
of nostalgia for home and one’s own people, coupled with the 
fascination of the heroic, the challenge to believe in the 
possibility of an ultimate victory over evil and pain. In the face of 
this appeal, the non-Christian may be tempted to feel like a 
spoilsport or a skeleton at the banquet. 

But the premise of the argument is just that, in his heart of 
hearts, man does feel alien from nature, and that his very deepest 
longing is for an eternity of joy, to the exclusion of sadness and 
suffering. As even Nietzsche said in Zarathustra: 


All joys want eternity, 
Want deep, profound eternity. 


Yet to hold that these are ultimate and universal facts of human 
nature and feeling is to reveal a form of self-awareness which is 
still close to the surface, and a readiness to confuse what one 


feels as a result of social conditioning with what one feels 
absolutely and necessarily. The more a person knows of himself, 
the more he will hesitate to define his nature and to assert what 
he must necessarily feel, and the more he will be astounded at his 
capacity to feel in unsuspected and unpredictable ways. Still more 
will this be so if he learns to explore, or feel deeply into, his 
negative states of feeling—his loneliness, sorrow, grief, 
depression, or fear—without trying to escape from them. 

In many so-called primitive cultures it is a requirement of tribal 
initiation to spend a lengthy period alone in the forests or 
mountains, a period of coming to terms with the solitude and 
nonhumanity of nature so as to discover who, or what, one really 
is—a discovery hardly possible while the community is telling 
you what you are, or ought to be. He may discover, for instance, 
that loneliness is the masked fear of an unknown which is 
himself, and that the alien-looking aspect of nature is a projection 
upon the forests of his fear of stepping outside habitual and 
conditioned patterns of feeling. There is much evidence to show 
that for anyone who passes through the barrier of loneliness, the 
sense of individual isolation bursts, almost by dint of its own 
intensity, into the “all-feeling” of identity with the universe. One 
may pooh-pooh this as “nature mysticism” or “pantheism,” but it 
should be obvious that a feeling of this kind corresponds better 
with a universe of mutually interdependent processes and 
relations than with a universe of distinct, blocklike entities. 

The more deeply we understand the play of our feelings, the 
more, too, we realize their ambivalence—the strange polarity of 
joy and sorrow, love and hate, humility and pride, elation and 
depression. We find that our feelings are not fixed, unrelated 
states, but slowly or rapidly swinging motions such that a 
perpetuity of joy would be as meaningless as the notion of 
swinging only to the right. In other words, just because it is 
static, a perpetual feeling is not a feeling, so that the conception 
of the perpetually good is a verbal abstraction which can neither 
be imagined, felt, nor actually desired. Such an idea can, once 
more, be taken seriously only by those who have not thoroughly 
explored the nature of feeling, who are unrelated to the natural 
realities of the very humanity which they hold to be God’s image. 

We begin, then, to discern the reasons why Christianity as we 
have known it differs so profoundly in style from the natural 


universe. To a large extent it is a construction of ideas or 
concepts playing together on their own, without adequate 
relation to that world of nature which ideas represent. It is true, 
of course, that in mathematics and physics we find purely 
conceptual constructions and ideas for which we can discover no 
sensuous image, such as curved space or quanta. But, in physics 
at least, these ideas are related to the physical world by testing 
their use in predicting the course of events. Furthermore, the 
physicist does not maintain that such ideas necessarily represent 
any concrete reality. He sees them rather as tools, like compasses, 
rulers, or numbers, which enable us to handle and measure that 
reality—tools which are not found but invented. 

May it not be, then, that many of the central ideas of 
Christianity are creative inventions, like the cities in which they 
were nurtured? This would of course be true of any religion or 
philosophy to the extent that it is a system of ideas, especially of 
ideas that cannot be verified by an appeal to experience. But 
Christianity differs sharply at this point from other traditions, 
such as Buddhism and the Vedanta. In the latter, ideas play a 
very secondary part, for the real center of these traditions is an 
ineffable experience, which is to say an experience which is 
concrete and nonverbal, not an idea at all. In Christianity, 
however, the stress is upon belief rather than experience, and 
immense importance has always been attached to an acceptance 
of the correct formulation of a dogma, doctrine, or rite. Early in 
its history Christianity rejected gnosis, or direct experience of 
God, in favor of pistis, or the trust of the will in certain revealed 
propositions about God. 

Spirit, then, is distinguished from nature as the abstract from 
the concrete, and the things of the spirit are identified with the 
things of the mind—with the world of words and thought- 
symbols—which are then seen, not as representing the concrete 
world, but as underlying it. For “in the beginning was the Word,” 
God the Son conceived as the Divine Idea after whose pattern the 
universe was made. Thus the realm of concepts acquires not only 
an independent life of its own, but a life more real and more 
fundamental than that of nonverbal nature. Ideas do not 
represent nature, but nature represents ideas in the clogging 
vesture of material stuff. Hence what is impossible and 
unimaginable in nature is possible in idea—as that the positive 


may be separated permanently from polarity with the negative, 
and joy from interdependence with sorrow. In short, purely 
verbal possibility is considered as having a higher reality than 
physical possibility. It is hard not to feel that this is the power of 
thought running away with itself and getting out of hand, and 
defending itself against the charge of nonsense by asserting that 
its own reality is primordial, and nature but its clumsy copy. 

Things are separable in words which are inseparable in nature 
because words are counters and classifiers which can be arranged 
in any order. The word “being” is formally separate from the 
word “nothing,” as “pleasure” from “pain.” But in nature being 
and nothing, or solid and space, constitute a relationship as 
inseparable as back and front. In the same way, the formally 
static character of our words for feelings conceals the fact (or 
better, the event) that our feelings are directions rather than 
states, and that in the realm of direction there is no North 
without South. 

In the great Asian traditions, however, spirit—as Brahman or 
Tao—is less easily confused with the abstract. Spirit is found in 
the direct experience of the concrete, natural world in what 
Buddhists would call its “suchness” (tathata), that is, in its 
nonverbal and nonconceptual state. This is not, however, what 
we mean by the world in its material or physical state, for, as we 
shall see, the word “material” stands for the world as “metered” 
or measured—the nonverbal world represented in terms of 
distinct facts, things, and events, which, like feet and inches, are 
human inventions for handling and describing the world. There is 
no word for what the world is in its natural, nonverbal state. For 
the question “What is it?” is really asking, “In what class is it?” 
Now it should be obvious that classification is, again, a human 
invention, and that the natural world is not given to us in a 
classified form, in cans with labels. When we ask what anything 
is in its natural state, the only answer can be to point to it 
directly, suggesting that the questioner observe it with a silent 
mind. 

Silent observation of this kind is exactly what is meant here by 
feeling (as distinct from particular feelings), the attitude and 
approach whereby nature must be explored if we are to recover 
our original sense of integrity with the natural world. In Taoism 
and Zen this attitude is called kuan, or “wordless contemplation.” 


Just as one must sometimes be silent in order to hear what others 
have to say, so thought itself must be silent if it is to think about 
anything other than itself. We need hardly be surprised if, in 
default of this silence, our minds begin to be haunted by words 
about words about words. It is a short step from this to the 
fantasy that the word is prior to nature itself, when, in fact, it is 
only prior to the classification of nature—to the sorting of nature 
into things and events. For it is things, not the natural world 
itself, which are created by the word. But, for lack of mental 
silence, the two are confused. 

The spell of words is by no means an enchantment to which 
only the intellectual is disposed. The most simple-minded people 
are as easily its prey, and it would seem that, at all levels of 
society, the cultures in which Christianity has arisen have been 
peculiarly confused by the powerful instrument of language. It 
has run away with them like a new gadget with a child, so that 
excessive verbal communication is really the characteristic 
disease of the West. We are simply unable to stop it, for when we 
are not talking to others we are compulsively thinking, that is, 
talking subvocally to ourselves. Communication has become a 
nervous habit, and cultures strike us as mysterious and baffling 
which do not at once tell all, or, worse, expect us to understand 
certain things without being told. I shall never forget the 
Japanese artist Hasegawa yelling in exasperation at the endless 
request for explanations from his Western students, “What’s the 
matter with you! Can’t you feel?” 

For one type of culture, then, the “truth about nature” is the 
verbal explanation or reconstruction of the world, considered as a 
system of law which precedes and underlies it as the plan in the 
mind of the architect comes before the building of a house. But 
for another type it is nature itself, experienced directly in mental 
silence, which in Zen Buddhism is called wu-nien or “no- 
thought.”2 Thus in the cultures of the Far East we rarely find the 
discrepancy between religion and nature so characteristic of the 
West. On the contrary, the finest Buddhist and Taoist art of China 
and Japan is not, as one might suppose, concerned with formally 
religious themes, but landscape painting, and studies of birds, 
trees, rocks, and plants. Furthermore, Zen is applied directly to 
the technique of gardening, and to a style of architecture which 
deliberately integrates the house with its natural surroundings— 


which simultaneously encloses man and admits nature. These, 
rather than Buddha images, express the knowledge of ultimate 
reality. 

And here we might mention a curious and apparently trivial 
symptom of the rift, not only between Christianity and nature, 
but also between Christianity and the naturalistic art forms of the 
Far East. Strangely enough, it is almost impossible to represent 
the central symbol of Christianity, the Cross or Crucifixion, in the 
Chinese style of painting. It has been tried many times, but never 
succeeds, for the symmetrical form of the Cross completely 
destroys the rhythm of a Chinese painting if it is made the 
principal image in the picture. Chinese Christians have tried to 
solve the problem by painting rustic Crosses with bark, twigs, and 
moss still on the wood. But those two straight beams simply jar 
with the rest of the painting, and, without destroying the symbol 
of the Cross, the artist cannot follow his natural tendency to bend 
the straight lines irregularly. For he follows nature in loving 
forms that are flowing, jagged, and unsymmetrical—forms 
eminently suited to his media, the soft brush and black ink. But in 
the art forms of Christianity, such as the Byzantine and Gothic, 
we find a love for the architectural and the courtly. God is 
conceived in the image of a throned monarch, and the rituals of 
the Church are patterned after the court ceremonials of the 
Greco-Roman emperors. Likewise, in the ancient Hebrew religion, 
the Ark of the Covenant was essentially a throne, hidden in the 
inner sanctuary of the Holy of Holies, which was built in the form 
of a perfect cube—symbol of completeness and perfection. 

Yet from the standpoint of Chinese philosophy and aesthetics, 
this symmetrical and architectonic perfection is rigid and lifeless. 
Such forms are found but rarely in nature, and thus when the 
Chinese artist starts to paint the rigid Cross he finds himself in 
conflict, for what he really wants to paint is a living tree. 
Furthermore, he thinks of the power behind nature, not in the 
image of a monarch, but as the Tao—the way, course, or flow of 
nature—and finds images for it in water and wind, in the air and 
sky, as well as in the processes of growth. There was no sense 
that the Tao had any inclination to obtrude itself or to shine in 
glory like a monarch, but rather to work hidden and unknown, 
making it appear that all its achievements were the work of 
others. In the words of Lao-tzu: 


The great Tao flows everywhere, 

to the left and to the right. 

All things depend upon it to exist, 

and it does not abandon them. 

To its accomplishments it lays no claim. 
It loves and nourishes all things, 

but does not lord it over them. xxxiv 


On the other hand: 


His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head 
were many crowns; and he had a name written, that 
no man knew, but he himself. And he was clothed 
with a vesture dipped in blood: and his name is 
called the Word of God.... And out of his mouth 
goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the 
nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; 
and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and 
wrath of Almighty God. And he hath on his vesture 
and on his thigh a name written: KING OF KINGS, AND LORD 
OF LORDS.3 


Magnificent as this is, the style is utterly different from the Taoist 
conception of the monarch, who is to 


Blunt his sharpness; 

Get rid of his separateness; 

Soften his brilliance; 

Be even with the dust. 

This is called the profound identity.4 lvi 


For, 


The ruler who wants to be above the people must speak of himself 
as below them. 


If he wants to be ahead of the people, he must keep himself behind 
them. 


Thus when the sage is above, the people do not feel him as a 
burden; 


When he is ahead, the people do not feel him as a hindrance. lxvi 


The king takes his pattern from the Tao, not the Tao from the 
king. And the Tao is always anonymous and unknown, and the 
incessant changefulness and flowing impermanence of nature is 
seen as a symbol of the fact that the Tao can never be grasped or 
conceived in any fixed form. 

The architectonic and artificial style of Christianity is nowhere 
clearer than in the idea of God as the maker of the world, and 
thus of the world itself as an artifact which has been constructed 
in accordance with a plan, and which has, therefore, a purpose 
and an explanation. But the mode of action of the Tao is called 
wu-wei, translatable both as “nonstriving” and “nonmaking.” For 
from the standpoint of Taoist philosophy natural forms are not 
made but grown, and there is a radical difference between the 
organic and the mechanical. Things which are made, such as 
houses, furniture, and machines, are an assemblage of parts put 
together, or shaped, like sculpture, from the outside inwards. But 
things which grow shape themselves from within outwards. They 
are not assemblages of originally distinct parts; they partition 
themselves, elaborating their own structure from the whole to the 
parts, from the simple to the complex. 

It is fascinating to watch the formation of nature’s most 
unnatural-looking object—the crystal. For it does not appear in 
the solution piece by piece but altogether at once, as if it were a 
projected image gradually coming into focus upon a screen. 
Similarly, the lines of force in a magnetic field do not appear 
serially, as in drawing, but constellate themselves in the iron 
filings as if a thousand hands were drawing them simultaneously 
—all in perfect co-ordination. Even when such an object as a 
plant-stem grows linearly, it does not do so by mere addition, as 
one builds a wall of bricks or pours concrete. The whole form 
expands from within, and this direction—from within—is exactly 
the meaning of the Chinese term for “nature,” tzu-jan or 
spontaneity. 

The form of Christianity differs from the form of nature 
because in the Church and in its spiritual atmosphere we are in a 
universe that has been made. Outside the Church we are in a 
universe that has grown. Thus the God who made the world 
stands outside it as the carpenter stands outside his artifacts, but 
the Tao which grows the world is within it. Christian doctrine 
admits, in theory, that God is immanent, but in practice it is his 


transcendence, his otherness, which is always stressed. We are 
permitted to think of him as within things and within the world 
only on the strict condition that we maintain an infinite 
qualitative distance between God and the creature which he 
inhabits. Even on the inside he is outside, as the architect is still 
really outside the house which he builds, even when he goes in to 
decorate the interior. 

Conceiving, then, man and the universe as made, the Western 
and Christian mind endeavors to interpret them mechanically— 
and this is at once its genius and its blindness. It is an idée fixe 
that the universe consists of distinct things or entities, which are 
precisely the structural parts of artifacts. Man himself is a part, 
brought from outside into the total assemblage of nature as a part 
is added to a building. Furthermore, the workings of the natural 
universe are understood in terms of logical laws—the mechanical 
order of things viewed as a linear series of causes and effects, 
under the limitations of a consciousness which takes them in and 
symbolizes them one at a time, piece by piece. Earth and sky are 
measured by approximating the wayward and whimsical shapes 
of nature to the abstract circles, triangles, and straight lines of 
Euclid. It appears that nature is a mechanism because such a 
mentality can grasp only as much of nature as it can fit into some 
mechanical or mathematical analogy. Thus it never really sees 
nature. It sees only the pattern of geometrical forms which it has 
managed to project upon it. 

Unhappily, this mechanical cast of thought turns back upon 
God himself, for although Christianity wants above all to insist 
that God is personal and living, his nature as conceived in 
practice lacks the most important attribute of personality. God is 
actually conceived as a set of principles—principles of morality 
and reason, of science and art. His love tempered with justice is 
likewise principled, since it is willed love rather than felt love, 
the masculine Logos rather than the feminine Eros. The missing 
attribute is perhaps best called inwardness—in the archaic rather 
than modern and sentimental sense of “having a heart.” For as 
living organisms grow from within outwards, and do not fashion 
themselves by standing outside themselves like architects or 
mechanics, they move according to inner spontaneity rather than 
objective principle. Inwardness is therefore mysterious and 
inscrutable but not chaotic and capricious. It does not work 


according to law, but the “laws of nature” are somewhat clumsily 
abstracted from its behavior—ex post facto. They are the 
mechanical analogy of living and spontaneous order, the triangle 
standing for the mountain. 

Once when my children asked me what God is, I replied that 
God is the deepest inside of everything. We were eating grapes, 
and they asked whether God was inside the grapes. When I 
answered, “Yes,” they said, “Let’s cut one open and see.” Cutting 
the grape, I said, “That’s funny, I don’t think we have found the 
real inside. We’ve found just another outside. Let’s try again.” So 
I cut one of the halves and put the other in one of the children’s 
mouths. “Oh dear,” I exclaimed, “we seem to have just some 
more outsides!” Again I gave one quarter to one of the children 
and split the other. “Well, all I see is still another outside,” I said, 
eating one eighth part myself. But just as I was about to cut the 
other, my little girl ran for her bag and cried, “Look! Here is the 
inside of my bag, but God isn’t there.” “No,” I answered, “that 
isn’t the inside of your bag. That’s the inside-outside, but God is 
the inside-inside, and I don’t think we'll ever get at it.” 

For the truly inward can never become an object. Because of 
the inwardness of our life-process we do not know, or rather, 
cannot tell, how or why we live, even though it is our own inmost 
selves which are doing the living. Yet, in the West at least, we do 
not actually recognize that we are doing it, for to the extent that 
we do not consciously control or understand the formation of our 
nervous systems, we feel that someone or something else— 
perhaps God—is doing it. We feel strange to our own insides, so 
that even the mystic feels that his inner experience of God is the 
experience of something wholly other. But this is because the 
beat of his heart also feels “other,” pulsing with an involuntary 
life which appears to be its own rather than ours. We have 
learned to identify ourselves only with the narrow and superficial 
area of the conscious and the voluntary. 

Thus it is in the image of this superficial self that we conceive 
God, though with its capacities vastly enlarged. God is the 
“other” conscious Self who designs and operates both our own 
inner processes and all the workings of nature. By his 
omniscience he attends consciously to every thing at once, and by 
his omnipotence makes it subject to his will. At first sight this is a 
fascinating and marvellous conception—an infinitely conscious 


mind, concentrated simultaneously on every galaxy and every 
atom with the entirety of its attention. Yet on second thought the 
conception is more monstrous than marvellous—a kind of 
intellectual elephantiasis, being simply a colossal magnification 
and multiplication of the conscious, analytical mode of 
knowledge. For God is conceived in the image of a severed 
consciousness, without inwardness, since he knows not only all 
things but himself as well through and through. He is completely 
transparent to his own conscious understanding; his subjectivity 
is totally objective, and for this very reason he lacks an inside. 
This is perhaps what Western man would himself like to be—a 
person in total control of himself, analyzed to the ultimate depths 
of his own unconscious, understood and explained to the last 
atom of his brain, and to this extent completely mechanized. 
When every last element of inwardness has become an object of 
knowledge, the person is, however, reduced to a rattling shell. 

Equally monstrous is the notion of absolute omnipotence when 
considered as perfect self-control, which is actually tantamount to 
a state of total paralysis. For control is a degree of inhibition, and 
a system which is perfectly inhibited is completely frozen. Of 
course, when we say that a pianist or a dancer has perfect control 
we refer to a certain combination of control and spontaneity. The 
artist has established an area of control within which he can 
abandon himself to spontaneity without restraint. We should 
rather think of God as the one whose spontaneity is so perfect 
that it needs no control, whose inside is so harmonious that it 
requires no conscious scrutiny. But this is not the regal God of 
ecclesiastical imagery, presiding over a cosmos which is a 
beneficent despotism run by enlightened force. 

Fortunately, there is another strain in Christianity, though it is 
seen more fully in Eastern Orthodoxy than in the West. This is the 
view that the creation is God’s kenosis, or “self-emptying.” The 
incarnation of God the Son in Jesus is seen as the historical image 
of the whole production of the universe. 


Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus, who, 
being in the form of God, thought not equality with God a 
thing to be grasped, but made himself of no reputation, and 
took upon himself the form of a servant, and was made in the 
likeness of men. And being found in fashion as a man, he 


humbled himself, and became obedient unto death.s 


The world, too, as the creation of God the Son, the Divine Word, 
is seen as God’s self-abandonment and self-concealment, so that 
nature is not so much governed from without as enlivened from 
within. The “love which moves the sun and other stars” is seen as 
an interior force, which is God forever giving himself away. There 
is likewise a strain in both Catholic and Protestant teaching 
which regards the humility and self-abasement of God in Christ as 
a deeper revelation of the divine heart than all the imagery of 
royal pomp and power. Yet this is offset by the thought that the 
“one full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice” is historically past, and 
that now the risen Christ reigns in glory at the right hand of the 
Father, whence he shall come to judge the living and the dead by 
fire. Again, a subtle theological insight can reconcile the two 
motifs. It can see the regal imagery as a symbol of the purely 
inward, spiritual, and unseen glory of humility and love. It can 
point out that the fire of judgment is the burning pride and 
anxiety in the hearts of those who will not yield to love and faith. 
Yet if this be so, the imagery is frankly misleading, and because 
imagery is far more powerful than rational speech, it would be 
better to drop it or change it than to explain it away. For it is the 
imagery rather than the actual doctrine which creates the 
persuasive feeling of a religion, and to regard it as relatively 
trivial is merely to be insensitive to the influence which it holds, 
not only upon those who believe it literally but also upon those 
who live within its atmosphere—however allegorically they may 
understand it.6 

Returning, then, to the personal impression which I mentioned 
at the start, the imagery of Christianity and the atmosphere of the 
Church seem utterly foreign to the world beyond its walls. But 
the reason is that when I leave the Church and the city behind 
and go out under the sky, when I am with the birds, for all their 
voraciousness, with the clouds, for all their thunders, and with 
the oceans, for all their tempests and submerged monsters—I 
cannot feel Christianly because I am in a world which grows from 
within. I am simply incapable of feeling its life as coming from 
above, from beyond the stars, even recognizing this to be a figure 
of speech. More exactly, I cannot feel that its life comes from 
Another, from one who is qualitatively and spiritually external to 


all that lives and grows. On the contrary, I feel this whole world 
to be moved from the inside, and from an inside so deep that it is 
my inside as well, more truly I than my surface consciousness. My 
sense of kinship with this world is not only with its obviously 
sympathetic and beautiful aspects, but also with the horrendous 
and strange. For I have found that the monstrous and inhuman 
aspects of fish and insects and reptiles are not so much in them as 
in me. They are external embodiments of my natural creeps and 
shudders at the thought of pain and death. 

To some extent the conflict between spirit and nature is based 
on the association of death and decay with evil, as if they were 
not originally part of the divine plan. It is easy, of course, to show 
that life is life-death rather than life as opposed to death, but 
rationalizations do not alter a revulsion so deeply embedded. Yet 
the problem of death is surely not to be solved by the abolition of 
death, which is almost analogous to chopping off the head to cure 
headache. The problem lies in our revulsion, and especially in our 
unwillingness to feel revulsion—as if it were a weakness of which 
we should be ashamed. 

But, once again, the association of God with being and life to 
the exclusion of nonbeing and death, and the attempt to triumph 
over death by the miracle of resurrection, is the failure to see that 
these pairs are not alternatives but correlatives. To be or not to 
be is not the question, for pure being and pure nonbeing are alike 
conceptual ghosts. But as soon as the “inner identity” of these 
correlatives is felt, as well as that which lies between man and 
nature, the knower and the known, death seems simply to be a 
return to that unknown inwardness out of which we were born. 
This is not to say that death, biologically speaking, is reversed 
birth. It is rather that the truly inward source of one’s life was 
never born, but has always remained inside, somewhat as the life 
remains in the tree, though the fruits may come and go. 
Outwardly, I am one apple among many. Inwardly, I am the 
tree.7 

Possibly this is what Jesus meant when he said, “I am the vine; 
you are the branches.” For Christianity is not necessarily against 
nature, and within its tradition lie the seeds of a flowering which 
may someday change its atmosphere profoundly. The rigid Cross 
may blossom like the Rod of Jesse, and among its thorns bear 
flowers, because, as an ancient hymn suggests, the Cross is really 


a tree. 


Crux fidelis, inter omnes 
Arbor una nobilis; 

Nulla silva talem profert 
Fronde, flore, germine. 
Dulce lignum, dulces clavos, 
Dulce pondus sustinet. 


Faithful Cross, the one Tree noble above all; no forest affords 
the like of this in leaf, or flower, or seed. Sweet the wood, 
sweet the nails, and sweet the weight it bears. 


This is what must happen if the Chinese artist is to be able to 
paint the Crucifixion. Certainly this does not mean the mere 
symbolic substitution of a tree for the stiff wooden beams. Nor 
does it mean a prettification of the symbol to conceal the agony 
and blood. It would simply be the outward sign that Western man 
had discovered the God of nature instead of the God of 
abstraction, and that the Crucifixion is not just a distant and 
isolated historical event but the inner life of a world, which, 
when seen from beyond the narrowly individual point of view, is 
sacrificial to its core. For the fact that life is ever related to death, 
living by the sacrifice of life, shows only that this “merely 
natural” world is the very incarnation of “This is my Body which 
is given for you, and this is my Blood which is shed for you.” 
Prophetically, then, the hymn continues: 


Flecte ramos, arbor alta, 
Tensa laxa viscera, 

Et rigor lentescat ille, 
Quem dedit nativitas; 

Et superni membra Regis 
Tende miti stipite. 


Bend thy boughs, O lofty Tree; loosen thy taut sinews, soften 
thy native hardness, and upon a gentle stem spread out the 
members of the heavenly King. 


But the taut sinews have not yet relaxed, and this is because 
nature is still feared as the beguiler and temptress, the Spider 


Mother, the abyss of universal flux which is always threatening to 
swallow the human person. Nature is seen as the wilderness 
encroaching upon the garden and the ocean washing away the 
shore—blind, disorganized, almost cancerous proliferation, 
against which every human work must be defended with 
perpetual vigilance. Chief of these works is the personality, the 
conscious ego, which needs an ark of salvation against the waters 
of the unconscious and its vast currents of “animal” lust and fear. 

Christian reason as distinct from feeling knows, however, that 
nature is in process of redemption and that its dark and 
destructive aspects work only under the permission and control of 
the will of God. Limitless in power, the divine order is in no 
danger from nature. But the human order, with its awesome gift 
of freedom, is secure against nature only so long as it patterns 
itself upon the divine. As soon as the human turns away from the 
divine, nature becomes, like the devils, an instrument of the 
wrath of God. Thus when a post-Christian technological society 
sees nature only as a vast randomness upon which man must 
relentlessly impose his order, the Christian finds himself in a 
position to point out that nature will always be the enemy to the 
man who has lost God. He will remind us of the saints who could 
live unharmed among wild beasts and who had power to 
command the forces of nature miraculously. 

Yet at root this is a conception of universal unity which is an 
imperium, depending ultimately upon the force of divine 
omnipotence, a cosmology whose order is political rather than 
organic. It is true that as Christianity matures the force of 
omnipotence is seen more and more as the persuasive force of 
love, just as in well-established states it becomes possible to 
abolish capital punishment and send criminals to psychiatric 
hospitals instead of prisons. Yet even in the most beneficent state, 
force remains the ultimate authority however well hidden. This is 
because, politically conceived, people are others, that is to say, 
alien wills and isolated consciousnesses upon which order has to 
be imposed from without. 

Political order is, then, different in principle from organic 
order, wherein the parts constitute a whole by nature as distinct 
from force or persuasion. In organic order the whole is primary, 
and the parts arise mutually within it. But in political order the 
whole is contrived. There is no “body politic” since political 


societies are put together rather than grown. Similarly, neither 
the universe nor the Church can be considered the Body of Christ 
while they are also considered as the Kingdom of God. The two 
conceptions are profoundly contradictory. There is no common 
measure between the order of the Vine and the order of the City. 
But, once again, it is clear that a political conception of the 
universe and, furthermore, a political conception of human 
society go hand in hand with a fractured and disorganized view 
of the world, with a mentality so fascinated by speech and 
thought that it has lost the power to feel the interval, the reality 
lying between terms. The terms, the Euclidean points, ends, and 
boundaries, are everything and the content nothing. 


1 John Betjeman, “Before the Anaesthetic or A Real Fright,” in Selected 
Poems. John Murray, London, 1948. 


2 But this is not what we should call “thoughtlessness” or mere empty- 
mindedness. For thoughts are themselves in and of nature, and kuan, or 
wordless contemplation, can persist even in the midst of thinking. Kuan is 
therefore an absence of “mental mitosis,” of the mind constantly trying to 
split itself, trying simultaneously to act and reflect, to think and to think 
about thinking, and so setting up the infinite regression or vicious circle of 
“words about words about words.” 


3 Revelation 19, 12-16. 
4 That is, the profound (or mysterious) identity of man and nature. 


5 Philippians 2, 5-8. (Following the AV except in v. 6.) The kenotic theory of 
the creation, as distinct from the Incarnation, is perhaps something of a 
minority view in the Orthodox Church, prevailing mostly among 
Hesychast mystics. 


6 A history of Christian theology and apologetics might be written from the 
standpoint that their development has arisen largely from the 
embarrassment of Biblical imagery, and the constant necessity of 
explaining it away. The writings of the early Fathers, almost as a matter of 
course, treat much of the Old Testament allegorically in order to 
rationalize the crude behavior of the Lord God in early Hebrew imagery, 
which Origen called “puerile.” And to this day the apologist has to keep on 
pointing out that it is not necessary to think of God as a white-haired old 
gentleman on a throne, nor of heaven as a golden city above the sky. 


7 This is of course speaking poetically—not fancifully but analogically. 
Obviously the “life” in the tree is not what we mean when we think of 
“life” as related to “death.” It is the “inner identity” of the two which 
cannot be expressed outwardly because words, as classifiers, restrict us to 
talking about classes in which things either are or are not. 


2: Science and Nature 


A KING OF ANCIENT INDIA, OPPRESSED BY the roughness of the earth upon 
soft human feet, proposed that his whole territory should be 
carpeted with skins. However, one of his wise men pointed out 
that the same result could be achieved far more simply by taking 
a single skin and cutting off small pieces to bind beneath the feet. 
These were the first sandals. To a Hindu the point of this story is 
not its obvious illustration of technical ingenuity. It is a parable 
of two different attitudes to the world, attitudes which 
correspond approximately to those of the progressive and 
traditional types of culture. Only in this case the more technically 
skillful solution represents the traditional culture, in which it is 
felt that it is easier for man to adapt himself to nature than to 
adapt nature to himself. This is why science and technology, as 
we know them, did not arise in Asia. 

Westerners generally feel that Asian indifference to the 
technical control of nature is either tropical laziness or the lack of 
a social conscience. It is easy to believe that religions which 
concern themselves with inward rather than outward solutions to 
suffering encourage callousness toward hunger, injustice, and 
disease. It is easy to say that they are aristocrats’ methods of 
exploiting the poor. But it is, perhaps, not so easy to see that the 
poor are also being exploited when they are persuaded to desire 
more and more possessions, and led to confuse happiness with 
progressive acquisition. The power to change nature or to 
perform miracles conceals the truth that suffering is relative, and 
that the fact that nature abhors a vacuum is above all true of 
troubles. 

The Western experiment in changing the face of nature by 
science and technology has its roots in the political cosmology of 
Christianity. For Christian apologists are indeed justified in 
pointing out that science has arisen pre-eminently in the context 
of the Hebrew-Christian tradition, notwithstanding the constant 
conflicts between the two. There can be conflict between 


Christianity and science for the very reason that both are 
speaking the same language and dealing with the same universe 
—the universe of facts. The claim of Christianity to be unique is 
bound up with its insistence on the truth of certain historical 
facts. To other spiritual traditions historical facts are of minor 
importance, but to Christianity it has always been “of the 
essence” that Jesus Christ did in fact rise physically from the 
dead, that he was, biologically speaking, born of a virgin, and 
that even God has the kind of objective and intractable reality 
which we associate with “hard facts.” The Christian who does not 
feel this to be so will also insist less upon the uniqueness of his 
religion. However, the temper of most current theology, both 
Catholic and Protestant, is to re-emphasize the historicity of the 
Biblical narrative. Even among theological liberals who have 
their doubts about miracles, this trend takes the curious form of 
arguing that the historical and narrative style of Christianity, 
however unhistorical in certain respects, nevertheless reveals that 
history is the unfolding of God’s purposes. 

Christianity is also unique in that the historical facts upon 
which it insists are miracles, betokening a state of mind for which 
the transformation of the physical world is of immense 
importance, for “if Christ be not risen from the dead, then is your 
faith vain.” Other traditions contain miraculous elements aplenty, 
but they are always treated as incidental signs, corroborating the 
divine authority of the performer. They are never the heart of the 
matter. But nothing is more important for Christianity than the 
subservience of nature to the commands of Christ, culminating in 
his victory over the hardest and most certain of all natural facts— 
death itself. 

However post-Christian and secular the present culture of the 
West may seem to be, it is still the culture uniquely preoccupied 
with miracles—that is to say, with the transformation of that 
world which is felt to be objective and external to the ego. 
Concurrently, an unparalleled cultural imperialism has taken the 
place of religious proselytism, and the progressive course of 
history toward the establishment of the Kingdom of God is seen 
in terms of the expansion of technological power, the increasing 
“spiritualization” of the physical world through the abolition of 
its finite limitations. 

All this has its roots in the political cosmology of the Hebrew- 


Christian tradition, which, until very recently, was also the 
cosmology of Western science and in some respects still remains 
so. For, as we have seen, a political universe is one in which 
separate things, facts, and events are governed by the force of 
law. However much ideas of the laws of nature may have 
changed, there is no doubt that the idea of natural law first arose 
from the supposition that the world obeyed the commandments 
of a ruler conceived in the image of an earthly king. 

Yet the notion of natural law is not fully accounted for by a 
primitive analogy between the world and a political kingship. 
There must also be taken into consideration a mode of thought 
apart from which such an analogy would hardly suggest itself. So 
far as one can see, this mode of thought arises from an accidental 
confusion which could easily occur in the development of 
language in particular and of abstract thought in general. 

It is commonly felt that the mind can think only of one thing at 
a time, and language, in so far as it is the main instrument of 
thought, confirms this impression by being a linear series of signs 
read or sounded one at a time. The sense of this common feeling 
is presumably that conscious thought is focused attention, and 
that such concentration of our awareness is difficult or impossible 
when the field of attention is too complex. Attention therefore 
requires selection. The field of awareness must be divided into 
relatively simple unities or wholes, so structured that their parts 
can be taken in at one glance. This may be done both by breaking 
the whole field down into component parts of the required 
simplicity, and by so screening out certain details of the whole 
that it is reduced to a single easily comprehensible form. It is thus 
that we actually see or hear infinitely more than we attend to or 
think about, and although we respond and adjust ourselves with 
extraordinary intelligence to much that we never notice, we feel 
in better control of a situation to the degree that we can bring it 
under conscious scrutiny. 

Now the simplified units of attention thus selected from the 
total field of awareness are what we call things and events, or 
facts. This does not ordinarily occur to us because we naively 
suppose that things are what we see in the first place, prior to the 
act of conscious attention. Obviously the eye as such does not see 
things: it sees the total visual field in all its infinite detail. Things 
appear to the mind when, by conscious attention, the field is 


broken down into easily thinkable unities. Yet we tend to 
consider this an act of discovery. Studying the visual or tactile 
field, intelligence arrives at the conclusion that there are actually 
things in the external world—a conclusion which appears to be 
verified by acting upon that assumption. This is to say, in other 
words, that by attending to the sensed world with the aid of these 
concentrated and simplified “grasps” or “glances” of the mind, we 
are able to predict its behavior and find our way around it. 

Yet the conclusion does not actually follow. We are also able to 
predict events and manage the external world by breaking down 
distances into feet and inches, weights into pounds and ounces, 
and motions into minutes and seconds. But do we actually 
suppose that twelve inches of wood are twelve separate bits of 
wood? We do not. We know that “breaking” wood into inches or 
pounds is done abstractly and not concretely. It is not, however, 
so easy to see that breaking the field of awareness into things and 
events is also done abstractly, and that things are the measuring 
units of thought just as pounds are the measuring units of 
weighing. But this begins to be apparent when we realize that 
any one thing may, by analysis, be broken down into any number 
of component things, or may in its turn be regarded as the 
component part of some larger thing. 

The real difficulty of understanding this point is that whereas 
inches are divisions on a ruler which do not themselves appear on 
the wooden board to be measured, the delineation of things 
seems to follow divisions and boundaries actually given in nature. 
For example, the thing called the human body is divided from 
other things in its environment by the clearly discernible surface 
of the skin. The point, though, is that the skin divides the body 
from the rest of the world as one thing from others in thought but 
not in nature. In nature the skin is as much a joiner as a divider, 
being, as it were, the bridge whereby the inner organs have 
contact with air, warmth, and light. 

Just because concentrated attention is exclusive, selective, and 
divisive it is much easier for it to notice differences than unities. 
Visual attention notices things as figures against a contrasting 
background, and our thought about such things emphasizes the 
difference between figure and ground. The outline of the figure or 
the “inline” of the ground divides the two from each other. Yet 
we do not so easily notice the union or inseparability of figure 


and ground, or solid and space. This is easily seen when we ask 
what would become of the figure or the solid without any 
surrounding ground or space. Conversely, we might ask what 
would become of the surrounding space if unoccupied by any 
solids. The answer is surely that it would no longer be space, for 
space is a “surrounding function” and there would be nothing to 
surround. It is important to note that this mutuality or 
inseparability of figure and ground is not only logical and 
grammatical but also sensuous. 1 

Figure-and-ground, then, constitute a relationship—an 
inseparable relationship of unity-in-diversity. But when human 
beings become preoccupied with concentrated attentiveness, with 
a type of thought which is analytic, divisive, and selective, they 
cease to notice the mutuality of contrasting “things” and the 
“identity” of differences. Similarly, when we ask what we really 
mean by a fact or a thing, we realize that because facts are 
divisions or selections of experience there can never be less than 
two! One solitary fact or thing cannot exist by itself, since it 
would be infinite—without delineating limits, without anything 
other. Now this essential duality and multiplicity of facts should 
be the clearest evidence of their interdependence and 
inseparability. 

What it comes to, then, is that the fundamental realities of 
nature are not, as thought construes them, separate things. The 
world is not a collection of objects assembled or added together 
so as to come into relationship with each other. The fundamental 
realities are the relations or “fields of force” in which facts are 
the terms or limits—somewhat as hot and cold are the upper and 
lower terms (that is, termini or ends) of the field of temperature, 
and scalp and soles the upper and lower limits of the body. Scalp 
and soles are obviously surfaces of the body, and though a person 
may be scalped, a scalp is never found sui generis, coming into 
being all on its own. But, save through the use of rather 
unsatisfactory analogies, words and thought forms cannot 
embrace this world. “Relations” rather than “things” as the basic 
constituents of nature sound impossibly tenuous and abstract, 
unless it can dawn upon us that relations are what we are 
actually sensing and feeling. We know nothing more concrete. 

But the dawning of this realization becomes still more remote 
when we proceed from the primary act of abstraction, selective 


attention, to the secondary, the signifying of thoughts with 
words. Because words other than proper names are classifiers, 
they will aggravate the impression that the world is a disjointed 
multiplicity. For when we say what anything is we identify it with 
a class. There is no other way of saying what this or that is than 
to classify it. But that is simply to divide it from everything else, 
to stress its differentiating characteristics as the most important. 
Thus it comes to be felt that an identity is a matter of separation, 
that, for instance, my identity is firstly in my role or class, and 
secondly in the special ways in which I differ from other 
members of my class. If, then, I am identified by my differences, 
my boundaries, my divisions from all else, I experience selfhood 
as a sense of separation. Thereupon I fail to notice, to feel 
identified with, the concrete unity which underlies these selected 
and abstracted marks of difference. Marks of difference are then 
felt as forms of separation and dissociation rather than 
relationship. In this situation I feel the world as something to 
which I must form a relation rather than with which I have a 
relation. 

A political cosmology presupposes, then, this fractured way of 
experiencing the world. God is not, as in Hindu cosmology, the 
underlying identity of the differences, but one of the differences 
—albeit the ruling difference. Man is related to God as to another 
distinct person, as subject to king or as son to father. The 
individual is, from the beginning and out of nothing, created 
separate and must bring himself or be brought into conformity 
with the divine will. 

Furthermore, because the world consists of things, and because 
things are defined by their classes, and their classes are ordered 
and marked by words, it appears that Logos, that word-and- 
thought actually underlies the world. “And God said, Let there be 
light.” “By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all 
the hosts of them by the breath of his mouth.” When it is not 
recognized that thought orders the world, it is supposed that 
thought discovers an order which is already there—a type of 
order which is, furthermore, expressible in terms of word-and- 
thought. 

Here, then, is the genesis of two of the most important 
historical premises of Western science. The first is that there is a 
law of nature, an order of things and events awaiting our 


discovery, and that this order can be formulated in thought, that 
is, in words or in some type of notation. The second is that the 
law of nature is universal, a premise deriving from monotheism, 
from the idea of one God ruling the whole world. 

Science is, moreover, an extreme instance of the entire method 
of attention which we have been discussing. It is an awareness of 
nature based upon the selective, analytic, and abstractive way of 
focusing attention. It understands the world by reducing it as 
minutely as possible to intelligible things. This it does by a 
“universal calculus,” that is, by translating the formlessness of 
nature into structures made up of simple and manageable units, 
aS a surveyor measures a “shapeless” piece of land by 
approximating its areas as minutely as possible to such simple 
abstract figures as triangles, squares, and circles. By this method 
all oddities and irregularities are progressively screened out until 
at last it appears that God himself is the supreme geometer. We 
say, “How astonishing it is that natural structures conform so 
precisely to geometrical laws!”—forgetting that by ignoring their 
irregularities we have forced them to do so. But this we have 
been able to do by analysis, by the ever minuter division of the 
world into parts which approximate the supreme simplicity of 
mathematical points. 

Alternatively, this way of regularizing the world may be 
illustrated by the method of the matrix. Superimpose a 
transparent sheet of finely squared graph paper upon some 
complex natural image. The “formless” image can then be 
described with approximate precision in terms of the highly 
formal arrangement of squares. Seen through such a screen, the 
path of an object moving at random can be “plotted” in terms of 
sO many squares up or down, left or right. Reduced to these 
terms, we can by statistical averages predict the approximate 
trend of its future motion—and then suppose that the object itself 
is obeying statistical laws. The object, however, is doing nothing 
of the kind. The statistical laws are being “obeyed” by our 
regularized model of the object’s behavior. 

In the twentieth century scientists are increasingly aware of the 
fact that the laws of nature are not discovered but invented, and 
the whole notion that nature is obeying or following some innate 
pattern or order is being supplanted by the idea that these 
patterns are not determinative but descriptive. This is a 


fundamental revolution in the philosophy of science which has 
hardly reached the general public and which has still but barely 
affected some of the special sciences. The scientist was first 
discovering the laws of God, in the faith that the workings of the 
world could be reformulated into the terms of the word, the 
reason, and the law which they were obeying. As the hypothesis 
of God made no difference to the accuracy of his predictions, he 
began to leave it out and to consider the world as a machine, 
something which followed laws with no lawgiver. Lastly, the 
hypothesis of pre-existing and determinative laws became 
unnecessary. They were seen simply as human tools, like knives, 
with which nature is chopped up into digestible portions. 

There are signs, however, that this is but one phase of a still 
more radical change in the outlook of science. For we may ask 
whether scientific method must confine itself to the analytic and 
abstractive mode of attention in studying nature. Until not so 
long ago the main preoccupation of almost every scientific 
discipline was classification—a minute, rigorous, and exhaustive 
identification of species, whether of birds or fish, chemicals or 
bacilli, organs or diseases, crystals or stars. Obviously this 
approach encouraged an atomistic and disintegrated view of 
nature, the disadvantages of which begin to appear when, on the 
basis of this view, science becomes technology and men start to 
extend their control of the world. For they begin to discover that 
nature cannot wisely be controlled in the same way in which it 
has been studied—piecemeal. Nature is through and through 
relational, and interference at one point has interminable and 
unforeseeable effects. The analytic study of these interrelations 
produces an ever-growing accumulation of extremely complicated 
information, so vast and so complex as to be unwieldy for many 
practical purposes, especially when quick decisions are needed. 

Consequently the progress of technology begins to have the 
opposite of its intended effect. Instead of simplifying human 
tasks, it makes them more complicated. No one dares move 
without consulting an expert. The expert in his turn cannot hope 
to have mastered more than a small section of the ceaselessly 
expanding volume of information. But whereas formal scientific 
knowledge is departmentalized, the world is not, so that the 
mastery of a single department of knowledge is often as 
frustrating as a closetful of left shoes. This is not only a problem 


of dealing with such formally “scientific” questions as 
endocrinology, soil chemistry, or nuclear fall-out. In a society 
whose means of production and communication are highly 
technological, the most ordinary matters of politics, economics, 
and law become so involved that the individual citizen feels 
paralyzed. The growth of bureaucracy and totalitarianism has, 
then, far less to do with sinister influences than with the mere 
mechanics of control in an impossibly complex system of 
interrelations. 

Yet if this were the whole story scientific knowledge would 
already have reached the point of total self-strangulation. That it 
has done so only in some degree is because the scientist actually 
understands interrelations by other means than analysis and step- 
by-step thinking. In practice he relies heavily upon intuition— 
upon a process of intelligence whose steps are unconscious, 
which does not appear to work in the painfully linear, one-thing- 
at-a-time fashion of thought, and which can therefore grasp 
whole fields of related detail simultaneously. 

For the notion that the interrelatedness of nature is complex 
and highly detailed is merely the result of translating it into the 
linear units of thought. Despite its rigor and despite its initial 
successes, this is an extremely clumsy mode of intelligence. Just 
as it is a highly complicated task to drink water with a fork 
instead of a glass, so the complexity of nature is not innate but a 
consequence of the instruments used to handle it. There is 
nothing complex about walking, breathing, and circulating one’s 
blood. Living organisms have developed these functions without 
thinking about them at all. The circulation of the blood becomes 
complex only when stated in physiological terms, that is, when 
understood by means of a conceptual model constructed of the 
kind of simple units which conscious attention requires. The 
natural world seems a marvel of complexity, requiring a vastly 
intricate intelligence to create and govern it, just because we 
have represented it to ourselves in the clumsy “notation” of 
thought. In a somewhat similar way, multiplication and division 
are processes of the most frustrating complexity for those 
working with Roman or Egyptian numerals. But with Arabic 
numerals they are relatively simple, and with an abacus simpler 
still. 

Understanding nature by means of thought is like trying to 


make out the contours of an enormous cave with the aid of a 
small flashlight casting a bright but very thin beam. The path of 
the light and the series of “spots” over which it has passed must 
be retained in memory, and from this record the general 
appearance of the cave must laboriously be reconstructed. 

In practice, then, the scientist must perforce use his intuition 
for grasping the wholes of nature, though he does not trust it. He 
must always stop to check intuitive insight with the thin bright 
beam of analytic thought. For intuition can so easily be wrong, 
just as the “organic intelligence” which regulates the body 
without thought cannot always be relied upon to avoid the 
“mistakes” of congenital deformity or cancer, nor to control 
instincts which, under special circumstances, lead directly to 
destruction. Thus it is natural enough and “healthy” enough to 
want to reproduce the species, but the reproductive urge cannot 
be relied upon to keep a watch on the environment and 
automatically check itself when the food supply is insufficient. 
Hence the only way of correcting the errors of intuition or 
unconscious intelligence seems to be by the laborious work of 
analysis and experiment. But this involves an interference with 
the natural order from the start, and the wisdom of this 
interference cannot be known until its work is well advanced! 

Therefore the scientist has to ask himself whether the 
“mistakes” of nature are really mistakes. Does a species destroy 
itself in the interests of the natural order as a whole—in the sense 
that if it did not do so, life would be intolerable for all, including 
itself? Are “errors” of congenital disease, or of epidemics or 
pestilence, necessary for maintaining a balance of life? Will 
correction of these errors give rise in the long run to far more 
serious problems than one has solved? And will the solution of 
those problems in turn create ever more fantastic difficulties? 
Must unconscious intelligence every so often be wrong lest, if it 
were always right, the species would be too successful and again 
upset the balance? 

On the other hand, he may ask whether the birth of conscious 
analysis is not itself an act of unconscious intelligence. Is 
conscious interference with nature actually quite natural, in the 
sense that it is still working in the interests of the natural order as 
a whole, even if it is going to involve the elimination of man? Or 
may it be that in pushing conscious analysis just as far as we can 


we shall discover means of enabling the unconscious intelligence 
to be far more effective? 

The difficulty with all these questions is that we can hardly 
find out the answers until it is too late to make use of them. 
What, furthermore, will be the test of doing the right thing? 
What, in other words, is the “good” of the natural order as a 
whole? The usual answer to the problem of what is good for any 
or all species is simply survival. Science is mainly interested in 
prediction because it assumes that the chief good of humanity is 
to continue into the future. This is likewise the test of almost all 
practical action: it has “survival-value.” Accepting this premise, 
that the good of life lies in its indefinite perpetuation through 
time, and assuming that such perpetuation must be pleasant for it 
to go on at all, the test of whether we have done wisely is that we 
are still here, and seem likely to remain for as long as we can 
foresee. 

But on this assumption the human race had survived, and 
seemed likely to go on surviving, for perhaps more than a million 
years before the arrival of modern technology. We must, on this 
premise, assume that it had acted wisely thus far. We may argue 
that its life was not highly pleasant, but it is difficult to know 
what this means. The race was certainly pleased to go on living, 
for it did so. On the other hand, after a bare two centuries of 
industrial technology the prospects of human survival are being 
quite seriously questioned. It is not unlikely that we may eat or 
blow ourselves off the planet. 

Yet surely the ideal of survival is completely inane. Studying 
human and animal psychology, it does indeed seem that “self- 
preservation is the first law of nature,” though it is possible that 
this is an anthropomorphism, a projection into nature of a 
peculiarly human attitude. If survival is the test of wisdom, the 
significance of life is merely time: we go on in order to keep 
going on. Our attitude to experience seems to be one of perpetual 
hunger, for even when we are satisfied and delighted to be alive 
we keep calling for more. The cry “Encore!” is the highest mark 
of approval. Obviously, this is because no moment of life is a true 
fulfillment. Even in satisfaction there remains a gnawing 
emptiness which nothing save an infinity of time can fill, for “all 
joys want eternity.” 

But the hunger for time is the direct result of our specialization 


in narrowed attention, of the mode of consciousness which takes 
the world in serially, one thought and one thing at a time. Each 
experience is for this reason partial, fractured, and incomplete, 
and no amount of these fragments ever add up to a whole 
experience, a true fulfillment. By and large they attain only to the 
weariness of satiation. The impression that all nature, like 
ourselves, hungers endlessly for survival is, then, the necessary 
result of the way in which we study it. The answer is 
predetermined by the character of the question. Nature seems to 
be a series of unsatisfactory moments ever demanding more 
because those are the terms in which we perceive it. We 
understand it by cutting it to pieces, assume that it is in itself this 
heap of fragments, and conclude that it is a system of endless 
incompleteness which can seek fulfillment only through 
everlasting addition. 

Thought and science are therefore raising problems which their 
terms of study can never answer, many of which are doubtless 
problems only for thought. The trisection of an angle is similarly 
an insoluble problem only for compass and_straight-edge 
construction, and Achilles cannot overtake the tortoise so long as 
their progress is considered piecemeal, endlessly halving the 
distance between them. However, as it is not Achilles but the 
method of measurement which fails to catch up with the tortoise, 
so it is not man but his method of thought which fails to find 
fulfillment in experience. This is by no means to say that science 
and analytic thought are useless and destructive tools, but rather 
that the people who use them must be greater than their tools. To 
be an effective scientist one must be more than a scientist, and a 
philosopher must be more than a thinker. For the analytic 
measurement of nature tells us nothing if we cannot see nature in 
any other way. 

Thus the scientist as scientist does not see nature at all—or 
rather he sees it only by means of an instrument of measurement, 
as if trees became visible to the carpenter only as he sawed them 
into planks or marked them out with his ruler. More importantly, 
man as ego does not see nature at all. For man as ego is man 
identifying himself or his mind, his total awareness, with the 
narrowed and exclusive style of attention which we call 
consciousness.2 Thus the radical change which may yet overcome 
modern science will be the recognition of itself as a secondary 


form of perception, related to a primary and more basic form. 
This involves a good deal more than the scientist’s recognition 
that there are other modes of knowledge than his own—for 
example, the religious—all of which are valid in their own 
spheres. For this merely puts the scientist as a man of religion in 
one compartment, and the scientist as scientist in another. But we 
have seen that the most important scientific insights, or 
intuitions, come precisely through the somewhat reluctant use of 
a nonthinking mode of awareness. 

It is therefore becoming generally realized that for the most 
creative research, men of science must be trusted and encouraged 
to let their minds wander unsystematically without any pressure 
for results. The visitor to such an inspired foundation as the 
Institute for Advanced Studies at Princeton will see some of the 
world’s greatest mathematicians just sitting at their desks with 
their heads in their hands, or staring blankly out of the window, 
apparently financed munificently to do nothing but “goof off.” 
Yet as R. G. H. Siu has shown in his Tao of Science, this is 
precisely the Taoist principle of “using no-knowledge to attain 
knowledge,” the Western discovery of the creative power of wu- 
nien, or “no-thought,” and kuan, or contemplation without 
strained attention. As an experienced director of research he has 
cogently argued that such a mode of awareness is essential when 
research is expected to bring forth new concepts, and to be 
something more than the verification of old ones.3 At present this 
mode is mistrusted and rigorously checked by analysis, but it is 
highly possible that the unreliability of scientific intuition is due 
to lack of use, and to the constant distraction of the mind by 
selective attention both in scientific and everyday consciousness. 

Now the recovery of our extensive and inclusive type of 
awareness is completely different from the acquisition of a moral 
virtue, to be urged upon society by persuasion and propaganda 
and cultivated by discipline and practice. As we know, such 
idealisms are notorious for their failure. Furthermore, moral and 
spiritual idealisms with all their efforts and disciplines aimed at 
the future are forms of the very mode of awareness which is 
giving us the trouble. For they perceive good and bad, ideal and 
real, separatively and fail to see that “goodness” is necessarily a 
“bad” man’s ideal, that courage is the goal of cowards, and that 
peace is sought only by the disturbed. As Lao-tzu put it: 


When the great Tao is lost, 

we have “human-heartedness” and “righteousness.” 
When “wisdom” and “sagacity” arise, 

we have great hypocrites. 

When the six family relations are not in harmony, 
we have “filial devotion.” 

When the nation is confused and disordered, 

we have “loyal ministers.” xviii 


7 


As “you cannot make a silk purse from a sow’s ear,” no amount of 
effort will turn turmoil into peace. For, as another Taoist saying 
puts it, “When the wrong man uses the right means, the right 
means work in the wrong way.” 

Thought, with its serial, one-at-a-time way of looking at things, 
is ever looking to the future to solve problems which can be 
handled only in the present—but not in the fragmentary present 
of fixed and pointed attention. The solution has to be found, as 
Krishnamurti has said, in the problem and not away from it. In 
other words, the “bad” man’s disturbing emotions and urgent 
desires have to be seen as they are—or, better, the moment in 
which they arise has to be seen as it is, without narrowing 
attention upon any aspect of it. And just here, instead of straining 
toward a future in which one hopes to be different, the mind 
opens and admits a whole experience in which and by which the 
problem of what is the “good” of life is answered. In the words of 
Goethe’s Fragment on Nature: 


At each moment she starts upon a long, long journey and at 
each moment reaches her end.... All is eternally present in her, 
for she knows neither past nor future. For her the present is 
eternity. 


1 The naive idea that there is first of all empty space and then things filling it 
underlies the classical problem of how the world came out of nothing. 
Now the problem has to be rephrased, “How did something-and-nothing 
come out of ... what?” 

2 Trigant Burrow (1) coined the useful terms “ditention” and “cotention” for 
the intensive and extensive modes of awareness. His whole discussion of 
the relation between the psychoneuroses and ditentive thought and feeling 
is most provocative. 


3 The whole work, Siu (1), may be read as an expansion of themes discussed 


in the present chapter. Unfortunately, it did not come to my attention until 
I had almost finished writing this book. It gives a very wide application of 
Chinese thought to the problems of science, though for the Western reader 
it is rather too vague in describing the character of the necessary mental 
attitude. 


3: The Art of Feeling 


THE WORDS WHICH ONE MIGHT BE TEMPTED to use for a silent and wide- 
open mind are mostly terms of abuse—thoughtless, mindless, 
unthinking, empty-headed, and vague. Perhaps this is some 
measure of an innate fear of releasing the chronic cramp of 
consciousness by which we grasp the facts of life and manage the 
world. It is only to be expected that the idea of an awareness 
which is something other than sharp and selective fills us with 
considerable disquiet. We are perfectly sure that it would mean 
going back to the supposedly confused sensitivity of infants and 
animals, that we should be unable to distinguish up from down, 
and that we should certainly be run over by a car the first time 
we went out on the street. 

Narrowed, serial consciousness, the memory-stored stream of 
impressions, is the means by which we have the sense of ego. It 
enables us to feel that behind thought there is a thinker and 
behind knowledge a knower—an individual who stands aside 
from the changing panorama of experience to order and control it 
as best he may. If the ego were to disappear, or rather, to be seen 
as a useful fiction, there would no longer be the duality of subject 
and object, experiencer and experience. There would simply be a 
continuous, self-moving stream of experiencing, without the sense 
either of an active subject who controls it or of a passive subject 
who suffers it. The thinker would be seen to be no more than the 
series of thoughts, and the feeler no more than the feelings. As 
Hume said in the Treatise of Human Nature: 


For my part, when I enter most intimately into what I call 
myself, I always stumble on some particular perception or 
other, of heat or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, pain or 
pleasure. I never can catch myself at any time without a 
perception, and never can observe any thing but the 
perception.... [We are] nothing but a bundle or collection of 
different perceptions, which succeed each other with an 


inconceivable rapidity, and are in a perpetual flux and 
movement.1 


Now this is just what we fear—the loss of human identity and 
integrity in a transient stream of atoms. Hume, arguing against 
the notion of the self as a metaphysical or mental substance, had 
of course no alternative conception other than the “bundle or 
collection” of intrinsically separate perceptions, for he was 
translating his experience into the disjointed terms of linear 
thought. He maintained that all our impressions are “different, 
and distinguishable, and separable from each other, and may be 
separately consider’d, and may exist separately, and have no need 
of any thing to support their existence.” Having seen the fiction 
of the separate ego-substance, he failed to see the fiction of 
separate things or perceptions which the ego, as a mode of 
awareness, abstracts from nature. As we have seen, inherently 
separate things can be ordered only mechanically or politically, 
so that without a real ego in which impressions are integrated 
and ordered, human experience is delivered over to mechanism 
or chaos. 

If the world of nature is neither things seen by an ego nor 
things, some of which are sensations, bundled mechanically 
together, but a field of “organic” relations, there is no need to 
fear that disorder is the only alternative to political order or to 
mechanism. The stream of human experience would then be 
ordered neither by a transcendental ego nor by a transcendental 
God but by itself. Yet this is what we usually mean by a 
mechanical or automatic order, since the machine is what “goes 
by itself.” We have seen, however, that there is a profound 
difference of operation betwen organism and mechanism. An 
organism can be represented in terms of a mechanical model just 
as “formless” shapes can be approximated by geometric models 
and as the movements of the stars can be translated into the 
figures in an almanac. But as the celestial bodies are other than 
and infinitely more than numerical relations and schedules, 
organisms and natural forms must never be confused with their 
mechanical representations. 

Once again, because the order of thought is a linear, bit-by-bit 
series, it can approximate but never comprehend a system of 
relations in which everything is happening simultaneously. It 


would be as if our narrowed consciousness had to take charge of 
all the operations of the body so that, unless it took thought of 
them, the glands and nerves and arteries could not do their work. 
As language, both written and spoken, so eloquently shows, the 
order of thought must be strung out in a line. But nature is not 
strung out in a line. Nature is, at the very least, a volume, and at 
most an infinitely dimensioned field. We need, then, another 
conception of natural order than the logical, than the order of the 
Logos or word based on bit-by-bit awareness. 

As Needham has shown, Chinese philosophy provides this in 
the Neo-Confucian (and Buddhist) conception of li, for which 
there has been no better English equivalent than “principle.” Li is 
the universal principle of order, but in this case the principle or 
principles cannot be stated in terms of law (tse). The root 
meaning of li is the markings in jade, the grain in wood, or the 
fiber in muscle. The root meaning of tse is the writing of imperial 
laws upon sacrificial caldrons.2 Now the markings in jade are 
“formless.” That is to say, they are unsymmetrical, fluid, and 
intricate patterns which appeal highly to the Chinese sense of 
beauty. Thus when it is said that the Tao has “no shape”3 we are 
not to imagine a uniform blank so much as a pattern without 
clearly discernible features, in other words, just exactly what the 
Chinese painter admires in rocks and clouds, and what he 
sometimes conveys in the texture of black ink applied with bold 
strokes of a rather dry brush. In the words of the Huai Nan Tzu: 


The Tao of Heaven operates mysteriously and secretly; it has 
no fixed shape; it follows no definite rules (tse); it is so great 
that you can never come to the end of it; it is so deep that you 
can never fathom it.4 


At the same time the order of the Tao is not so inscrutable that 
man can see it only as confusion. When the artist handles his 
material, perfection consists in knowing how to follow its nature, 
how to follow the grain in carving wood, and how to employ the 
sound-textures of various musical instruments. The nature of the 
material is precisely li. He discovers it, however, not by logical 
analysis but by kuan,s to which we have already referred as 
“silent contemplation,” or looking at nature without thinking in 
the sense of narrowed attention. Speaking of the hexagram kuan 


in the Book of Changes, Wang Pi writes: 


The general meaning of the tao of “Kuan” is that one should 
not govern by means of punishments and legal pressure, but 
by looking forth one should exert one’s influence so as to 
change all things. Spiritual power can no man see. We do not 
see Heaven command the four seasons, and yet they never 
swerve from their course. So also we do not see the sage 
ordering people about, and yet they obey and spontaneously 
serve him.« 


The point is that things are brought into order through regarding 
them from a viewpoint unrestricted by the ego, since their li or 
pattern cannot be observed while looking and_ thinking 
piecemeal, nor when regarding them as objects apart from 
oneself, the subject. The Chinese character for kuan shows the 
radical sign for “seeing” beside a bird which is probably a heron, 
and although Needham feels that it may originally have had 
something to do with watching the flight of birds for omens, I am 
inclined to think that the root idea was taken from the way in 
which a heron stands stock-still at the edge of a pool, gazing into 
the water. It does not seem to be looking for fish, and yet the 
moment a fish moves it dives. Kuan is, then, simply to observe 
silently, openly, and without seeking any particular result. It 
signifies a mode of observation in which there is no duality of 
seer and seen: there is simply the seeing. Watching thus, the 
heron is all pool. 

In some respects this is what we mean by feeling, as when one 
learns to dance by watching and “getting the feel of it” rather 
than following a diagram of the steps. Similarly the bowler in 
cricket or the pitcher in baseball develops his skill by “feel” 
rather than by studying precise technical directions. So, too, it is 
by feeling that the musician distinguishes the styles of composers, 
that the wine taster identifies vintages, that the painter 
determines compositional proportions, that the farmer foretells 
the weather, and that the potter throws and shapes his clay. Up to 
a point these arts have communicable rules, but there is always 
something indefinable which distinguishes true mastery. As the 
wheelwright says in the Chuang-tzu: 


Let me take an illustration from my own trade. In making a 
wheel, if you work too slowly, you can’t make it firm; if you 
work too fast, the spokes won’t fit in. You must go neither too 
slowly nor too fast. There must be co-ordination of mind and 
hand. Words cannot explain what it is, but there is some 
mysterious art herein. I cannot teach it to my son; nor can he 
learn it from me. Consequently, though seventy years of age, I 
am still making wheels in my old age.7 


Analytically studied, these skills appear at first sight to be the 
result of “unconscious thinking,” the brain acting as an extremely 
complex electronic computer which delivers its results to the 
consciousness. In other words, they are the consequence of a 
thinking process which differs merely in quantity from conscious 
thought: it is faster and more complex. But this tells us not so 
much about what the brain does as about the way in which it has 
been studied and the model to which it has been approximated. 
The brain may be represented in terms of quantitative 
measurement, but it does not follow that it works in these terms. 
On the contrary, it does not work in terms at all, and for this 
reason can respond intelligently to relations which can be termed 
only approximately, slowly, and laboriously. 

But if we pursue the question, “How, then, does feeling work?” 
recognizing that an answer in terms is no answer, we shall have 
to say that it works as it feels from the inside, in the same way 
that we feel how to move our legs. We easily forget that this is a 
more intimate knowledge of our nature than objective 
description, which is of necessity superficial, being knowledge of 
surfaces. Thus it is of relatively little use to the scientist to know, 
in terms, how his brain operates, for in practice he gets his best 
results when he resorts to feeling or intuition, when his research 
is a kind of puttering without any specific result in mind. He 
must, of course, have a knowledge of terms which will enable 
him to recognize a result when he sees it. But these enable him to 
communicate the result to himself and to others; they do not 
supply the result any more than the dictionary and the rules of 
prosody supply the poet with poetry. Kuan as feeling without 
seeking, or open awareness, is therefore as essential to the 
scientist, for all his analytic rigor, as to the poet. The attitude is 
marvellously described by Lin Ching-hsi in his Poetical Remains of 


the Old Gentleman of Chi Mountain as follows: 


Scholars of old time said that the mind is originally empty, 
and only because of this can it respond [resonate]s to natural 
things without prejudices (lit. traces, chio left behind to 
influence later vision). Only the empty mind can respond to 
the things of Nature. Though everything resonates with the 
mind, the mind should be as if it had never resonated, and 
things should not remain in it. But once the mind has received 
(impressions of) natural things, they tend to remain and not to 
disappear, thus leaving traces in the mind. It should be like a 
river gorge with swans flying overhead; the river has no desire 
to retain the swan, yet the swan’s passage is traced out by its 
shadow without any omission. Take another example. All 
things, whether beautiful or ugly, are reflected perfectly in a 
mirror; it never refuses to show anything, nor retains anything 
afterwards.10 


Kuan is no more a mind that is merely empty than li, the 
pattern of the Tao, is a featureless blank. Indeed, kuan is not so 
much a mind empty of contents as a mind empty of mind. It is 
mind or “experiencing” at work without the sense of the seeking 
and staring subject, for the sensation of the ego is the sensation of 
a kind of effort of consciousness, of a confusion of nerves with 
muscles. But as glaring and staring do not clarify the eyesight, 
and as straining to hear does not sharpen the ears, mental 
“trying” does not enhance understanding. Nevertheless the mind 
is constantly making efforts to fight off the sense of boredom or 
depression, to stop being afraid, to get the most out of a pleasure, 
or to compel itself to be loving, attentive, patient, or happy. On 
being told that this is wrong, the mind will even make efforts not 
to make efforts. This can come to an end only as it is clearly seen 
that all these efforts are as futile as trying to leap into the air and 
fly, as struggling to sleep, or as forcing an erection of the sexual 
member. Everyone is familiar with the contradiction of trying to 
recollect a forgotten name, and though it happens again and 
again, we never seem to trust the memory to supply the 
information spontaneously. Yet this is one of the most common 
forms of what is known in Zen Buddhism as satori—the effortless, 
spontaneous, and sudden dawning of a realization. The difficulty 


is of course that the mind strains itself by force of habit, and that 
until it loses the habit it must be watched—gently—all the time. 11 

In saying that the ego is a sensation of mental strain, we must 
not overlook the fact that the words “ego” and “I” are sometimes 
used simply to denote this organism as distinct from its soul or 
from one of its psychological functions. In this sense, of course, 
“T” does not necessarily denote a state of strain or a psychological 
excrescence. But the sensation of the ego as a part function of the 
whole organism, or rather, as an inner entity which owns and 
inhabits the organism, is the result of an excess of activity in the 
use of the senses and of certain muscles. This is the habit of using 
more energy than is necessary to think, see, hear, or make 
decisions. Thus even when lying flat on the floor most people will 
continue to make totally needless muscular efforts to retain their 
position, almost as if they were afraid of the organism losing its 
shape and dissolving into a jelly. All this arises from anxiety 
acquired in learning control and co-ordination, for under social 
pressure the child tries to speed up his neural skills by sheer 
muscle-power. 

For all that has been said, we are so convinced of the necessity 
of mental strain that the dropping of the habit will hardly be 
acceptable until certain theoretical objections are answered. The 
“mental strain” deplored by conventional psychology is, of 
course, highly excessive strain, but it is not generally recognized 
that there is a contradiction in mental strain as such and in any 
degree. The two principal objections are, I think, firstly, that an 
absence of strain would encourage a view of the world 
characterized by mystical and pantheistic vagueness which is 
both demoralizing and uncritical; and, secondly, that since 
mental strain is essential to any self-control, its absence will 
result in being completely swept away by one’s feelings. 

In theological circles “pantheism” has long been a definitively 
damning label, and those who like their religious and 
philosophical opinions to be robust and definite are also inclined 
to use the word “mysticism” with the same kind of opprobrium. 
They associate it with “mist,” with vagueness, with clouding of 
issues and blurring of distinctions. Therefore from this standpoint 
nothing could be more ghastly than “mystical pantheism” or 
“pantheistic nature mysticism,” which is just what the attitude of 
kuan appears to produce. However much the contrary may be 


pointed out, such people continue to insist that Taoist and 
Buddhist mysticism reduces the interesting and significant 
distinctions of the world to a miasma of uniform oneness.i2 I am 
God, you are God, everything is God, and God is a boundless and 
featureless sea of dimly conscious tapioca pudding. The mystic is 
thus a feeble-minded fellow who finds in this boring 
“undifferentiated aesthetic continuum” (Northrop) a source of 
enthusiasm, because, somehow or other, it unifies the conflicts 
and evils of the world into a transcendental Goodness. 

While this is obviously an ignorant caricature, there is 
something to be said in defense of philosophical vagueness. 
Strangely assorted people join forces in making fun of it—Logical 
Positivists and Catholic Neo-Thomists, Dialectical Materialists and 
Protestant Neo-Orthodoxists, Behaviorists and Fundamentalists. 
Despite intense differences of opinion among themselves, they 
belong to a psychological type which takes special glee in having 
one’s philosophy of life clear-cut, hard, and rigid. They range 
from the kind of scientist who likes to lick his tongue around the 
notion of “brute” facts to the kind of religionist who fondles a 
system of “unequivocal dogma.” There is doubtless a deep sense 
of security in being able to say, “The clear and authoritative 
teaching of the Church is ...,” or to feel that one has mastered a 
logical method which can tear other opinions, and especially 
metaphysical opinions, to shreds. Attitudes of this kind usually go 
together with a somewhat aggressive and hostile type of 
personality which employs sharp definition like the edge of a 
sword. There is more in this than a metaphor, for, as we have 
seen, the laws and hypotheses of science are not so much 
discoveries as instruments, like knives and hammers, for bending 
nature to one’s will. So there is a type of personality which 
approaches the world with an entire armory of sharp and hard 
instruments, by means of which it slices and sorts the universe 
into precise and sterile categories which will not interfere with 
one’s peace of mind. 

There is a place in life for a sharp knife, but there is a still more 
important place for other kinds of contact with the world. Man is 
not to be an intellectual porcupine, meeting his environment with 
a surface of spikes. Man meets the world outside with a soft skin, 
with a delicate eyeball and eardrum, and finds communion with 
it through a warm, melting, vaguely defined, and caressing touch 


whereby the world is not set at a distance like an enemy to be 
shot, but embraced to become one flesh, like a beloved wife. 
After all, the whole possibility of clear knowledge depends upon 
sensitive organs which, as it were, bring the outside world into 
our bodies, and give us knowledge of that world precisely in the 
form of our own bodily states. 

Hence the importance of opinions, of instruments of the mind, 
which are vague, misty, and melting rather than clear-cut. They 
provide possibilties of communication, of actual contact and 
relationship with nature more intimate than anything to be found 
by preserving at all costs the “distance of objectivity.” As Chinese 
and Japanese painters have so well understood, there are 
landscapes which are best viewed through half-closed eyes, 
mountains which are most alluring when partially veiled in mist, 
and waters which are most profound when the horizon is lost, 
and they are merged with the sky. 


Through the evening mist a lone goose is flying; 
Of one tone are wide waters and sky. 


Or consider Po Chii-i’s lines on “Walking at Night in Fine Rain,” 
translated, I think, by Arthur Waley: 


Autumn clouds, vague and obscure; 

The evening, lonely and chill. 

I felt the dampness on my garments, 

But saw no spot, and heard no sound of rain. 


Or Lin Yutang’s version of Chia Tao’s “Searching for the Hermit 
in Vain”: 


I asked the boy beneath the pines. 
He said, “The Master’s gone alone 
Herb-picking somewhere on the mount, 
Cloud-hidden, whereabouts unknown. ” 


Images of a rather similar mood are strung together by Seami 
when he tries to suggest what the Japanese mean by yugen, a 
subtle order of beauty whose origin is dark and obscure: “To 
watch the sun sink behind a flower-clad hill, to wander on and on 
in a huge forest with no thought of return, to stand on the shore 


and gaze after a boat that goes hid by far-off islands, to ponder on 
the journey of wild geese seen and lost among the clouds.”13 But 
there is a kind of brash mental healthiness ever ready to rush in 
and clean up the mystery, to find out just precisely where the 
wild geese have gone, what herbs the master is picking and 
where, and that sees the true face of a landscape only in the 
harsh light of the noonday sun. It is just this attitude which every 
traditional culture finds utterly insufferable in Western man, not 
just because it is tactless and unrefined, but because it is blind. It 
cannot tell the difference between the surface and the depth. It 
seeks the depth by cutting into the surface. But the depth is 
known only when it reveals itself, and ever withdraws from the 
probing mind. In the words of Chuang-tzu: 


Things are produced around us, but no one knows the 
whence. They issue forth, but no one sees the portal. Men one 
and all value that part of knowledge which is known. They do 
not know how to avail themselves of the unknown in order to 
reach knowledge. Is not this misguided? 14 


We fail so easily to see the difference between fear of the 
unknown and respect for the unknown, thinking that those who 
do not hasten in with bright lights and knives are deterred by a 
holy and superstitious fear. Respect for the unknown is the 
attitude of those who, instead of raping nature, woo her until she 
gives herself. But what she gives, even then, is not the cold clarity 
of the surface but the warm inwardness of the body—a 
mysteriousness which is not merely a negation, a blank absence 
of knowledge, but that positive substance which we call 
wonderfull. 


“The highest that man can attain in these matters,” said 
Goethe, “is wonder; if the primary phenomenon causes this, let 
him be satisfied; more it cannot bring; and he should forbear 
to seek for anything further behind it: here is the limit. But the 
sight of a prime phenomenon is generally not enough for 
people. They think they must go still further; and are thus like 
children, who, after peeping into a mirror, turn it round 
directly to see what is on the other side.” 15 


For as Whitehead said: 


When you understand all about the sun and all about the 
atmosphere and all about the rotation of the earth, you may 
still miss the radiance of the sunset. There is no substitute for 
the direct perception [kuan] of the concrete achievement of a 
thing in its actuality. 16 


This is, surely, a true materialism, or perhaps it would be better 
to say a true substantialism, since matter is really cognate to 
“meter” and properly designates not the reality of nature but 
nature in terms of measures. And “substance” in this sense would 
not be the gross notion of “stuff,” but what is conveyed by the 
Chinese t’7ii7—the wholeness, the Gestalt, the complete field of 
relations, which escapes every linear description. 

The natural world therefore reveals its content, its fullness of 
wonder, when respect hinders us from investigating it in such a 
way as to shatter it to abstractions. If I must cross every skyline to 
find out what is beyond, I shall never appreciate the true depth of 
sky seen between trees upon the ridge of a hill. If I must map the 
canyons and count the trees, I shall never enter into the sound of 
a hidden waterfall. If I must explore and investigate every trail, 
that path which vanishes into the forest far up on the 
mountainside will be found at last to lead merely back to the 
suburbs. To the mind which pursues every road to its end, every 
road leads nowhere. To abstain is not to postpone the cold 
disillusionment of the true facts but to see that one arrives by 
staying rather than going, that to be forever looking beyond is to 
remain blind to what is here. 

To know nature, the Tao, and the “substance” of things, we 
must know it as, in the archaic sense, a man “knows” a woman— 
in the warm vagueness of immediate contact. As the Cloud of 
Unknowing says of God, “By love he may be gotten and holden, 
but by thought never.” This implies, too, that it is also mistaken 
to think of it as actually vague, like mist or diffused light or 
tapioca pudding. The image of vagueness implies that to know 
nature, outside ourselves as within, we must abandon every idea, 
every thought and opinion, of what it is—and look. If we must 
have some idea of it, it must be the most vague imaginable, 
which is why, even for Westerners, such formless conceptions as 
the Tao are to be preferred to the idea of God, with its all too 
definite associations. 


The danger of the “pantheistic” and mystical attitude to nature 
is, of course, that it may become exclusive and one-sided, though 
there seem to be few historical instances of this. There is no real 
reason why it should become so, for its advantage is precisely 
that it gives us a formless background against which the forms of 
everyday, practical problems may be seen more clearly. When our 
idea of the background, of God, is highly formal, practical 
conduct is as tortuous as trying to write upon a printed page. 
Issues cannot be seen clearly because it is not seen that matters of 
right and wrong are like the rules of grammar—conventions of 
communication. By grounding right and wrong in the Absolute, in 
the background, not only do the rules become too rigid, but they 
are also sanctioned by too weighty an authority. As a Chinese 
proverb says, “Do not swat a fly upon your friend’s head with a 
hatchet.” By grounding the rules of action in God, the West has 
not succeeded in fostering any unusual degree of morality. On the 
contrary, it has invited just those violent ideological revolutions 
against intolerable authority which are so characteristic of its 
history. The same would apply to a rigid scientific dogma as to 
what is natural and what is not. 

In practice a mysticism which avoids all rigid formulations of 
both nature and God has usually been favorable to the growth of 
science.is For its attitude is empirical, emphasizing concrete 
experience rather than theoretical construction or belief, and its 
frame of mind is contemplative and receptive. It is unfavorable to 
science to the degree that science confuses abstract models with 
nature, and to the degree that science, as technology, interferes 
with nature myopically, or upon the basis of prescientific views of 
man from which it has not recovered. Furthermore, it provides a 
basis for action which is not a cumbersome linear and legal view 
either of God’s will or of laws of nature based on an accumulation 
of past experiment. 

The attitude of kuan is peculiarly sensitive to the conditions of 
the immediate moment in all their changeful interrelatedness, 
and, as we have seen, one of the difficulties of scientific 
knowledge is that its linear complexity makes it hard to apply to 
swift decisions, especially when “circumstances alter cases.” Thus 
in discussing the secrets of successful drama Seami wrote: 


If you look deeply into the ultimate essentials of this art, 


you will find that what is called “the flower” [of yugen] has no 
separate existence. Were it not for the spectator who reads into 
the performance a thousand excellences, there would be no 
“flower” at all. The Sutra says, “Good and ill are one; villainy 
and honesty are of like kind.” Indeed, what standard have we 
whereby to discern good from bad? We can only take what 
suits the need of the moment and call it “good.”19 


Such an attitude would be short-sighted indeed if it were based 
on the linear and punctive view of the moment, where each 
“thing” is not seen in its relation to the whole.20 For example, 
those whom we hate most violently are often those we love most 
deeply, and if we are insensitive to this interrelation we may 
confuse the part feeling with the whole, and destroy someone we 
love or marry someone we are going to hate. 

This brings us, then, to the second theoretical objection: that 
the mental strain of the controlling ego is necessary if we are not 
to be carried away by naturally undisciplined feelings and 
emotions. The objection is, once again, based on a political 
instead of an organic view of human nature. Human psychology 
is seen as composed of separate parts, functions, or faculties, as if 
the Lord God had made him by grafting the soul of an angel to 
the body of an animal. Man is then conceived as a collection of 
powers, urges, and appetites to be governed by the ego-soul. It is 
obvious at once that this view has had a profound influence upon 
modern psychology, which, though advising the ego to govern 
with kindness rather than violence, still treats it as the 
responsible boss. 

But if we think of the total course of a man’s experience, inner 
and outer, together with its unconscious psychophysical bases, as 
a system regulated organically, the principle of control must be 
entirely different. 


Joy and anger, sorrow and happiness, caution and remorse, 
come upon us by turns, with ever-changing mood. They come 
like music from hollows (in wood, when played upon by the 
wind), or like mushrooms from the damp. Daily and nightly 
they alternate within us, but we cannot tell whence they 
spring.... 

But for these emotions I should not be. But for me, they 


would have no scope. So far we can go; but we do not know 
what it is that brings them into play. If there is really a 
governor [tsai, M 6655], we find no evidence of its being. One 
could believe that it might be active, but we do not see its 
form. It would have to have feeling without form. 

The hundred bones, the nine orifices, and the six internal 
organs are all complete in their places. Which of them should 
one prefer? Do we like them all equally, or some more than 
others? Are they all the servants [of another]? Are these 
servants unable to govern one another mutually, or do they 
take the parts of ruler and servant alternately?21 


Taking up this theme in his commentary on Chuang-tzu, Kuo 
Hsiang says: 


The hands and feet differ in their duties; the five internal 
organs differ in their functions. They never associate with one 
another, yet the hundred parts (of the body) are held together 
by them in a common unity. This is the way in which they 
associate through non-association. They never (deliberately) 
cooperate, and yet, both internally and externally, all complete 
one another. This is the way in which they cooperate through 
non-cooperation.22 


In other words, all parts of the organism regulate themselves 
spontaneously (tzu-jan), and their order is confused when the 
changing panorama of feelings seems to be confronted by a 
controlling ego, which attempts to retain the positive (yang) and 
to reject the negative (yin). 

According to Taoist philosophy, it is just this attempt to 
regulate the psyche from outside and to wrest the positive from 
the negative which is at the root of all social and moral 
confusion. What needs, then, to be controlled is not so much the 
spontaneous flow of human passions as the ego which exploits 
them—in other words, the controller itself. This has likewise been 
evident to such highly perceptive Christians as St. Augustine and 
Martin Luther, who realized so keenly that mere self-control was 
in no sense a remedy for the ills of man since it was precisely in 
the self that evil had taken its root. But they never abandoned the 
political idea of control, since their solution was to have the self 


empowered and regenerated by the grace of God—the ego of the 
universe. They did not see that the difficulty lay, not in the good 
or ill will of the controller, but in the whole rationale of control 
which they were attempting to use. They did not realize that the 
problem for God was the same as the problem for the human ego. 
For even God’s universe had spawned the Devil, who arises not so 
much from his own independent malice as from God’s 
“arrogance” in assuming omnipotent kingship and identifying 
himself with unalloyed goodness. The Devil is God’s 
unconsciously produced shadow. Naturally, God is not allowed to 
be responsible for the origin of evil, for the connection between 
the two lies in the unconscious. Man says, “I didn’t mean to hurt 
you, but my temper got the better of me. I shall try to control it 
in future.” And God says, “I didn’t mean there to be any evil, but 
my angel Lucifer brought it up of his own free will. In the future I 
will shut him up safely in hell.”23 

A problem of evil arises as soon as there is a problem of good, 
that is, as soon as there is any thought of what may be done to 
make the present situation “better,” under whatever 
nomenclature the idea may be concealed. Taoist philosophy may 
easily be misunderstood as saying that it is better to let an 
organic system regulate itself than to meddle in it from without, 
and better to recognize that good and evil are correlative than to 
wrest the one from the other. And yet Chuang-tzu says plainly: 


Those who would have right without its correlative, wrong; 
or good government without its correlative, misrule,—they do 
not apprehend the great principles of the universe nor the 
conditions to which all creation is subject. One might as well 
talk of the existence of heaven without that of earth, or of the 
negative principle without the positive, which is clearly 
absurd. Such people, if they do not yield to argument, must be 
either fools or knaves.24 xvii 


Yet, if this be true, must there not be fools and knaves as the 
correlatives of sages and saints, and does not the fallacy attacked 
simply reappear in the attack? 

If the positive and the negative, the good and the evil, are 
indeed correlative, no course of action can be recommended, 
including even the course of inaction. Nothing will make 


anything better which will not also make it worse. But this is 
exactly the predicament of the human ego as Taoist philosophy 
sees it. It is always wanting to control its situation so as to 
improve it, but neither action nor, with the motive of 
improvement, inaction will succeed. Recognizing the trap in 
which it finds itself, the mind has no alternative but to surrender 
that “straining after the good” which constitutes the ego. It does 
not surrender cunningly, with the thought that this will make 
things better. It surrenders unconditionally—not because it is 
good to do nothing, but because nothing can be done. All at once 
there descends upon it, quite spontaneously, a profound and 
completely uncontrived stillness—a quietude that envelops the 
world like the first fall of heavy snow, or like a windless 
afternoon in the mountains, where silence makes itself known in 
the undisturbed hum of insects in the grass. 

In this stillness there is no sense of passivity, of submitting to 
necessity, for there is no longer any differentiation between the 
mind and its experience. All acts, one’s own and others’, seem to 
be happening freely from a single source. Life keeps moving on, 
and yet remains profoundly rooted in the present, seeking no 
result, for the present has spread out from its constriction in an 
elusive pin-point of strained consciousness to an all-embracing 
eternity. Feelings both positive and negative come and go without 
turmoil, for they seem to be simply observed, though there is no 
one observing. They pass trackless like birds in the sky, and build 
up no resistances which have to be dissipated in reckless action. 

Clearly this state is, in retrospect, “better” than the seeking and 
staring strain of the mind which came before. But its goodness is 
of another order. Because it came unsought, it is not the kind of 
goodness which is in relation to evil, not the fantasy of peace 
which is conceived in the midst of turmoil. Furthermore, since 
nothing is done to retain it, it is not in relation to the memory of 
the former state, which otherwise would move one to fortify and 
protect it against change. For now there is no one left to build the 
fortifications. Memories rise and fall like other feelings, ordered 
perhaps better than before, but no longer congealing around an 
ego to build its illusion of continued identity. 

From this standpoint it can be seen that intelligence is not a 
separate, ordering faculty of the mind, but a characteristic of the 
whole organism-environment relationship, the field of forces 


wherein lies the reality of a human being. For as Macneile Dixon 
said in his Human Situation, “Tangible and visible things are but 
the poles, or terminations of these fields of unperceived energy. 
Matter, if it exists at all in any sense, is a sleeping partner in the 
firm of Nature.” Between subject and object, organism and 
environment, yang and yin, is the balancing or homeostatic 
relationship called Tao—intelligent not because it has an ego but 
because it has li, organic pattern. The spontaneous flow of 
feeling, rising and falling in its mood, is an essential part of this 
balancing process, and is not, then, to be regarded as the 
disordered play of blind passions. Thus it is said that Lieh-tzu 
attained the Tao by “letting the events of the heart go just as they 
liked.”25 As a good sailor gives himself to the motion of a ship 
and does not fight it with his stomach muscles, the man of Tao 
gives himself to the motion of his moods. 

Surprisingly, perhaps, this is not at all the same thing as is 
ordinarily meant by “giving in to one’s feelings’—always a 
symptom of resistance rather than “give.” For when we think 
about our feelings we tend to represent them as fixed states. Such 
words as anger, depression, fear, grief, anxiety, and guilt suggest 
uniform states which tend to persist if no action is taken to 
change or release them. As fever was once considered a disease 
instead of a natural healing process, we still think of negative 
feelings as disorders of the mind which need to be cured. But 
what needs to be cured is the inner resistance to those feelings 
which moves us to dissipate them in precipitate action. To resist 
the feeling is to be unable to contain it long enough for it to work 
itself out. Anger, for example, is not a fixed state but a motion, 
and unless compressed by resistance into unusual violence, like 
boiling water in a sealed vessel, it will adjust itself spontaneously. 
For anger is not a separate, autonomous demon rushing up from 
time to time from his quarters in the unconscious. Anger is simply 
a direction or pattern of psychic action. There is thus no anger; 
there is only acting angrily, or feeling angrily. Anger is feeling in 
motion to some other “state,” for as Lao-tzu said: 


A swishing wind does not outlast the morning; pelting rain 
does not outlast the day. Who makes these things but heaven 
and earth? If heaven and earth cannot maintain them for long, 
how can man? xxiii 


To give free rein to the course of feeling is therefore to observe 
it without interference, recognizing that because feeling is motion 
it is not to be understood in terms which imply not only static 
states but judgments of good and bad. Watched without naming, 
feelings become simply neuromuscular tensions and changes, 
palpitations and pressures, tinglings and twitchings, of enormous 
subtlety and interest. This is, however, not quite the same thing 
as the psychotherapeutic gambit of “accepting” negative feelings 
in order to change them, that is, with the intention of effecting a 
shift of the whole tone of feeling in the direction of the positive 
and “good.” “Acceptance” of this kind still implies the ego, 
standing apart from the immediate feeling or experience, and 
waiting for it to change—however patiently and submissively. 

So long as the sense of the observing subject remains, there is 
the effort, however indirect, to control feeling from the outside, 
which is resistance setting up turmoil in the stream. Resistance 
disappears and the balancing process comes into full effect not by 
intention on the part of the subject, but only as it is seen that the 
feeling of being the subject, the ego, is itself part of the stream of 
experience and does not stand outside it in a controlling position. 
In the words of Chuang-tzu: 


Only the truly intelligent understand this principle of the 
identity of all things. They do not view things as apprehended 
by themselves, subjectively, but transfer themselves into the 
position of the things viewed. And viewing them thus they are 
able to comprehend them, nay, to master them. 26 


However, the point might be expressed more exactly by saying 
that the subject is treated not as an object but as the inseparable 
pole or term of a subject-object identity. The dividedness of the 
knower and the known becomes, without being simply 
obliterated, the plainest sign of their inner unity. 

This is, indeed, the crucial point of the whole unitive 
philosophy of nature as it is set forward in Taoism and Buddhism, 
and which distinguishes it from a merely monistic pantheism. 
Distinct and unique events, whether external objects or the 
internal subject, are seen to be “one with nature” by virtue of 
their very distinctness, and not at all by absorption into a 
featureless uniformity. Once again, it is the mutual distinction of 


figure and ground, subject and object, and not their merging 
which reveals their inner identity. A Zen master was asked, “I 
have heard that there is one thing which cannot be named. It has 
not been born; it will not die when the body dies. When the 
universe burns up it will not be affected. What is that one thing?” 
The master answered, “A sesame bun.” 

In addition, then, to the mood of yugen, of mysterious and 
pregnant vagueness, which haunts Far Eastern painting, there is 
also an immensely forceful delineation of the unique event—the 
single bird, the spray of bamboo, the solitary tree, the lonely 
rock. Hence the sudden awakening to this “inner identity” which 
in Zen is called satori is usually precipitated by, or bound up 
with, some such simple fact as the sound of a berry falling in the 
forest or the sight of a piece of crumpled paper in the street. 
There is thus a double meaning in Suzuki’s translation of the 
poem: 


Oh, this one rare occurrence, 

For which would I not be glad to give ten thousand pieces of gold! 
A hat is on my head, a bundle round my loins; 

And on my staff the refreshing breeze and the full moon I carry! 


For the “one rare occurrence” is at once the satori experience and 
the unique event to which it is attached—one implying all, 
moment implying eternity. But to state the implication is, in a 
way, to say too much, especially if it were taken to mean that the 
perception of the particular ought to make us think about the 
universal. On the contrary, the universality of the unique event 
and the eternity of the moment come to be seen only as the 
straining of the mind is released and the present event, whatever 
it may be, is regarded without the slightest attempt to get 
anything from it. However, this attempt is so habitual that it can 
hardly be stopped, so that whenever anyone tries to accept the 
moment just as it is he becomes aware only of the frustration of 
himself trying to do so. This seems to present an unbreakable 
vicious circle—unless he realizes that the moment which he was 
trying to accept has now moved on and is presenting itself to him 
as his own sensation of strain! If he feels it to be voluntary, there 
is no problem in accepting it, for it is his own immediate act. If 
he feels it to be involuntary, he must perforce accept it, for he 


can do no other. Either way, the strain is accepted and it 
dissolves. But this is also the discovery of the inner identity of the 
voluntary and the involuntary, the subjective and the objective. 
For when the object, the moment to be accepted, presented itself 
as the sensation of the strain of trying to accept, this was the 
subject, the ego itself. In the words of the Zen master P’u-yen, 
“Nothing is left to you at this moment but to burst out into a loud 
laugh. You have accomplished a final turning and in very truth 
know that ‘when a cow in Kuai-chou grazes the herbage, a horse 
in I-chou finds its stomach filled.’ ”27 

In sum, then, the realization that nature is ordered organically 
rather than politically, that it is a field of relationships rather 
than a collection of things, requires an appropriate mode of 
human awareness. The habitual egocentric mode in which man 
identifies himself with a subject facing a world of alien objects 
does not fit the physical situation. So long as it remains, our 
inward feeling is at variance with reality. Based on this feeling, 
our efforts to control ourselves and the surrounding world 
become viciously circular entanglements of ever-growing 
complexity. More and more the individual feels himself frustrated 
and impotent in the midst of a mechanical world order which has 
become an irresistible “march of progress” toward ends of its 
own. Therapies for the frustrated individual, whether religious or 
psychological, merely complicate the problem in so far as they 
assume that the separate ego is the very reality toward which 
their ministrations are directed. For, as Trigant Burrow saw, the 
source of the trouble is social rather than individual: that is to 
say, the ego is a social convention foisted upon human 
consciousness by conditioning. The root of mental disorder is not 
therefore a malfunctioning peculiar to this or that ego; it is rather 
that the ego-feeling as such is an error of perception. To placate it 
is only to enable it to go on confusing the mind with a mode of 
awareness which, because it clashes with the natural order, 
breeds the vast family of psychological frustrations and illnesses. 

An organic natural order has its proper correspondence in a 
mode of consciousness which is a total feeling or experiencing. 
Where feeling is broken up into the feeler and the feeling, the 
knower and the known, what lies between the two is not 
relationship but mere juxtaposition. Identified with one of its 
terms alone, consciousness feels “out on a limb” facing an alien 


world which it controls only to find it more and more 
uncontrollable, and which it exploits only to find it more and 
more ungratifying. 


1 Hume (1), p. 252. 


2 For the characters see Mathews’ Chinese-English Dictionary 3864 (li) and 
6746 (tse). For the original forms, see Karlgren’s Grammata Serica 978 and 
906. Since the Romanized forms of Chinese words give little clue to the 
actual written term, we shall hereinafter identify Chinese terms with their 
numbers in the Mathews Dictionary, e.g., M 3864. 


3 Yung, M 7560. 

4 Huai Nan Tzu, 9. Tr. Needham (1), vol. 2, p. 561. 
5 M 3575. 

6 Tr. Needham (1), vol. 2, pp. 561-62. 

7H. A. Giles (1), p. 171. 


s Ying, M 7477. Needham points out that this is the technical term for 
“resonance,” an idea basic to the Chinese philosophy of the relations 
between events, derived from the Book of Changes. Cf. Eckhart, “If my eye 
is to discern color, it must itself be free from color.” 


9M 502. Also “effects” or “searching out.” 
10 Chi Shan Chi, 4. Tr. Needham (1), vol. 2, p. 89. 


11 The habitual straining of the mind can be relaxed temporarily by the use 
of certain drugs, such as alcohol, mescalin, and lysergic acid. Whereas 
alcohol dulls the clarity of awareness, mescalin and lysergic acid do not. 
Consequently these two, and sometimes also nitrous oxide and carbon 
dioxide, will induce states of consciousness in which the individual feels 
his relational identity with the whole realm of nature. Although these 
states appear to be similar to those realized through more “natural” 
means, they differ in the sense that being able to swim with a life jacket 
differs from swimming unaided. From personal, though limited, 
experimentation with a research group working with lysergic acid, I would 
judge that the state of consciousness induced is confused with a mystical 
state because of similarities of language used in describing the two. The 
experience is multidimensional, as if everything were inside, or implied, 
everything else, requiring a description which is paradoxical from the 
standpoint of ordinary logic. But whereas the drug gives a vision of nature 
which is infinitely complex, the mystical state is clarifying, and gives a 
vision which is as infinitely simple. The drug seems to give the intelligence 
a kaleidescopic quality which “patterns” the perception of relations in 
accordance with its own peculiar structure. 


12 In my Supreme Identity 1 put forward a view of the Vedanta which very 
carefully explained its difference from pantheism and from all those types 
of “acosmistic’ mysticsm which seem to idealize the complete 
disappearance of the natural world from consciousness. Nevertheless, it 


was criticized by Reinhold Niebuhr in The Nation for advocating exactly 
those views which it opposed, an interesting example of the fact that 
Christian polemicists spend a good deal of energy attacking points of view 
which exist only in their own minds. 


13 Waley (1), pp. 21-22. 

14H. A. Giles (1), p. 345. 

15s Eckermann (1). February 18th, 1829. 

16 Whitehead (1), p. 248. 

17 M 6246. 

is On which see Needham (1), vol. 2, pp. 89-98. 

19 Waley ()), p. 22. 

20 An excellent example of sensitivity to the moment is found in the 
application of Zen to kendo, or swordsmanship. No amount of drilled-in 
rules or reflexes can prepare the swordsman for the infinity of different 
attacks which he may have to face, especially when confronted with more 
than one opponent. He is taught, therefore, never to make any specific 
preparation for attack nor to expect it from any particular direction. 
Otherwise, to meet an unusual attack he will have to retreat from one 
stance before being able to adopt another. He must be able to spring 
immediately from a relaxed center of rest to the direction required. This 
relaxed openness of sensitivity in every direction is precisely kuan, or, as it 
is more commonly called in Zen, mushin, which is to say no “mind,” no 
strain of the mind to watch for a particular result. 

21 Chuang-tzu, ii. Cf. H. A. Giles (1), p. 14, Lin Yutang (2), p. 235, and 
Needham (1), vol. 2, p. 52. 


22 Chuang-tzu Chu, iii, 25. Tr. Bodde in Fung Yu-lan (1), vol. 2, p. 211. 
23 For a fuller discussion of this theme see Jung (1), and Watts (2), ch. 2. 
24H. A. Giles (1), pp. 207-8. 


25 Lieh-tzu, 2. L. Giles (1), p. 41, translates this passage, “my mind (hsin) gave 
free rein to its reflections (nien),” but this is rather too intellectual since 
hsin (M 2735) is not so much the thinking mind as the totality of psychic 
functioning, conscious and unconscious, and nien (M 4716) is not so much 
cortical thought as any event of psychic experience. 

26 Chuang-tzu, 2. Tr. H. A. Giles (1), p. 20. 


27 Suzuki (3), p. 80. 


4: The World as Ecstasy 


DEEPLY INVOLVED WITH OUR WHOLE ESTRANGEMENT from nature is the 
embarrassment of “having” a body. It is perhaps an egg-and-hen 
question as to whether we resent the body because we think we 
are spirits, or vice versa. But we are accustomed to feeling that 
our bodies are vehicles in which we are compelled to live, 
vehicles which are at once all too much ourselves and yet utterly 
foreign. Responding only most imperfectly to the will and 
resisting the comprehension of the intellect, the body seems to be 
thrust upon us like an indispensable wife with whom it is 
impossible to live. We love it most dearly, and yet must spend 
most of our time working to support it. Its five senses, delicate 
and vibrant, communicate the whole delight and glory of the 
world at the price of being equally receptive to its agony and 
horror. For the body is sensitive because it is soft, pliant, and 
impressionable, but it lives in a universe which is for the most 
part rock and fire. When young we let our consciousness expand 
with joy through all the innumerable passages of its nerves, but 
as time goes on we begin to withdraw, and beg the surgeon to 
“fix” it like a wayward machine, to cut away the pieces which rot 
and ache, and to dope the jangling senses which so 
inconsiderately retain their alertness while all else deteriorates. 
Modestly and graciously posed, the naked form of man or woman 
is revered as the height of beauty, yet this same form can turn in 
an instant lascivious or grotesque, disgusting or uncouth, by the 
slightest change of posture or activity—so easily, indeed, that for 
most of the time we conceal it from sight with clothing, beneath 
which it grows pallid and potatoish like the white slugs that live 
under rocks. 

The body is so alien to the mind that even when it is at its best 
it is not so much loved as exploited, and for the remainder of the 
time we do what we may to put it in a state of comfort where it 
may be forgotten, where its limitations will not encumber the 
play of emotion and thought. But contrive as we will to transcend 


this physical vehicle, the clarity of consciousness goes hand in 
hand with the sensitivity of nerves and thus with inevitable 
exposure to revulsion and pain. This is so much so that the 
hardness and painfulness of things become the measure of their 
reality. What does not resist us becomes dreamlike and 
impalpable, but in the shock of pain we know that we are alive 
and awake, and thus come to think of the real as that which 
conflicts most abruptly with the whole nature of sensitivity. One 
has thus never heard of soft facts, only of hard. Yet it is just 
because there are such soft facts as eyeballs and finger-tips that 
the hard are manifested. 

But to the extent that the measure of reality is felt to be the 
degree of resistance and pain which the environment offers to our 
nerves, the body becomes above all else the instrument of our 
suffering. It negates our will; it decays before we have lost the 
capacity for disgust; its possession exposes us to all the twenty- 
one measurable degrees of agony by the cruelty of human torture, 
by accident, or by disease. Those who are fortunate enough to 
escape the worst that can happen are nevertheless tormented 
with imaginations of what might be, and their skins tingle and 
their stomachs turn in sympathy and horror at the fate of others. 

It is little wonder, then, that we seek detachment from the 
body, wanting to convince ourselves that the real “I” is not this 
quaking mass of tissue with all its repulsive possibilities for pain 
and corruption. It is little wonder that we expect religions, 
philosophies, and other forms of wisdom to show us above all 
else a way of deliverance from suffering, from the plight of being 
a soft body in a world of hard reality. Sometimes therefore it 
seems that the answer is to match hardness with hardness, to 
identify ourselves with a spirit which has principles but no 
feelings, to despise and mortify the body, and to withdraw into 
the comfortably fleshless world of abstract thought or psychic 
fantasy. To match the hardness of facts we then identify our 
minds with such symbols of fixity, entity, and power as the ego, 
the will, and the immortal soul, believing ourselves to belong in 
our inmost being to a realm of spirit beyond both the hardness of 
fact and the weakness of flesh. This is, as it were, a shrinking of 
consciousness from its environment of pain, gathering itself back 
and back into a knot around its own center. 

Yet it is just in this shrinking and hardening that consciousness 


not only loses its true strength but also aggravates its plight. For 
the withdrawal from suffering is also suffering, such that the 
restricted and enclosed consciousness of the ego is really a spasm 
of fear. As a man with a stomach wound craves water, which it is 
fatal to drink, the mind’s chronic withdrawal from suffering 
renders it just that much more vulnerable. Fully expanded, 
consciousness feels an identity with the whole world, but 
contracted it is the more inescapably attached to a single minute 
and perishable organism. 

This is not to say that it is fatal for nerves and muscles to draw 
back from a sharp spike or some other occasion of pain, for did 
they not do so the organism would swiftly cease to exist. The 
withdrawal I am speaking of here is much deeper: it is a 
withdrawal from withdrawal, an unwillingness to be capable of 
feeling pain, unwillingness to squirm and shrink when the 
occasion of pain arises. Subtle as this distinction may be, it is of 
immense importance, though it may seem at first that pain and 
the unwillingness to react painfully are the same thing. But it 
must be obvious that unless the organism can feel pain, it cannot 
withdraw from danger, so that the unwillingness to be able to be 
hurt is in fact suicidal, whereas the simple retreat from an 
occasion of pain is not. It is true that we want to have our cake 
and eat it: we want to be sensitive and alive, but not sensitive to 
suffering. But this puts us in a contradiction of the specially 
intolerable type known as a “double bind.” 

The “double bind” is a situation wherein all the alternatives 
offered are forbidden. A witness in court is put in a double bind 
when the attorney asks him, “Have you stopped beating your 
wife? Answer yes or no!” Either answer will convict him of 
beating her. So also when suffering arises we want to escape both 
from its objective occasion and from its subjective reactions. But 
when escape from the former is impossible, so is escape from the 
latter. We must suffer—that is, we must react in the only way that 
is open to us, which would naturally be to writhe, shriek, or 
weep. Now the double bind comes in when we forbid ourselves 
this reaction, either in actual suffering or in the imagination of 
suffering to come. We revolt at the prospect of our own orgiastic 
reactions to pain because they are in flat contradiction with our 
socially conditioned image of ourselves. Such reactions are a 
fearful admission of the identity of consciousness with the 


organism, of the lack of a detached, powerful, and transcending 
will which is the essential core of the personality. 

Hence the sadist and torturer takes his most unholy delight not 
just in watching the bodily convulsions of his victim, but in 
“breaking the spirit” which resists them. Yet if there were no 
resisting spirit his savagery would be rendered something like 
slashing at water with a sword, and he would find himself 
confronted with a total weakness that offered neither challenge 
nor interest. But it is exactly this weakness which is the mind’s 
real and unsuspected strength. In Lao-tzu’s words: 


Man when living is soft and tender; when dead he is hard 
and tough. All animals and plants are tender and fragile; when 
dead they become withered and dry. Therefore it is said: the 
hard and the tough are parts of death; the soft and tender are 
parts of life. This is the reason why the soldiers when they are 
too tough cannot carry the day; the tree when it is too tough 
will break. The position of the strong and great is low, and the 
position of the weak and tender is high.1 lxxvi 


There appear, then, to be two unexpected consequences of 
unreservedly permitting the organism its natural, orgiastic 
response to pain, of which one is the ability to endure pain and 
its anticipation by reason of a far greater amount of “give” in the 
system. The other is that this, in turn, cuts down the total shock 
of suffering upon the organism, which furthermore reduces the 
intensity of the reactions. In other words, the toughening of the 
spirit against suffering and the shrinking of consciousness from 
the orgiastic reactions which it involves are a socially inculcated 
error of behavior, making the human situation far worse than it 
need be. Moreover, this shrinking of consciousness from our 
reactions to suffering is at root the same_ psychological 
mechanism as the straining of consciousness to get the most from 
our reactions to pleasure, and both make up the sensation of the 
separate, indwelling ego. 

This is surely the reason why so many spiritual traditions insist 
that the way to liberation from egocentricity is through suffering. 
Yet this is so often misunderstood as “practice suffering,” as 
toughening oneself against suffering by increasing doses of 
mortification to harden the body and soul. Interpreted in this 


way, the spiritual discipline of suffering becomes a way of death 
and insensitivity, of final withdrawal from life into a “spiritual” 
world which is totally removed from nature. It is to correct this 
error that Mahayana Buddhism maintains that “nirvana and 
samsara are not different,” that the state of liberation is not away 
from the state of nature, and that the liberated Bodhisattva 
returns indefinitely into the “round of birth-and-death” out of his 
compassion for all sentient beings. For the same reason Buddhist 
doctrine denies the reality of a separate ego, saying: 


Suffering alone exists, none who suffer; 
The deed there is, but no doer thereof; 
Nirvana is, but no one seeking it; 

Path there is, but none who travel it.2 


And again, unexpectedly, the dissolution of the egocentric 
contraction (sankocha) of consciousness by no means reduces the 
personality to a flabby nonentity. On the contrary, the organism 
is at its greatest strength in realizing the fullest possible relation 
to its environment—a relation which is hardly felt at all when the 
individualized consciousness tries to preserve itself by separation 
from the body and from all that it experiences. “Whosoever 
would save his soul shall lose it,” and we should understand this 
“save” as “salvage,” as enclosing and isolating. Conversely, we 
should understand that the soul or personality lives just to the 
degree that it does not withdraw, that it does not shrink from the 
full implications of being one with the body and with the whole 
realm of natural experience. For although this seems to suggest 
the absorption of man into the flux of nature, the integrity of 
personality is far better preserved by the faith of self-giving than 
the shattering anxiety of self-preservation. 

We saw that the shrinking of consciousness from suffering and 
the straining of consciousness to seek gratification are at root the 
same. In each case the way of dissolution is also the same, and 
involves first of all the recognition that consciousness, in so far as 
it feels itself to be the ego, cannot stop its own shrinking, its 
revulsion from the orgiastic response to pain. It must therefore be 
understood that this revulsion is itself part and parcel of the 
orgiastic response, and not, as we are led to believe, a means of 
escape from it. This is, in other words, the recognition that all our 


psychological defenses against suffering are useless. The more we 
defend, the more we suffer, and defending is itself suffering. 
Although we cannot help putting up the psychological defense, it 
dissolves when it is seen that the defense is all of a piece with 
what we are defending ourselves against. The entire movement is 
the convulsion of suffering which does not lead away from 
suffering. Continued as a means to get rid of suffering, it merely 
intensifies it. But continued because this is simply the natural 
response to which, if we do not deceive ourselves, we must give 
in, the whole experience of suffering undergoes a startling 
change. 

It becomes what in Indian philosophy is called ananda, 
ordinarily translated “bliss.” Ananda is attributed to Brahman, the 
ultimate Reality beyond all dualities, together with sat, truth, and 
chit, awareness. Yet we usually consider bliss to be an extremely 
dualistic state of mind—an extreme of happiness or pleasure, 
opposed to an equal extreme of misery or pain. There would seem 
to be a serious contradiction in making anything so relative as 
bliss one of the attributes of the Absolute. For if bliss is realized 
in contrast with abject misery as light is known in contrast with 
darkness, how is it possible to contemplate a bliss which is 
nondual and eternal? 

It must first be understood that Indian philosophy uses a 
convention of terminology similar to the trick of perspective, of 
representing a three-dimensional object upon a two-dimensional 
surface. Any line drawn upon a flat surface will be more or less 
horizontal or perpendicular, spanning the height and the width of 
the area. But by the convention of perspective, slanting lines 
which approach a vanishing point are understood to represent the 
third dimension of depth. As the flat surface has but two 
dimensions, so our ordinary thought and language has a rigidly 
dualistic logic, in terms of which it makes no sense to speak of 
that which “neither is nor is not,” nor of a bliss which transcends 
both pleasure and pain. But just as one can suggest three 
dimensions in terms of two, dualistic language can suggest an 
experience beyond duality. The very word “nondual” (advaita) is, 
formally speaking, the opposite of “dual” (dvaita), as bliss is the 
opposite of misery. But Indian philosophy uses advaita and 
ananda in a context where they refer to another dimension of 
experience, as lines that are more or less high or wide are taken 


to signify depth. Furthermore, this other dimension of experience 
is understood to be of a higher order of reality than the dualistic 
dimension, where life and death, pleasure and pain stand utterly 
apart. 

What we feel is to an enormous and unsuspected degree 
dependent on what we think, and the basic contrasts of thought 
ordinarily strike us as the basic contrasts of the natural world. We 
therefore take it for granted that we feel an immense difference 
between pleasure and pain. But it is obvious in some of the 
milder forms of these sensations that the pleasure or the pain lies 
not so much in the feeling itself as in its context. There is no 
appreciable physiological difference between shudders of delight 
and shudders of fear, nor between the thrills of rapturous music 
and the thrills of terrifying melodrama. Likewise, intensities of 
joy and grief produce the same “heartbreak” feeling which is 
expressed in weeping, and to fall deeply in love is to enter a state 
where delight and anguish are at times so interwoven as to be 
indistinguishable. But the context of the feeling changes its 
interpretation, depending on whether the circumstances which 
arouse it are for us or against us. Similarly, one and the same 
verbal sound changes its meaning according to the setting, as in 
Thomas Hood’s 


They went and told the sexton, 
And the sexton tolled the bell. 


It is easy enough to see the sensational or physiological identity 
of these feelings in some of the milder forms of physical pleasure 
and pain, and even in some of the strong forms of moral pleasure 
and pain. But it is exceedingly difficult to see it when these 
sensations become more acute. Nevertheless, there are special 
circumstances of heightened feeling, such as religious devotion 
and sexual passion, in which far more poignant types of pleasure 
and pain lose their distinction. Ordinarily, such ascetic disciplines 
as self-flagellation, wearing hair shirts, and kneeling on chains 
are adopted to do violence to the desire for pleasure. Yet it is 
possible that asceticism is a way of genuine spiritual insight 
because it leads eventually, however unintentionally, to the 
realization that in the ardor of devotion pleasure and pain are a 
single ecstasy. Consider, for example, Bernini’s celebrated effigy 


of St. Theresa of Avila in rapture, pierced by the dart of the 
divine love. The face is equally expressive of ravishment or 
torture, and the smile of the angel wielding the dart is 
accordingly compassionate or cruel. 

Perverse and abnormal as they are usually regarded, we should 
also consider the phenomena of sadism and masochism—better 
designated by the single term algolagnia, or “lustful pain.” Merely 
to dismiss these phenomena as perverse and unnatural is to say 
no more than that they do not fit into a preconceived notion of 
order. The very fact that they are human possibilities shows that 
they are extensions of ordinary feelings, revealing depths of our 
nature which are usually left unexplored. Distasteful as they may 
be, this should not prevent us from trying to discover whether 
they throw any light on the problem of suffering. 

The sadist is really a vicarious masochist, for in inflicting pain 
he identifies himself emotionally with his victim, and gives a 
sexual interpretation to his victim’s reactions to pain. For 
masochism or algolagnia is the association of the orgiastic 
convulsions of pain with sexual ecstasy, and involves far more 
than that the two types of reaction look somewhat alike to an 
external observer. The masochist finds in pain of certain types a 
positive stimulant to sexual orgasm, and as the intensity of his 
feeling increases he is able to delight in harsher and harsher 
degrees of pain. The standard Freudian explanation is that the 
masochist so associates sexual pleasure with guilt that he cannot 
permit himself this pleasure unless he is also being punished. This 
seems to me to be doubtful and, like so much Freudian reasoning, 
unnecessarily complex, stretching facts to fit theories at all costs. 
For masochism is found in cultures where sexuality and sin are 
not allied to anything like the degree to which they are wedded 
in the Christian West.3 It would be simpler and more reasonable 
to say that the masochist intensifies or stimulates sexual reactions 
by inducing similar reactions arising from pain. To this it should 
be added that the masochist’s desire to be subjugated or 
humiliated is allied to the fact that all sexual ecstasy, male or 
female, has a quality of self-abandonment, of surrender to a force 
greater than the ego. 

A still more notable instance of the pleasure-pain identity has 
come to light in the work of the British obstetrician Grantley Dick 
Reid in his remarkably successful techniques of natural 


childbirth. Labor pains may ordinarily reach a degree of extreme 
severity so as to reach almost the highest level of pain which the 
organism can experience. The interest of Reid’s technique is that 
it focuses the mother’s attention on the feeling of the uterine 
contraction itself, dissociating it from socially implanted ideas of 
how it is supposed to feel. So long as she regards it as a pain she 
will resist it, but if she can approach it simply as a tension she 
can be shown how to go with it and relax into it—a technique 
which is learned through prenatal exercises. By thus abandoning 
herself without reserve to the spontaneous contractions of the 
uterus, she can experience childbirth as an extremely strong 
physical ecstasy rather than a torture. 

Now it may appear that all these types of pleasure-pain are 
induced hypnotically, through the circumstances of religious 
devotion, sexual passion, or the physician’s authoritative 
suggestions. To some extent this is perhaps true, although it 
might be better to call it a counterhypnotism, counter, that is, to 
the immense force of social suggestion which has taught us since 
babyhood how we ought to interpret our sensations and feelings. 
Surely the child learns much of how he should experience his 
sensations of pain from the attitudes of sympathy, horror, or 
disgust displayed by his parents. In these attitudes the child sees 
sympathetic resistances to pain which he learns to make for 
himself. 

On the other hand, circumstances of religious ardor, sexual 
passion, or medical assurance create an atmosphere in which the 
organism can permit its own spontaneous reactions to the full. 
Under these conditions the organism is no longer split into the 
natural animal and the controlling ego. The whole being is one 
with its own spontaneity and feels free to let go with the utmost 
abandon. The same conditions are induced by such religious 
exercises as the dervish dance or the chanting of mantrams, the 
rites of the Penitentes or the glossolalia (tongue-blabbering) of 
Pentecostal preachers. But the frantic, explosive, and even 
dangerous character of some of these abandonments to 
spontaneity is largely the result of its normal restraint. In a 
culture where sex is calculated, religion decorous, dancing polite, 
music refined or sentimental, and yielding to pain shameful, 
many people have never experienced full spontaneity. Little or 
nothing is known of its integrating, cathartic, and purifying 


consequences, let alone of the fact that it may not only be 
creatively controlled, but also become a constant way of life. 
Under such circumstances the cultivation of spontaneity is left to 
the “social underground” of Negro revivals, jam sessions, or rock- 
and-roll parties. We cannot even conceive that Coomaraswamy’s 
description of the sage as living “a perpetual uncalculated life in 
the present”4 could mean anything but total disorder. 

The point here, however, is that when the organism’s natural 
reactions to pain are permitted without restraint, pain goes 
beyond pleasure and pain to ecstasy, which is really the proper 
equivalent of ananda. We begin here to find an approach to the 
mystery of human suffering which is adequate to the immense 
inevitability of the problem. This is not to say that our efforts to 
reduce the amount of pain in the world should be given up, but 
only that at best they are pitifully insufficient. The same 
insufficiency affects all the ordinary religious and philosophical 
rationalizations, wherein suffering is somehow explained away as 
a temporary means in the fulfillment of a. divine plan or as a 
penalty for sin or as an illusion of the finite mind. One feels 
almost instinctively that some of these answers are an affront to 
the dignity of suffering and to its overwhelming reality for every 
single form of life. For as we look back and forward into the 
history of the universe we find little evidence and little assurance 
of orderly comfort as anything but a rarity. Life has been and 
looks as if it will be for the most part convulsive and catastrophic, 
maintaining itself by slaying and eating itself.s The problem of 
suffering will therefore continue to have a kind of awesome 
holiness so long as life depends in any way upon the pain of even 
a single creature. 

One must respect the Indian ideal of ahimsa or “harmlessness” 
and the Buddhist monk’s reduction of killing and causing pain to 
the utmost minimum. But in effect this abstinence is no more 
than a gesture which, when we really come down to it, is a 
retreat from the problem. Again, the answer to the problem of 
suffering is not away from the problem but in it. The inevitability 
of pain will not be met by deadening sensitivity but by increasing 
it, by exploring and feeling out the manner in which the natural 
organism itself wants to react and which its innate wisdom has 
provided. The physician attending the deathbed will have to use 
the same means as the physician attending childbed, creating an 


atmosphere in which the physical or moral revulsions to death 
and its pains are fully permitted and encouraged. The feelings of 
a suffering being must be allowed to move unblocked as nature 
directs them, subject only to the external control of destructive 
action. 

We begin to see, then, that the answer to suffering is the 
organism’s response to it, its innate tendency to transmute 
unavoidable pain into ecstasy. This is the insight which underlies 
the cosmological myth of Hinduism, where the world in all the 
fullness of its delight and horror is seen as the ecstasy of God, 
perpetually incarnating himself by an act of self-abandonment in 
the myriad forms of creatures. This is why Shiva, the divine 
prototype of all suffering and destruction, is Nataraja, the “Lord 
of the Dance.” For the everlasting, agonizing dissolution and 
renewal of life is the dance of Shiva, always ecstatic because it is 
without inner conflict, because in other words it is nondual— 
without the resistance of a controller external to the controlled, 
without any other principle of motion than its own sahaja, or 
spontaneity. 

Left thus to itself, the spontaneity of the organism encounters 
no obstacle to its continued movement, which, like flowing 
water, perpetually finds out the course of least resistance, for as 
Lao-tzu said: 


The highest goodness is like water. Water is beneficent to all 
things but does not contend. It stays in [lowly] places which 
others despise. Therefore it is near Tao.6 viii 


Because it does not block itself, the course of feeling acquires a 
sensation of freedom or “voidness,” represented in Buddhist and 
Taoist terminology as wu-hsin—that is, “egolessness” or “no- 
mindness”—no feeler in conflict with feeling. In sorrow as in joy, 
in pain as in pleasure, the natural reactions follow one another 
without hindrance “like a ball in a mountain stream.” 

Suffering and death—all that dark and destructive side of 
nature for which Shiva stands—are therefore problematic for the 
ego rather than the organism. The organism accepts them 
through ecstasy, but the ego is rigid and unyielding and finds 
them problematic because they affront its pride. For, as Trigant 
Burrow has shown, the ego is the social image or role with which 


the mind is shamed into identifying itself, since we are taught to 
act the part which society wants us to play—the part of a reliable 
and predictable center of action which resists spontaneous 
change. But in extreme suffering and in death this part cannot be 
played, and as a result they become associated with all the shame 
and fear with which, as children, we were forced into becoming 
acceptable egos. Death and agony are therefore dreaded as loss of 
status, and their struggles are desperate attempts to maintain the 
assumed patterns of action and feeling. Yet in some traditional 
societies the individual prepares for death by abandoning status 
before he dies, that is, by relinquishing his role or caste and 
becoming, with full social approval, a “nobody.” In practice, 
however, this is often frustrated by the fact that being “nobody” 
becomes a new kind of status—the formal role of “holy man” or 
sanyassin, the conventionally ecclesiastical monk. 

The fear of spontaneity from which this arises is based not only 
on the confusion of the natural and biological type of order with 
the political, with legal and enforced order. 

It arises also from failure to see that the socially problematic 
spontaneity of little children is as yet unco-or-dinated and 
“embryonic.” We then make the mistake of socializing children, 
not by developing their spontaneity, but by developing a system 
of resistances and fears which, as it were, splits the organism into 
a spontaneous center and an inhibiting center. Thus it is rare 
indeed to find an integrated person capable of self-controlling 
spontaneity, which sounds like a contradiction in terms. It is as if 
we were teaching our children to walk by lifting up their feet 
with their own hands instead of moving their legs from within. 
We do not see that before spontaneity can control itself it must be 
able to function. The legs must have full freedom of movement 
before they can acquire the discipline of walking and running or 
dancing. For disciplined motion is the control of relaxed motion. 
Similarly, disciplined action and feeling is the direction of relaxed 
action and feeling to prearranged ends. The pianist must 
therefore acquire relaxation and freedom in his arms and fingers 
before he can execute complex musical figures, but much 
abominable technique has been acquired by forcing the fingers to 
perform piano exercises without preliminary relaxation.7 

Spontaneity is, after all, total sincerity—the whole being 
involved in the act without the slightest reservation—and as a 


rule the civilized adult is goaded into it only by abject despair, 
intolerable suffering, or imminent death. Hence the proverb, 
“Man’s extremity is God’s opportunity.” Thus a modern Hindu 
sage has remarked that the first thing he has to teach Westerners 
who come to him is how to cry, which also goes to show that our 
spontaneity is inhibited not only by the ego-complex as such but 
also by the Anglo-Saxon conception of masculinity. So far from 
being a form of strength, the masculine rigidity and toughness 
which we affect is nothing more than an emotional paralysis. It is 
assumed not because we are in control of our feelings but because 
we fear them, along with everything in our nature that is 
symbolically feminine and yielding. But a man who is 
emotionally paralyzed cannot be male, that is, he cannot be male 
in relation to female, for if he is to relate himself to a woman 
there must be something of the woman in his nature. 


He who knows the masculine and yet keeps to the feminine 
Will become a channel drawing all the world towards it; 


Being a channel for the world, he will not be severed from the eternal 
virtue, 

And then he can return again to the state of infancy (i.e., to 
spontaneity).s xxviii 


Childlikeness, or artless simplicity, is the ideal of the artist no 
less than of the sage, for it is to perform the work of art or of life 
without the least trace of affectation, of being in two minds. But 
the way to the child is through the woman, through yielding to 
spontaneity, through giving in to just what one is, moment by 
moment, in the ceaselessly changing course of nature. It is to this 
“just what one is” that the Hindu adage Tat tvam asi—“That art 
thou”—trefers, and That is the eternal, nondual Brahman. To the 
degree, however, that this way is not one of anxiety-ridden self- 
control, it is equally removed from the exhibitionism of the arty 
libertine whose display of “being himself” is designed to shock 
and draw attention. His vices are as hypocritical as a Pharisee’s 
virtues. I remember an avant-garde party at which a number of 
young men wandering around stark naked were more fully 
clothed than anyone else in the room, failing to realize that 
nakedness is a state that we cannot avoid. For our clothes, our 
skins, our personalities, our virtues and our vices are as 


transparent as space. We cannot lay claim to them, and there is 
no one to lay the claim, since the self is as transparent as its 
garments. 

Empty and nihilistic as it may sound, this recognition of total 
nakedness and transparency is a joy beyond all telling, for what is 
empty is not reality itself but all that seems to block its light. 


Old P’ang requires nothing in the world: 

All is empty with him, even a seat he has not, 

For absolute Emptiness reigns in his household; 

How empty indeed it is with no treasures! 

When the sun is risen, he walks through Emptiness, 
When the sun sets, he sleeps in Emptiness; 

Sitting in Emptiness he sings his empty songs, 

And his empty songs reverberate through Emptiness. 9 


To name or symbolize the joyous content of this emptiness is 
always to say too much, to put, as they say in Zen, legs upon the 
snake. For in Buddhist philosophy emptiness (sunyata) denotes 
the most solid and basic reality, though it is called empty because 
it never becomes an object of knowledge. This is because, being 
common to all related terms—figure and ground, solid and space, 
motion and rest—it is never seen in contrast with anything else 
and thus is never seen as an object. It may be called the 
fundamental reality or substance of the world only by analogy, 
for strictly speaking reality is known by contrast with unreality, 
and substance or stuff by contrast with shape or with empty 
space. However, it may be realized by the intuitive wisdom which 
Buddhists call prajna, for, as we have seen, it is really obvious 
that all related terms have an “inner identity” which, not being 
one of the terms, is in the true sense of the word 
“interminable”—unable to be described or imagined. For prajna is 
the mode of knowledge which is direct, which is not knowledge 
in terms of words, symbols, images, and logical classes with their 
inevitable duality of inside and outside. 

The “emptiness” of the universe also signifies the fact that the 
outlines, forms, and boundaries to which we attach all terms are 
in constant change, and in this sense its reality cannot be fixed or 
limited. It is called empty because it cannot be grasped, for even 


the hills are shadows, 
And they flow from form to form, 
And nothing stands. 


Yet all man’s resistance to Shiva, to change, suffering, dissolution, 
and death, is a resistance to being transparent, even though the 
resistance itself is as a phantom hand clutching at clouds. 
Suffering is ultimately ecstasy because it pries loose our 
strangling grasp upon ourselves and melts “this all too solid 
flesh.” For the everlasting renewal and dissolution of the world is 
the most emphatic and inescapable revelation of the fact that 
“form is emptiness, and emptiness itself is form,” and that the 
agonized ego is a ring of defense around nothing. The transience 
from which we seek liberation is the very liberator. 

There are no means or methods for understanding this, for 
every such device is artfulness, is ultimately an attempt to 
become something, to be more than this melting moment which 
the utmost tension of the will cannot hold. Belief in an 
unchanging God, an immortal soul, or even in a deathless nirvana 
as something to be gained is all part of this artfulness, as is 
equally the sterile certainty and aggressive cocksureness of 
atheism and scientific materialism. There is no way to where we 
are, and whoever seeks one finds only a slick wall of granite 
without passage or foothold. Yogas, prayers, therapies, and 
spiritual exercises are at root only elaborate postponements of the 
recognition that there is nothing to be grasped and no way to 
grasp it. 

This is not to say that there is no God or to deny the possibility 
that there is some form of personal continuity beyond death. It is 
rather to say that a God to be grasped or believed in is no God, 
and that a continuity to be wished for is only a continuity of 
bondage. Death presents itself to us as the possibility of sleep 
without waking, or at most as the possibility of waking up as 
someone else altogether—just as we did when we were born. 
Depressing or frightening as it may appear at first sight, the 
thought of sleep without waking—ever—is strangely fruitful, 
since it works 


To tease us out of thought, as doth eternity. 


Such a contemplation of death renders the hard core of “I-ness” 
already insubstantial, the more so as we go into it thoroughly and 
see that sleep without waking is not to be confused with the 
fantasy of being shut up forever in darkness. It is the 
disappearance even of darkness, reducing the imagination to 
impotence and thought to silence. At this point we ordinarily 
busy our brains with other matters, but the fascination of the 
certainty of death can sometimes hold us wonder-struck until the 
moment of a curious illumination in which we see that what dies 
is not consciousness but memory. Consciousness recurs in every 
newborn creature, and wherever it recurs it is “I.” And in so far 
as it is only this “I,” it struggles again and again in hundreds of 
millions of beings against the dissolution which would set it free. 
To see this is to feel the most peculiar solidarity—almost identity 
—with other creatures, and to begin to understand the meaning 
of compassion. 

In the intense joy which attends the full realization that we are 
momentary and transparent, and that nothing can be grasped, 
there is no question of an icy detachment from the world. A man 
who had realized this very fully once wrote to me, “I am now 
becoming as deeply attached as I can be to as many people and 
things as possible.” For after the pralaya in which all the 
manifested worlds are dissolved, Brahma once again precipitates 
himself into the myriad forms of life and consciousness, and after 
he has realized nirvana, the Bodhisattva returns into the 
interminable round of birth-and-death. 


Even beyond the ultimate limits there extends a passageway 
Whereby he comes back among the six realms of existence.... 
Like a gem he stands out even in the mud; 

Like pure gold he shines even in the furnace. 10 


In attachment there is pain, and in pain deliverance, so that at 
this point attachment itself offers no obstacle, and the liberated 
one is at last free to love with all his might and to suffer with all 
his heart. This is not because he has learned the trick of splitting 
himself into higher and lower selves so that he can watch himself 
with inward indifference, but rather because he has found the 
meeting-point of the limit of wisdom and the limit of foolishness. 
The Bodhisattva is the fool who has become wise by persisting in 


his folly. 

The well-intentioned reverence of innumerable believers has, of 
course, set the Buddhas, the sages, the liberated ones upon the 
summit of spiritual success, though by this means they have 
piously postponed their own awakening. For the realm of 
liberation is absolutely incommensurable with the relativities of 
higher and lower, better and worse, gain and loss, since these are 
all the transparent and empty advantages and disadvantages of 
the ego. Though not strictly accurate, it is less misleading to think 
of liberation as the depth of spiritual failure—where one cannot 
even lay claim to vices, let alone virtues. For in seeing fully into 
his own empty momentariness, the Bodhisattva knows a despair 
beyond suicide, the absolute despair which is the etymological 
meaning of nirvana. It is complete disillusion from every hope of 
safety, or rest, or gain, suicide itself being no escape since “I” 
awakens once more in every being that is born. It is the 
recognition of final defeat for all the artfulness of the ego, which, 
in this disillusion, expires—finding only emptiness in its most 
frantic resistance to emptiness, suffering in escape from suffering, 
and nothing but clinging in its efforts to let go. But here he finds 
in his own dissolving the same emptiness from which there blazes 
the whole host of sun, moon, and stars. 


1 In Ch’u Ta-kao (1), p. 89. 
2 Visuddhimagga, 16. 


3 There is some evidence to show that deliberate masochism was first 
introduced into the West from Arabian culture—a culture notably free 
from sexual squeamishness. See Havelock Ellis (1), Part II, p. 130, quoting 
Eulenburg, Sadismus und Masochismus. 


4 A. K. Coomaraswamy (1), p. 134. 


5 It is curious to speculate upon the consequences of civilized man’s refusal 
to be eaten by other forms of life, to return his body for the fertilization of 
the soil from which he took it This is a significant symptom of his 
alienation from nature, and may be a by no means negligible deprivation 
of the earth’s resources. 

6 Ch’u Ta-kao (1), p. 18. 

7 See L. Bonpensiere (1). It is true that Beethoven fingered certain passages 
in his sonatas in such a way that they could be played only with a feeling 
of strain and conflict, but this is merely the exception that proves the rule. 
He wanted these passages to express conflict musically. 


s Ch’u Ta-kao (1), p. 38. 


9 P’ang Chii-shih, ninth-century Zen master. In Suzuki (1), vol. 2, p. 297. 
10 Tzu-te Hui. In Suzuki (2), pp. 150-51. 


5: The World as Non-Sense 


THAT OUR LIFE IS A DISSOLVING MOMENT IN Which there is nothing to grasp 
and no one to grasp it is the negative way of saying something 
which may also be said positively. But the positive way is not 
quite so effective and forceful, and lends itself more easily to 
misunderstanding. The sense that there is something to be 
grasped rests upon the seeming duality of the ego and its 
experience. But the reason why there is nothing to be grasped is 
that this duality is only seeming, so that the attempt to cling is 
like trying to bite the teeth with the teeth, or to clutch the hand 
with the hand. The corollary of this realization is that subject and 
object, oneself and the world, are a unity or, to be precise, a 
“nonduality” since the word “unity” may be taken to exclude 
diversity. 

The sense of the vast gulf between the ego and the world 
disappears, and one’s subjective, inner life seems no longer to be 
separate from everything else, from one’s total experience of the 
stream of nature. It becomes simply obvious that “everything is 
the Tao”—an integrated, harmonious, and universal process from 
which it is absolutely impossible to deviate. This sensation is 
marvellous, to put it mildly, though there is no logical reason 
why it should be so, unless it is just through release from the 
chronic feeling of having to “face” reality. For here one does not 
face life any more; one simply is it. 

But things are not usually felt to be marvellous unless they are 
full of consequence, unless they lead to definitive changes in 
practical life. When this sensation first dawns upon people, as it 
often does quite unexpectedly, they are apt to expect all kinds of 
results from it, which is why it vanishes as swiftly as it comes. 
They expect it to change their characters, to make them better, 
stronger, wiser, and happier. For they believe that they have 
grasped something immensely valuable, and go bouncing around 
as if they had inherited a fortune. 

A Zen master was once asked, “What is the most valuable thing 


in the world?” He answered, “The head of a dead cat!” “Why?” 
“Because no one can put a price on it.” The realization of the 
unity of the world is like this dead cat’s head. It is the most 
priceless, the most inconsequential thing of all. It has no results, 
no implications, and no logical meaning. One cannot get anything 
out of it because it is impossible to take up a position outside it 
from which to reach in and grasp. The whole notion of gain, 
whether it be the gain of wealth or the gain of knowledge and 
virtue, is like stopping the pangs of hunger by gobbling oneself 
up from the toes. Yet we do it anyhow, for it really makes no 
difference whether it is one’s own toes or roast duck: the 
satisfaction is always momentary. As the Upanishads say, “Annam 
Brahman—food is Brahman. I, the food, eat the eater of food!”1 
We are all eating ourselves like the serpent Ouroboros, and the 
only real disappointment comes from expecting to get something 
from it. This is why the Buddha said to his disciple Subhuti, “I 
gained absolutely nothing from unsurpassed and _ perfect 
Awakening.” On the other hand, when there is no expectation, no 
looking for a result, and nothing gained but this “head of a dead 
cat,” there is quite suddenly and gratuitously, quite miraculously 
and unreasonably, more than one ever had sought. 

This is not a matter of renunciation and repressing desire — 
those traps which the clever and cunning lay for God. One cannot 
renounce life for the same reason that one cannot gain from it. As 
is said in the Cheng-tao Ke: 


You cannot take hold of it, 

But you cannot lose it. 

In not being able to get it, you get it. 
When you are silent, it speaks; 
When you speak, it is silent. xxxiv 


For although it is often said that to seek the Tao is to lose it, since 
seeking puts a gap between the seeker and the sought, this is not 
quite true, as becomes evident when we try compulsively not to 
seek, not to wish, not to cling. The truth, however, is that one 
cannot deviate from the Tao even by seeking for it. There simply 
is no wrong attitude to the Tao because, again, there is no point 
outside it from which to take an attitude. The seeming separation 
of the subjective self is just as much an expression of the Tao as 


the clear outline of a leaf. 

Such assertions will naturally be irritating to sensible and 
practical minds—this excitement about something which does not 
necessarily make any difference to anything, this perfectly 
meaningless idea of a harmony from which it is impossible to 
deviate. But the whole point of this “dead cat’s head” philosophy 
is just that it is inconsequential, that, like nature itself, it is a kind 
of sublime nonsense, an expression of ecstasy, an end in itself 
without purpose or goal. 

Restless, probing, and grasping minds are completely frustrated 
by such pointlessness, since for them only that has meaning 
which, like a word, points to something beyond itself. Therefore 
in so far as the world seems meaningful to them they have 
reduced it to a collection of signs like a dictionary. In their world 
flowers have scent and color in order to attract bees, and 
chameleons change their skin-tone with the intent of concealing 
themselves. Or, if what they are projecting upon nature is not 
mind but machinery, bees are attracted to flowers because they 
have scent and color, and chameleons survive because they have 
skin which changes its tone. They do not see the world of color 
and scented bee-visited flowers growing—without the abstract 
and divisive “because.” Instead of interrelated patterns wherein 
all the parts grow simultaneously together, they see 
conglomerations of “billiard ball” things, strung together by the 
temporal sequence of cause and effect. In such a world things are 
what they are only in relation to what was and what will be, but 
in the goalless world of the Tao, things are what they are in 
relation to each other’s presence. 

Perhaps we may now begin to see why men have an almost 
universal tendency to seek relief from their own kind among the 
trees and plants, the mountains and waters. There is an easy and 
rather cheap sophistication in mocking the love of nature, but 
there is always something profound and essential in the universal 
theme of poetry, however hackneyed. For hundreds of years the 
great poets of East and West have given expression to this 
basically human love of “communing with nature,” a phrase 
which in present-day intellectual circles seems to have acquired a 
slightly ridiculous tone. Presumably it is regarded as one of those 
“escapes from reality” so much condemned by those who restrict 
reality to what one reads about in the newspapers. 


But perhaps the reason for this love of nonhuman nature is that 
communion with it restores us to a level of our own human 
nature at which we are still sane, free from humbug, and 
untouched by anxieties about the meaning and purpose of our 
lives. For what we call “nature” is free from a certain kind of 
scheming and self-importance. The birds and beasts indeed 
pursue their business of eating and breeding with the utmost 
devotion. But they do not justify it; they do not pretend that it 
serves higher ends, or that it makes a significant contribution to 
the progress of the world. 

This is not meant to sound unkind to human beings, because 
the point is not so simple as that the birds are right and we are 
wrong. The point is that rapport with the marvellously 
purposeless world of nature gives us new eyes for ourselves—eyes 
in which our very self-importance is not condemned, but seen as 
something quite other than what it imagines itself to be. In this 
light all the weirdly abstract and pompous pursuits of men are 
suddenly transformed into natural marvels of the same order as 
the immense beaks of the toucans and hornbills, the fabulous tails 
of the birds of paradise, the towering necks of the giraffes, and 
the vividly polychromed posteriors of the baboons. Seen thus, 
neither as something to be condemned nor in its accustomed 
aspect of serious worth, the self-importance of man dissolves in 
laughter. His insistent purposefulness and his extraordinary 
preoccupation with abstractions are, while perfectly natural, 
overdone—like the vast bodies of the dinosaurs. As means of 
survival and adaptation they have been overplayed, producing a 
species too cunning and too practical for its own good, and which 
for this very reason stands in need of the “dead cat’s head” 
philosophy. For this is the philosophy which, like nature, has no 
purpose or consequence other than itself. 

Yet by indirection, surprisingly and artlessly, this philosophy 
arrives at an immensely heightened perception of the significance 
of the world. Perhaps “significance” is the wrong word, for seen 
thus the world does not point to a meaning beyond itself. It is like 
pure music—music when it is not a support for words, when it is 
not imitating natural sounds, and when, we might almost say, it 
does not represent feeling but is feeling. It is like the poetry of 
incantation and spellbinding where the words themselves are the 
meaning— 


The silver is white, red is the gold; 
The robes they lay in fold. 

The bailey beareth the bell away; 
The lily, the rose, the rose I lay. 


People who turn with incomprehension from a nonobjective 
painting will nevertheless gaze with delight at a landscape where 
the artist has represented clouds and rocks which themselves 
represent nothing, paying unconscious tribute to the wonder of 
natural nonsense. For it is not as if these forms moved us by their 
approximation to the intelligible shapes of the geometer or by 
their resemblance to other things; the clouds are no less beautiful 
when not reminding us of mountains and cities in the sky. The 
rush of waterfalls and the babbling of streams are not loved for 
their resemblance to speech; the irregularly scattered stars do not 
excite us because of the formal constellations which have been 
traced out between them; and it is for no symmetry or suggestion 
of pictures that we delight in the patterns of foam, of the veins in 
rock, or of the black branches of trees in wintertime. 

Seen in this light, the bewildering complexity of nature is a 
dance with no destination other than the figures now in 
performance, figures improvised not in response to an overruling 
law but mutually to each other. Even the cities lose their 
calculated practicality and become pumping ganglia in a network 
of arteries spread over the earth, sucking their corpuscles in at 
dawn and spitting them out at sunset. Caught up in the illusion of 
time and teleology, the dance and the ecstatic rhythm of the 
process is hidden and is seen instead as a frenzied pursuit, 
fighting its way through delays and obstacles. But when the final 
futility of the pursuit is recognized, the mind comes to rest and 
notices the rhythm, becoming aware that the timeless intent of 
the process is fulfilled at each instant. 

There are occasions when this vision of the world takes us by 
surprise, the mind having slipped unconsciously into a receptive 
attitude. It is like the oft-recurring tale of coming upon an 
unexpected door in a familiar wall, a door that leads into an 
enchanted garden, or a cleft in a rock that gives entrance to a 
cavern of jewels. Yet when one comes back to the place again, 
looking for the entrance, it is no longer to be found. It was in just 
this way that late one afternoon my own garden became suddenly 


transfigured—for about half an hour, just at the beginning of 
twilight. The sky was in some way transparent, its blue quiet and 
clear, but more inwardly luminous than ever at high noon. The 
leaves of the trees and shrubs assumed qualities of green that 
were incandescent, and their clusterings were no longer shapeless 
daubs, but arabesques of marvellous complexity and clarity. The 
interlacing of branches against the sky suggested filigree or 
tracery, not in the sense of artificiality, but of distinctness and 
rhythm. Flowers—I remember especially the fuchsias—were 
suddenly the lightest carvings of ivory and coral. 

It is as if the impressions of a restless and seeking mind are 
blurred by the speed at which they are overpassed, so that the 
rhythmic clarity of forms is unnoticed, and colors are seen flat 
without inner light. Furthermore, it is characteristic of almost all 
these openings of vision that every detail of the world appears to 
be in order, not as on a parade ground but as perfectly 
interconnected with everything else so that nothing is irrelevant, 
nothing inessential. This, perhaps more than anything, explains 
the logically nonsensical feeling that everything is “right,” or in 
harmony with the Tao, just as it is. And this applies equally to 
impressions that would ordinarily be thought simply messy, like 
garbage in a gutter or a spilled ash-tray on the carpet ... or the 
head of a dead cat. 

In the Western world it is second nature for us to assume that 
all creative action requires the incentive of inadequacy and 
discontent. It seems obvious that if we felt fulfilled at each instant 
and no longer regarded time as a path of pursuit, we should just 
sit down in the sun, pull large Mexican hats over our eyes, and 
put bottles of tequila at our elbows. Even if this were true it 
might not be so great a disaster as we imagine, for there is no 
doubt that our extreme busyness is as much nervous fidgets as 
industry, and that a certain amount of ordinary laziness would 
lend our culture the pleasant mellowness which it singularly 
lacks. However, it does not seem to occur to us that action 
goaded by a sense of inadequacy will be creative only in a limited 
sense. It will express the emptiness from which it springs rather 
than fullness, hunger rather than strength. Thus when our love 
for others is based simply on mutual need it becomes strangling— 
a kind of vampirism in which we say, all too expressively, “I love 
you so much I could eat you!” It is from such desiring that 


parental devotion becomes smother-love and marriage holy 
deadlock. 

Modern theologians have used the Greek words eros and agape 
to distinguish between hungering love and generous love, 
ascribing the latter, however, to God alone. The fallen nature of 
man can only hunger, because sin is a descent from the fullness of 
Being to Nothingness. Lacking divine grace, man can act only 
from the natural incentive of need, and this assumption persists 
as a matter of common sense even when it is no longer believed 
that there is a God creating the world out of his infinite fullness. 
We assume, furthermore, that the whole realm of nature acts 
from hunger alone, for in Christianity it was understood that 
nature fell together with Adam, its head. And the notion that 
nature acts only from necessity accords perfectly with the 
mechanism which displaces theism. 

But if the Fall was the loss of our sense of integrity with nature, 
the supposedly hunger-driven quality of natural action is a 
projection upon the world of our own state. If we are to abandon 
Newtonian mechanics in the physical sphere we must also do so 
in the psychological and moral. In the same measure that the 
atoms are not billiard balls struck into motion by others, our 
actions are not entities forced into operation by distinct motives 
and drives. Actions appear to be forced by other things to the 
degree that the agent identifies himself with a single part of the 
situation in which the actions occur, such as the will as distinct 
from the passions, or the mind as distinct from the body. But if he 
identifies himself with his passions and with his body, he will not 
seem to be moved by them. If he can go further and see that he is 
not simply his body but the whole of his body-environment 
relationship, he will not even feel forced to act by the 
environment. The effect appears to be controlled passively by its 
cause only in so far as it is considered to be distinct from the 
cause. But if cause and effect are just the terms of a single act, 
there is neither controller nor controlled. Thus the feeling that 
action has to spring from necessity comes from thinking that the 
self is the center of consciousness as distinct from the periphery. 

The question “Why should one act?” has meaning only so long 
as motivation seems necessary to action. But if action or process 
rather than inert substance is what constitutes the world, it is 
absurd to seek an external reason for action. There is really no 


alternative to action, and this is not to say that we must act, since 
this would imply the reality of the inert, substantial “we” 
reluctantly activated from outside. The point is that, motivated or 
not, we are action. But when action is felt to be motivated, it 
expresses the hungering emptiness of the ego, the inertness of 
entity rather than the liveliness of act. When, however, man is 
not pursuing something outside himself, he is action expressing 
its own fullness, whether weeping for sorrow or jumping for joy. 

In Indian philosophy karma signifies both motivated or 
purposeful action and cause and effect, and karma is the type of 
action which holds man in bondage. Goal-seeking, it reaches no 
goal, but ever perpetuates the need for goals. Solving problems, it 
ever creates more problems to solve. Karma is therefore 
significant action because, like the sign, it points beyond itself to 
a meaning, to the motive from which it sprang or the end which 
it seeks. It is action creating the necessity for further action. On 
the other hand, sahaja is spontaneous and inconsequential action 
characteristic of the jivan-mukta, the liberated one, who lives and 
moves in the same way as nature—babbling like streams, 
gesticulating like trees in the wind, wandering like clouds, or just 
existing like rocks on the sand. His life has the quality of what the 
Japanese call fura-fura—the flapping of a cloth in the breeze or 
the motion of an empty gourd in a bubbling river. “The wind 
bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the voice thereof, but 
canst not tell whence it cometh nor whither it goeth.” No more 
can the wind itself. 

This is why there is a universal likening of sages to lunatics, 
since in their subtly differing ways neither make any sense nor 
accept the world’s practical scale of values. 


His door stands closed, and the wise ones do not know him. 
His inner life is hidden, and he moves outside the ruts of the 
recognized virtues. Carrying a gourd, he enters the 
marketplace; making his way with a staff, he returns home. 
Even in the liquor shop and the fish market everyone is 
transformed into a Buddha. 


Bare-chested and bare-footed, he goes into the dust of this world. 
Smeared with mud and daubed with ashes, he wears a broad grin. 
He has no need of the secret powers of the gods, 


For by his direct command the dead trees blossom with flowers. 2 


For as the nonsense of the madman is a babble of words for its 
own fascination, the nonsense of nature and of the sage is the 
perception that the ultimate meaninglessness of the world 
contains the same hidden joy as its transience and emptiness. If 
we seek the meaning in the past, the chain of cause and effect 
vanishes like the wake of a ship. If we seek it in the future, it 
fades out like the beam of a searchlight in the night sky. If we 
seek it in the present, it is as elusive as flying spray, and there is 
nothing to grasp. But when only the seeking remains and we seek 
to know what this is, it suddenly turns into the mountains and 
waters, the sky and the stars, sufficient to themselves with no one 
left to seek anything from them. 


From all that has been said until now it may seem that our 
philosophy of nature has reached a point of complete self- 
contradiction. For if what it comes to is that there is no real 
division between man and nature, it follows that there is nothing 
artificial from which the natural can be distinguished. As Goethe 
said again in the Fragment on Nature: 


The most unnatural also is nature. Who sees her not on all 
sides sees her truly nowhere.... Even in resisting her laws one 
obeys them; and one works with her even in desiring to work 
against her. 


If this be true it would seem to render null all that has been said 
about the mechanical and unnatural character of the 
monotheistic God and of the linear and political views of the 
world order shared by Christianity and, until recently, by the 
philosophy of science. It would also seem to be pointless to prefer 
one mode of consciousness to another, to consider the open 
attentiveness of kuan more natural than the straining and staring 
attitude of egocentricity. If even the self-conscious artificialities 
and conceits of urban and industrial civilization are no more 
unnatural than the pretentious tail feathers of the peacock, this 
amounts to saying that in the natural life anything and everything 
“goes.” As we said, there is no possibility of deviation from the 


Tao. 

However, at the very least there is this much difference 
between such a position as this and, say, Christianity or a 
legalistic science: that they make a distinction between man and 
nature which this philosophy does not. It is granted that the 
making of this distinction is no less within the realm of nature 
than not making it. Both positions are therefore in some sense 
“right,” if this is what we mean by natural, in the sense, perhaps, 
of a libertarian saying to a totalitarian, “I disagree entirely with 
what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say it.” 
As in an ideal democracy the exercise of freedom involves the 
right to vote for restrictions on freedom, so man’s participation in 
nature involves the right and the freedom to feel that he stands 
above nature. As by democratic process the people may freely 
renounce freedom, one may likewise be naturally unnatural. 
Whereas the totalitarian may then assert that freedom has been 
abolished, the libertarian will point out that this is true only to 
the extent that he freely asserts it. Even under tyranny “a people 
gets what government it deserves,” because it always retains the 
power, that is, the freedom to govern itself. In the same way it is 
possible for this philosophy to assert quite meaningfully that it is 
perfectly natural to believe that man is apart from nature and yet 
to disagree with the belief. 

But if a people votes freely for certain restrictions on its 
freedom, it should never forget that freedom remains the 
background and authority for law. Similarly, the ultimate point of 
this philosophy is that as a people can never abandon its freedom 
and responsibility absolutely, a human being cannot absolutely 
abandon his naturalness and, likewise, should never forget it. To 
put it in another way, naturalness is a_ self-determining 
spontaneity (tzu-jan) which we retain even in the most awkward 
rigidity and affectation of attitude. But the “we” which retains 
this spontaneity is not the self-restriction called “ego”; it is the 
natural man, the organism-environment relationship. 

Thus if political health consists in realizing that legal restraint 
is freely self-imposed by the people, philosophical health consists 
in realizing that our true self is the natural man, the spontaneous 
Tao, from which we never deviate. In psychological terms this 
realization is a total self-acceptance standing, like political 
freedom, as the constant background of every thought, feeling, 


and action—however restricted. Such acceptance of oneself is the 
condition of that underlying integrity, sincerity, and peace of 
heart which, in the sage, endures beneath every disturbance. It is, 
in short, a deeply inward consent to be just exactly what we are 
and to feel just exactly what we are feeling at every moment, 
even before what we are has been changed, however slightly, by 
accepting it. It is the recognition that “all things are lawful for 
me,” even if “not all are expedient,” but probably in a far wider 
sense than St. Paul ever intended. Stated boldly, if crudely, it is 
the insight that whatever we are just now, that is now what we 
should ideally be. This is the sense of the Zen Buddhist saying, 
“Your ordinary mind is the Tao,” the “ordinary mind” being the 
present, given state of consciousness, whatever its nature. For 
enlightenment, or accord with the Tao, remains unrealized so 
long as it is considered as a specific state to be attained, and for 
which there are tests and standards of success. It is much rather 
freedom to be the failure that one is. 

Unlikely as it may seem, this outrageous and nonmoral 
freedom is the basis of all mental and spiritual wholeness, 
provided, I was about to say, that it seeks no result. But so full an 
acceptance includes also this seeking, along with just anything 
that one happens to be doing or feeling. The apparently extreme 
passivity of this acceptance is, however, creative because it 
permits one to be all of a piece, to be good, bad, indifferent, or 
merely confused, with a whole heart. To act or grow creatively 
we must begin from where we are, but we cannot begin at all if 
we are not “all here” without reservation or regret. Lacking self- 
acceptance, we are always at odds with our point of departure, 
always doubting the ground on which we stand, always so 
divided against ourselves that we cannot act with sincerity. Apart 
from self-acceptance as the groundwork of thought and action, 
every attempt at spiritual or moral discipline is the fruitless 
struggle of a mind that is split asunder and insincere. It is the 
freedom which is the essential basis of self-restraint. 

In the West we have always admitted in theory that truly moral 
acts must be expressions of freedom. Yet we have never allowed 
this freedom, never permitted ourselves to be everything that we 
are, to see that fundamentally all the gains and losses, rights and 
wrongs of our lives are as natural and “perfect” as the peaks and 
valleys of a mountain range. For in identifying God, the Absolute, 


with a goodness excluding evil we make it impossible for us to 
accept ourselves radically: what is not in accord with the will of 
God is at variance with Being itself and must not under any 
circumstances be accepted. Our freedom is therefore set about 
with such catastrophic rewards and punishments that it is not 
freedom at all, but resembles rather the totalitarian state in which 
one may vote against the government but always at the risk of 
being sent to a concentration camp. Instead of self-acceptance, 
the groundwork of our thought and action has therefore been 
metaphysical anxiety, the terror of being ultimately wrong and 
rotten to the core. 

It is for this reason that the formal Catholic and Protestant 
orthodoxies have always been strictly exoteric doctrines, 
identifying the Absolute with the relativities of good and evil. 
Theologians are wont to say that if the distinctions between good 
and evil are not valid eternally they are not truly valid and 
important distinctions. But this actually amounts to saying that 
what is finite and relative is not important—a strange view for 
those who also insist that there is a real finite creation distinct 
from God and an object of his love. Not to be able to distinguish 
the absolutely important from the relatively important without 
thinking the latter unimportant is surely to adopt a most 
primitive scale of values. 

Conversely, there is always the risk that a fundamental self- 
acceptance will render a person insensitive to the importance of 
moral values, but this is only to say that without risk there is no 
freedom. The fear that self-acceptance necessarily annihilates 
ethical judgment is groundless, for we are perfectly able to 
distinguish between up and down at any point on the earth’s 
surface, realizing at the same time that there is no up and down 
in the larger framework of the cosmos. Self-acceptance is 
therefore the spiritual and psychological equivalent of space, of a 
freedom which does not annihilate distinctions but makes them 
possible. 


The capacity of the mind is great, like the emptiness of 
space.... The marvelous nature of the ordinary person is 
fundamentally empty and has no fixed character. Such is the 
truly sky-like quality of one’s natural self.... The emptiness of 
universal space can contain the myriad things of every shape 


and form—the sun, moon, and stars, the mountains and rivers, 
the great earth with its springs, streams, and waterfalls, grass, 
trees, and dense forests, its sinners and saints, and the ways of 
good and evil.... All these are in the void, and the ordinary 
person’s nature is void in just this way.3 


But the healing and liberating force of self-acceptance is so 
contrary to the expectations of our pedestrian common sense that 
its power seems almost uncanny even to the psychotherapist who 
watches it happen again and again. For it is just this which 
restores the integrity and responsibility of the sick mind, 
liberating it from every radical compulsion to be what it is not. 
Nevertheless, this emergence of law from liberty, of cosmos from 
the void, and of energy from passivity is always so miraculously 
unexpected and improbable that it does not ordinarily come 
about except by some stratagem which enables us to permit 
ourselves this freedom in such a way that the right hand does not 
know what the left is doing. Thus we can bring ourselves to self- 
acceptance vicariously, through the agency of a liberalized God 
who is infinitely loving and forgiving, so that it is he who accepts 
us totally, and not, at least directly, we ourselves. Or it may be 
that we can accord ourselves the right to self-acceptance only 
when we have paid for it by going through some disciplinary mill 
or spiritual obstacle-course, whereafter our acceptance of 
ourselves is reinforced by the collective authority of fellow 
initiates, representing some hallowed tradition.4 Such are the 
ways of placating the fear of freedom which society must almost 
inevitably implant from our childhood. For lacking discrimination 
between the hierarchies of value and truth, the child may say that 
two and two are five if he is told the higher mathematical truth 
that they are not always and necessarily four. 

Growth in philosophical understanding, or just plain wisdom, is 
always a matter of being able to distinguish between levels of 
truth and frames of reference, at the same time being able to see 
one’s own life in its intimate relation to these differing and ever 
more universal levels. Above all, there is the level beyond levels, 
the boundless frame of universal nature, which, however 
impossible to describe, is the self-determining and spontaneous 
ground of our being and our freedom. The degree of our freedom 
and self-determination varies with the level which we realize to 


be our self—the source from which we act. As our sense of self is 
narrow, the more we feel our existence as restraint. “And 
therefore,” said Ruysbroeck, “we must all found our lives upon a 
fathomless abyss”—so to discover that what we are is not what 
we are bound to be, but what we are free to be. For when we 
stand with our nature, seeing that there is nowhere to stand 
against it, we are at last able to move unmoved. 


1 Taittiriya Upanishad, iii, 10, 6. 


2 Shih Niu T’ou, x. Comment on the last of the Ten Oxherding Pictures which 
illustrate the stages of realization in Zen Buddhism. 


3 Hui-neng, eighth-century Zen master, in the Tan-ching, ii. 


4 In the course of such preliminary disciplines the neophyte may sometimes 
acquire various skills and powers or subtle traits of character and manner 
which are subsequently understood as the signs of his liberation. This is, 
however, a confusion of freedom with success in particular skills. Thus an 
initiate who, in his preliminary training, learned to stand pain without 
flinching may be unable to run a farm or build a house as well as any 
ordinary neurotic. His response to pain may in fact prove nothing more 
than that he has learned the trick of self-hypnosis, or managed to lose his 
sensitivity. 


Il: MAN AND WOMAN 


6: Spirituality and Sexuality 


THE DIVISION OF LIFE INTO THE HIGHER and lower categories of spirit and 
nature usually goes hand in hand with a symbolism in which 
spirit is male and nature female. The resemblance was perhaps 
suggested by the rains falling from heaven to fertilize the earth, 
the planting of seed in the ground, and the ripening of the fruit 
by the warmth of the sun. To a considerable extent ancient man 
reasoned in terms of such correspondences, and made sense of his 
world by seeing analogies between one natural process and 
another, analogies which were understood to be actual 
relationships. The art of astrology, for example, is the most 
complete monument to this way of reasoning, based as it is upon 
the correspondences between the macrocosm and the microcosm, 
the order of the stars and the order of terrestrial affairs. In the 
words of the Hermetic Emerald Tablet: 


Heaven above, heaven below; 
Stars above, stars below. 

All that is over, under shall show. 
Happy who the riddle readeth! 


Unfortunately for those who search for consistent systems in 
ancient cosmology, it was always possible to read the 
correspondences as well as the very orders of heaven and earth in 
different ways. Heaven might be male and earth female, but then 
it was equally possible to think of space and the sky as an all- 
embracing womb in which the universe had been brought to 
birth, for such is apparently the sense of the Egyptian sky goddess 
Nut. It is easy, however, for us to dismiss such ways of thinking 
as mere projection, as a confusion of objective nature with 
fantasies which it evokes from the human mind. Yet after all our 
own science is likewise a projection, though what it reads into 
nature is not a loosely knit system of poetic images but the highly 
exact and consistent structure of mathematics. Both are products 


of the human mind, and mathematics in particular may be 
developed indefinitely in the abstract as a pure creation of 
thought without reference to any external experience. But 
mathematics works because of its immense inner consistency and 
precision, serving thus as an admirable tool for measuring nature 
to suit the purposes which we have in mind. However, not all 
cultures have the same purposes, so that other ways of “reading” 
the world may serve equally well for ends which are as legitimate 
as ours, for there are no laws by which these ends may be judged 
apart from the very readings of the world which serve them. 

Indeed, the world is not unlike a vast, shapeless Rorschach blot 
which we read according to our inner disposition, in such a way 
that our interpretations say far more about ourselves than about 
the blot. But whereas the psychologist has tried to develop a 
science to judge and compare the various interpretations of the 
Rorschach Test, there is as yet no supracultural science, no 
“metascience,” whereby we can _ assess. our differing 
interpretations of the cosmic Rorschach blot. Cultural 
anthropology, the nearest thing to this, suffers the defect of being 
thoroughly embedded in the conventions of Western science, of 
one particular way of interpreting the blot. 

The importance of the correspondence between spirit and man 
and nature and woman is that it projects upon the world a 
disposition in which the members of several cuitures, including 
our own, are still involved. It is a disposition in which the split 
between man and nature is related to a problematic attitude to 
sex, though like egg and hen it is doubtful which came first. It is 
perhaps best to treat them as arising mutually, each being 
symptomatic of the other. 

The historical reasons for our problematic attitude to sexuality 
are so obscure that there are numerous contradictory theories to 
explain it. It seems useless, therefore, to try to decide between 
them in the present state of our knowledge. The problem may be 
discussed more profitably just by taking the attitude as given, and 
by considering its consequences and alternatives. The fact is that 
in some unknown way the female sex has become associated with 
the earthy aspect of human nature and with sexuality as such. 
The male sex could conceivably have been put in the same 
position, and there is no conclusive evidence that women are 
more desirous and provocative of sexual activity than men, or 


vice versa. These are almost certainly matters of cultural 
conditioning which do not explain how the culture itself came to 
be as it is. It seems plausible that the association of women with 
sexuality as such is a male point of view arising in cultures where 
the male is dominant, but this in turn may be not so much a 
cause of the attitude as one of its concurrent symptoms. It is, 
however, very possible that the attitude to women is rather more 
accidental than the attitude to sexuality, for we know that the 
male and the female alike can feel the sexual relationship to be a 
seduction, a danger, and a problem. But why they do so at any 
time may no longer be the reason for their having first done so, 
so that knowledge of historical causes may not of itself provide 
any solution to the problem. 

Thus to say that man’s relation to nature is in some sense 
parallel to his relation to woman is to speak symbolically. The 
real parallel is the relation of the human being, male or female, 
to the sexual division of the species and to all that it involves. 
When, therefore, we shall speak loosely of the reasons for certain 
sexual attitudes, we shall not be speaking of fundamental 
historical causes, for these are, strictly speaking, prehistoric—not 
necessarily so much in point of time as in extent of knowledge. 
We shall be speaking of the reasons as they exist today, either as 
matters of open knowledge or as forms of unconscious 
conditioning. There is no clear evidence that we are 
unconsciously conditioned by events from the remote historical 
past, and we must therefore be most cautious in using the insights 
of psychoanalysis for reconstructing the history of cultures. 
Certainly we can trace the historical effects of Christian, 
Buddhist, or Hindu doctrines upon our sexual attitudes, but what 
lies behind these doctrines and the attitudes from which they 
arose remains conjectural and dim. Furthermore, it is always 
possible to argue not that we are conditioned by the past, but that 
we use the past to condition ourselves in the present, and for 
reasons which are not historical but deeply inward and unknown. 
For example, a physiologist does not need to call upon the whole 
history of living creatures to explain why a person is hungry. He 
explains it from the present state of the organism.1 

Let us then say that in the Christian and post-Christian West we 
simply find ourselves in a culture where nature is called Mother 
Nature, where God is exclusively male, and where one of the 


common meanings of Woman or Women with the capital W is 
simply sex, whereas Man with the capital M means humanity in 
general. As part and parcel of this situation, as distinct from its 
historical explanation, we find that in the Indo-European 
language system the words matter, materia, and meter as well as 
mother, and its Latin and Greek forms mater and F"7™P, are 
derived alike from the Sanskrit root ma- (matr-), from which, in 
Sanskrit itself, come both mata (mother) and mayd (the 
phenomenal world of nature). The meaning of the common root 
ma- is “to measure,” thus giving mdayd the sense of the world-as- 
measured, that is, as divided up into things, events, and 
categories. In contrast stands the world unmeasured, the infinite 
and undivided (advaita) Brahman, the supreme spiritual reality. 
While it can be pointed out that the Devil is also male, since as 
the angel Lucifer he is a pure spirit, it must be noted that his 
popular form is simply that of the god Pan—the lusty spirit of 
earth and fertility, the genius of natural beauty. Hell, his domain, 
lies downward in the heart of the earth, where all is dark, inward, 
and unconscious as distinct from the bright heavens above. The 
catalogue of popular images, figures of speech, and customs 
which associate spirit with the divine, the good, and the male and 
nature with the material, evil, sexual, and female could go on 
indefinitely. 

But the heart of the matter begins to reveal itself when, 
considering nature in the Chinese sense of spontaneity (tzu-jan), 
we begin to realize that the opposition of spirit to both nature 
and sexuality is the opposition of the conscious will, of the ego, to 
that which it cannot control. If sexual abstinence is, as in so many 
spiritual traditions, the condition of enhanced consciousness, it is 
because consciousness as we know it is an act of restraint. The 
point comes out clearly in St. Augustine’s discussion of the 
spontaneity of the sexual member: 


Justly, too, these members themselves, being moved and 
restrained not at our will, but by a certain independent 
autocracy, so to speak, are called “shameful.” Their condition 
was different before sin ... because not yet did lust move those 
members without the will’s consent.... But when [our first 
parents] were stripped of grace, that their disobedience might 
be punished by fit retribution, there began to be in the 


movement of their bodily members a shameless novelty which 
made nakedness indecent.2 


This is clearly the reaction of one for whom the soul, the will, 
the spiritual part of man, is identified with that form of 
consciousness which we have seen to be a partial and exclusive 
mode of attention. It is the mode of attention which grasps and 
orders the world by seeing it as one-at-a-time things, excluding 
and ignoring the rest. For it is this which involves that straining 
of the mind which is also the sensation of willing and of being a 
separate, exclusive ego. 

Shame is thus the accompaniment of the failure of concentrated 
attention and will which manifests itself not only in the 
spontaneity of sexual excitement, but also in crying, trembling, 
blushing, blanching, and so many other socially “shameful” 
reactions.3 These reactions are ordinarily avoided by 
concentrating the attention elsewhere and so avoiding the 
shameful response, and thus the ascetic disciplinarian will 
overcome lust, not by pitting the will against it directly, but by 
attending resolutely to other matters. 

Obviously, the sexual function is one of the most powerful 
manifestations of biological spontaneity, and thus more especially 
difficult for the will to control. The immediate reasons for 
controlling it vary from the belief that it saps virility, through 
proprietary rights upon women, to its association with a complex 
love relationship with one woman alone, to mention only a few. 
But these seem to be secondary to the fact that sexual restraint is 
a principal test of the strength of the ego, along with resistance to 
pain and regulation of the wanderings of thought and feeling. 
Such restraints are the very substance of individual 
consciousness, of the sensation that feeling and action are 
directed from within a limited center of the organism, and that 
consciousness is not the mere witness of activity but the 
responsible agent. Yet this is something quite different from the 
spontaneous self-control of, say, the circulation of blood, where 
the control is carried out by the organism as a _ whole, 
unconsciously. For willed control brings about a sense of duality 
within the organism, of consciousness in conflict with appetite. 

But this mode of control is a peculiar example of the proverb 
that nothing fails like success. For the more consciousness is 


individualized by the success of the will, the more everything 
outside the individual seems to be a threat—including not only 
the external world but also the “external” and uncontrolled 
spontaneity of one’s own body, which, for example, continues to 
age, die, and corrupt against one’s desire. Every success in control 
therefore demands a further success, so that the process cannot 
stop short of omnipotence. But this, save perhaps in some 
inconceivably distant future, is impossible. Hence there arises the 
desire to protect the ego from alien spontaneity by withdrawal 
from the natural world into a realm of pure consciousness or 
spirit. 

Now withdrawal requires the inner detachment of 
consciousness, which is felt to be bound to nature so long as it 
desires it, or rather, so long as it identifies itself with the bodily 
organism’s natural appetites. Thus it must not only control them 
but also cease to enjoy them. It makes little difference whether 
the realm of spirit be pure and formless, as in many types of 
mysticism, or whether it be a world of transfigured and 
spiritualized matter, as in Christianity. The point is that in either 
case will and consciousness triumph, attaining omnipotence 
either in their own right or by the grace of union with an 
omnipotent God whose whole nature is that of a self- and all- 
controlling will.4 

On some such lines as these we must explain the ancient and 
widely prevalent conflict between spirituality and sexuality, the 
belief, found in East and West alike, that sexual abstinence and 
freedom from lust are essential prerequisites for man’s proper and 
ultimate development. Presumably, we are free to define man’s 
ultimate goal as we will, even if what we desire is the stimulus of 
eternal conflict or the repose of bodily insensitivity. But if we 
think of spirituality less in terms of what it avoids and more in 
terms of what it is positively, and if we may think of it as 
including an intense awareness of the inner identity of subject 
and object, man and the universe, there is no reason whatsoever 
why it should require the rejection of sexuality. On the contrary, 
this most intimate of relationships of the self with another would 
naturally become one of the chief spheres of spiritual insight and 
growth. 

This is in no way to say that the monastic and celibate life is an 
aberration, for man is not absolutely obliged to have sexual 


relations, nor even to eat or to live. As under certain 
circumstances a voluntary death or fast is perfectly justifiable, so 
also is sexual abstinence—in order, for example, that the force of 
the libido may be expended in other directions. The common 
mistake of the religious celibate has been to suppose that the 
highest spiritual life absolutely demands the renunciation of 
sexuality, as if the knowledge of God were an alternative to the 
knowledge of woman, or to any other form of experience. 

Indeed, the life of total chastity is often undertaken as a 
monogamous marriage of the soul with God, as an all-consuming 
love of creature for Creator in which love for a mortal woman 
would be a fatal distraction. In this context sexuality is often 
renounced, not because it is evil, but because it is a precious and 
beautiful possession offered to God in sacrifice. But this raises the 
question as to whether renunciation as such is sacrifice in the 
proper sense of an act which “makes holy” (sacer-facere) the thing 
offered. For if sexuality is a relationship and an activity, can it be 
offered when neither the relationship nor the activity exists? Does 
a dancer offer her dancing to God by ceasing to dance? An 
offering can cease to exist, for its original owner, if given away to 
another for his use. But sacrifice is only accidentally associated 
with the cessation, death, or mutilation of the offering because it 
was once supposed that, say, burning bulls on an altar was the 
only way of transporting them to heaven. 

The offering of sexuality to God is in all probability a survival 
of the idea that a woman’s body, and its sexual enjoyment, is the 
property of her husband, to whom she is bound to reserve herself 
even if he does not actually lie with her. By analogy, the body of 
the celibate becomes the property of God, dedicated to him alone. 
But this is not only a confusion of God with what is after all only 
his symbol, the tribal father, but also the likening of the Creator- 
creature relationship to a strictly barbarous conception of 
marriage. Obviously, the possession of a body is not a 
relationship to a person; one is related to the person only in being 
related to the organism of another in its total functioning. For the 
human being is not a thing but a process, not an object but a life. 

The offering may be defended by saying that God uses the 
sexual energy of his human spouses in other ways, diverting them 
into prayer or into acts of charity. With this there can be no 
quarrel—provided that it does not exclude the possibility that 


God may use them for sexual activity itself as an aspect of life no 
whit less holy than prayer or feeding the poor. Historically, the 
supernaturalists have admitted this only with great reluctance— 
outside the Semitic-Islamic traditions, which have largely escaped 
sexual squeamishness. But the literature of the spiritual life is 
overwhelmingly preoccupied with the sinful aspects of sex. It has 
almost nothing to say, positively, about what holy sex might be, 
save that it must be reserved to a single life partner and 
consummated for the purpose of procreation in one particular 
physical attitude alone! 

That matrimony may be an estate as holy as virginity is 
something which the Christian tradition admits theoretically, as a 
consequence of its Hebrew background.s But the force of Hebraic 
insistence on the goodness of things physical has had little effect 
on the actual feeling and practice of the Church. For from the 
earliest times the Church Fathers virtually equated sex with sin 
by identifying all sexual feeling and desire with the evil of lust. At 
the same time they could maintain, as against the Gnostics and 
Manichaeans, that the mere physical apparatus and mechanics of 
sex were, as God’s creation, inherently pure. Speaking, then, of 
“ideal” sexuality as it might have been before the Fall, St. 
Augustine wrote: 


Those members, like the rest, would be moved by the 
command of his will, and the husband would be mingled with 
the loins of the wife without the seductive stimulus of passion, 
with calmness of mind and with no corruption of the 
innocence of the body.... Because the wild heat of passion 
would not activate those parts of the body, but, as would be 
proper, a voluntary control would employ them. Thus it would 
then have been possible to inject the semen into the womb 
through the female genitalia as innocently as the menstrual 
flow is now ejected.« 


The general tenor and attitude of supernaturalism to sexuality 
is unmistakable: it is overwhelmingly negative, and to all intents 
and purposes the attitude is not the least modified by separating 
sexual mechanics from sexual feelings, a separation which in any 
case destroys the integrity of mind and body. Practically, if not 
theoretically, the basis of this attitude is the feeling that God and 


nature are simply incompatible. They may not have been so 
originally, but then nature was nothing like the nature we 
experience today. If we are to believe St. Augustine, it was 
something as lacking in spontaneity as artificial insemination. 

Now the practical effect of a philosophy in which God and 
nature are incompatible is somewhat unexpected. For when the 
knowledge and love of God is considered to exclude other goals 
and other creatures, God is actually put on a par with his 
creatures. The knowledge of God and the knowledge of creatures 
can exclude one another only if they are of the same kind. One 
must choose between yellow and blue, as two of the kind color, 
but there is no need to choose between yellow and round, since 
what is round can also be yellow. If God is universal, the 
knowledge of God should include all other knowledge as the 
sense of sight includes all the differing objects of vision. But if the 
eye should attempt to see sight, it will turn in upon itself and see 
nothing. 

Indeed, the celibate life is more appropriate to “worldly” 
vocations than spiritual, for while it is possible to be both a sage 
and a physician or artist, the exigencies of a professional or 
creative vocation so often suggest the Latin tag, Aut libri aut liberi 
—either books or children. But the vocation to sanctity should 
hardly be a specialization on the same level as writing, medicine, 
or mathematics, for God himself—the “object” of sanctity—is no 
specialist. Were he so, the universe would consist of nothing but 
formally religious creations—clergymen, bibles, churches, 
monasteries, rosaries, prayer-books, and angels. 

Sanctity or sagehood as an exclusive vocation is, once again, 
symptomatic of an exclusive mode of consciousness in general 
and of the spiritual consciousness in particular. Its basic 
assumption is that God and nature are in competition and that 
man must choose between them. Its standpoint is radically 
dualistic, and thus it is strange indeed to find it in traditions 
which otherwise abjure dualism. This is a basic inconsistency, 
and its appearance is strangest of all in the nondualistic traditions 
of Indian Vedanta and Buddhism. But the confusion out of which 
it arises is highly instructive. 

As we have seen, the relegation of sexuality and nature to the 
forces of evil grows out of the belief that strength and clarity of 
consciousness depend upon cultivating a one-pointed and 


exclusive mode of attention. This is, in other words, a type of 
attention which ignores the background in fastening upon the 
figure, and which grasps the world serially, one thing at a time. 
Yet this is exactly the meaning of the Hindu-Buddhist term 
avidya, ignorance, or “ignore-ance,” the basic unconsciousness as a 
result of which it appears that the universe is a collection of 
separate things and events. A Buddha or “awakened one” is 
precisely the man who has overcome this unconsciousness and is 
no more bewitched by sakaya-drishti, the “vision of separateness.” 
In other words, he sees each “part” of nature without ignoring its 
relation to the whole, without being deceived by the illusion of 
maya which, as we also saw, is based on the idea of 
“measurement” (md-, matr-), the dividing of the world into 
classes, into countable things and events. So divided, the world 
appears to be dual (dvaita), but to the unobstructed vision of the 
sage it is in truth undivided or nondual (advaita) and in this state 
identical with Brahman, the immeasurable and infinite reality. 

Considered as a collection of separate things, the world is thus 
a creation of thought. Maya, or measuring and classifying, is an 
operation of the mind, and as such is the “mother” (mata) of a 
strictly abstract conception of nature, illusory in the sense that 
nature is so divided only in one’s mind. Maya is illusory in an evil 
sense only when the vision of the world as divided is not 
subordinate to the vision of the world as undivided, when, in 
other words, the cleverness of the measuring mind does not 
become too much of a good thing and is “unable to see the forest 
for the trees.” 

But the general trend of Indian thought was to fall into the very 
trap which it should have avoided: it confused the abstract world 
of maya with the concrete world of nature, of direct experience, 
and then sought liberation from nature in terms of a state of 
consciousness bereft of all sense experience. It interpreted maya 
as an illusion of the senses rather than of thought projecting itself 
through the senses. In various forms of yoga it cultivated 
prolonged exclusive concentration upon a single point—avidya!— 
in order to exclude sense experience from consciousness, 
regarding it as the supreme obstacle to spiritual insight. Above 
all, sense experience implied “woman,” not only as a highly 
attractive experience, but also as the “source” of birth into the 
natural world, and thus the very incarnation of maya, the Cosmic 


Seductress. 

Thus the identification of maya with nature and with woman is 
the classic example of deception by maya, of confusing the world 
projected by the mind with the real world. Yet although maya is 
figuratively the “mother” of the projected world, projection is 
rather a male function than a female. As usual, however, man 
projects his seed into the woman and then accuses her of 
seducing him. As Adam said, “This woman whom thou gavest me, 
she tempted me and I did eat.” 

It was in this way that much of Indian philosophy became in 
practice the archetype of all world-denying dualisms, and in 
seeking liberation from sense experience became twice over the 
victim of maya. For in struggling for release from maya as the 
concrete world of nature, it confirmed itself more and more 
deeply in the very illusion that what our minds project upon the 
world is what we actually see. It forgot that the senses are 
innocent and that self-deception is the work of thought and 
imagination.7 

Confusions of this kind obscure the ways in which both 
sexuality and sensuality may become maya in its proper sense, 
that is, when the mind seeks more from nature than she can offer, 
when isolated aspects of nature are pursued in the attempt to 
force from them a life of joy without sorrow, or pleasure without 
pain. Thus the desire for sexual experience is maya when it is “on 
the brain,” when it is a purely willful and imaginative craving to 
which the organism responds reluctantly, or not at all. Idealized 
and fashionable conceptions of feminine beauty are maya when, 
as is often the case, they have little relation to the actual 
conformations of women. Love, as de Rougemont points out, is 
maya when it is being in love with being in love, rather than a 
relationship with a particular woman. Maya is indeed Woman in 
the abstract. 

Now sexuality is in this sense abstract whenever it is exploited 
or forced, when it is a deliberate, self-conscious, and yet 
compulsive pursuit of ecstasy, making up for the stark absence of 
ecstasy in all other spheres of life. Ecstasy, or transcending 
oneself, is the natural accompaniment of a full relationship in 
which we experience the “inner identity” between ourselves and 
the world. But when that relationship is hidden and the 
individual feels himself to be a restricted island of consciousness, 


his emotional experience is largely one of restriction, and it is as 
arid as the abstract persona which he believes himself to be. But 
the sexual act remains the one easy outlet from his predicament, 
the one brief interval in which he transcends himself and yields 
consciously to the spontaneity of his organism. More and more, 
then, this act is expected to compensate for defective spontaneity 
in all other directions, and is therefore abstracted or set apart 
from other experiences as the great delight. 

Such abstract sexuality is thus the certain result of a forced and 
studied style of personality, and of confusing spirituality with 
mere will power—a confusion which remains even when one is 
willing one’s will over to God. The individual ascetic may indeed 
succeed in sublimating his desire for sexual ecstasy into some 
other form, but he remains part of a society, a culture, upon 
which his attitude to sex has a powerful influence. By associating 
sex with evil he makes the great delight an even greater 
fascination for the other members of his society, and thereby 
unknowingly assists the growth of all the refinements of civilized 
lust. Considered from the standpoint of society as a whole, 
puritanism is as much a method of exploiting sex by titillation as 
black underwear, since it promotes the same shocking and 
exciting contrast between the naked flesh and the black of clerical 
propriety. It would not be unreasonable to regard puritanism, like 
masochism, as an extreme form of sexual “decadence.” 

The culture of Victorian England offers a striking example of 
this religious prurience, since it was by no means so sexless and 
staid as has often been supposed, but was, on the contrary, a 
culture of the most elegant lasciviousness. Extreme modesty and 
prudishness in the home so heightened the fascination of sex that 
prostitution, even for the upper classes, flourished on a far 
greater scale than in our own relatively liberal times. Fashionable 
and respectable boarding schools combined a total repression of 
overt sexuality with a proportionably flagrant indulgence in 
flagellomania. Fashions in clothing did everything to reveal and 
accentuate the feminine outline in the very act of covering it from 
neck to toe in veritable strait jackets of tweed, flannel, and boned 
corsetry. Even the chairs, tables, and household ornaments were 
suggestively bulged and curved—the chairs wide-shouldered and 
then waisted at the back, the seat broad, and the legs so 
obviously thighs or calves that squeamish housewives made the 


resemblance all the stronger by fitting them with skirts. For when 
sexuality is repressed in its direct manifestation, it irradiates 
other spheres of life to scatter on every side symbols and 
suggestions of its all the more urgent presence. 

From the standpoint of cultural anthropology this backhanded 
manner of embellishing sexuality may be just one of many 
legitimate variants of the art of sex. For so sensitive a creature as 
man, art is natural. He does not care to masticate raw beef with 
hands and teeth, nor to make love with the same “natural” 
unconcern as that with which he sneezes, nor to live in homes 
thrown together anyhow to keep out the wet and cold. Therefore 
there is almost always an art of love, whether it be as directly 
concerned with the sexual act as the Indian Kamasutra, or a 
preoccupation with the long preliminaries of wooing to which the 
sexual act itself is merely the final swift climax. Puritanism is 
simply one of these variants—that is, if we look at it as a natural 
phenomenon and do not take it at its own valuation of itself. It is 
another case of serving nature in trying to work against her, of an 
extreme of human artifice being no less natural than the 
supposedly freakish creatures of the wild. It is simply damming a 
stream to increase its force, but doing so unintentionally or 
unconsciously. Thus it has often been noted that periods of 
license and periods of puritanism alternate, the latter creating an 
excitement that can no longer be contained, and the former a 
lassitude that requires reinvigoration. The more normal means of 
keeping the stream at an even strength is modesty rather than 
prudery, the heightening of sexual fascination by aesthetic 
concealment as distinct from moral condemnation.s 

But if puritanism and cultivated licentiousness are not 
fundamental deviations from nature, they are simply the opposite 
poles of one and the same attitude—that, right or wrong, sexual 
pleasure is the great delight.9 This attitude, like the cultivation of 
the ego, is indeed one of the innumerable possibilities of the 
freedom of our nature, but because it abstracts sexuality from the 
rest of life (or attempts to do so), it hardly begins to realize its 
possibilities. Abstract sexuality is partial—a function of 
dissociated brains instead of total organisms—and for this reason 
is a singular confusion of the natural world with the maya of 
intellectual divisions and categories. For when sexuality is set 
apart as a specially good or specially evil compartment of life, it 


no longer works in full relation to everything else. In other 
words, it loses universality. It becomes a part doing duty for the 
whole—the idolatry of a creature worshipped in place of God, 
and an idolatry committed as much by the ascetic as the libertine. 

So long, then, as sexuality remains this abstract maya it 
remains a “demonic” and unspiritualized force, unspiritual in the 
sense that it is divorced from the universal and concrete reality of 
nature. For we are trying to wrest it from subordination to the 
total pattern of organism-environment relationship which, in 
Chinese philosophy, is li—the ordering principle of the Tao. But 
the universalization of sex involves far more than Freud’s 
recognition that art, religion, and politics are expressions of 
sublimated libido. We must also see that sexual relations are 
religious, social, metaphysical, and artistic. Thus the “sexual 
problem” cannot be solved simply at the sexual level, for which 
reason our whole discussion makes it subordinate to the problem 
of man and nature. Sexuality will remain a problem so long as it 
continues to be the isolated area in which the individual 
transcends himself and experiences spontaneity. He must first 
allow himself to be spontaneous in the whole play of inner feeling 
and of sensory response to the everyday world. Only as the senses 
in general can learn to accept without grasping, or to be 
conscious without straining, can the special sensations of sex be 
free from the grasping of abstract lust and its inseparable twin, 
the inhibition of abstract or “spiritual” disgust. 

It is in this way alone that the problem can be taken out of the 
fruitlessly alternating dualism in which we have set it. In this 
dualism sexuality is now good and now bad, now lustful and now 
prudish, now compellingly grasped and now guiltily inhibited. 
For when sexual activity is sought in the abstract its 
disappointments are proportionate to its exaggerated 
expectations, associating themselves with the swift transition 
from extreme excitement to lassitude which accompanies 
detumescence. The aftermath of intercourse, which should be a 
state of fulfilled tranquillity, is for the prude the depression of 
guilt and for the libertine the depression of ennui. The reason is 
that both are grasping at the sensation of intense lust which 
immediately precedes the orgasm, making it a goal rather than a 
gift, and so experienced it is an elation which swings over to 
depression, its opposite maya. But when the mounting excitement 


is accepted rather than grasped, it becomes a full realization of 
spontaneity, and the resulting orgasm is not its sudden end but 
the bursting in upon us of peace. 

It will by now be clear that a truly natural sexuality is by no 
means a spontaneity in the sense of promiscuity breaking loose 
from restraint. No more is it the colorlessly “healthy” sexuality of 
mere animal release from biological tension. To the degree that 
we do not yet know what man is, we do not yet know what 
human sexuality is. We do not know what man is so long as we 
know him piecemeal, categorically, as the separate individual, 
the agglomeration of blocklike instincts and passions and 
sensations regarded one by one under the fixed stare of an 
exclusive consciousness. What man is, and what human sexuality 
is, will come to be known only as we lay ourselves open to 
experience with the full sensitivity of feeling which does not 
grasp. 

The experience of sexual love is therefore no longer to be 
sought as the repetition of a familiar ecstasy, prejudiced by the 
expectation of what we already know. It will be the exploration 
of our relationship with an ever-changing, ever unknown partner, 
unknown because he or she is not in truth the abstract role or 
person, the set of conditioned reflexes which society has imposed, 
the stereotyped male or female which education has led us to 
expect. All these are maya, and the love of these is the endlessly 
frustrating love of fantasy. What is not maya is mystery, what 
cannot be described or measured, and it is in this sense— 
symbolized by the veil of modesty—that woman is always a 
mystery to man, and man to woman. It is in this sense that we 
must understand van der Leeuw’s remarkable saying that “the 
mystery of life is not a problem to be solved, but a reality to be 
experienced.” 


1 It is of interest that in the academic world only the more or less “effete” 
disciplines are studied by the historical method. Beginning courses in 
religion, philosophy, or “culture” are usually historical, but the history of 
mathematics, chemistry, or medicine is the concern of a few specialists 
only. The ordinary student begins at once to learn them from their present 
rudiments. 


2 De Civitate Dei, xiv, 17. Tr. Dods (1), vol. 2, p. 33. 


3 Note the “double bind” involved in blushing. One blushes because of shame 
and is in turn ashamed to blush, and is thus left with no alternative but to 


be “covered with confusion.” This is a mild example of the way in which, 
as Gregory Bateson (1) has shown, double-bind situations lead to the more 
serious “confusion” of insanity, and especially schizophrenia. 


4 Yet it is curious that both nature mysticism and supernatural mysticism can 
arrive at experiences which are almost indistinguishable. For it would 
seem that the latter, in struggling not only with external nature but also 
with its own wayward will and desire, reaches a point of impasse where it 
discovers the perversion or selfishness of the will in the very will to 
struggle. It is then forced to “give itself up” to a higher power which has 
been conceived as the supernatural will of God. But in fact the power to 
which it surrenders may be the very different “omnipotence” of natural 
spontaneity. Thus, even when trained in a tradition of supernaturalism, the 
mystic may return after his experience into the world bereft of all disgust 
for nature. On the contrary, he is often endowed with a completely artless 
and childlike love for every kind of creature. In his eyes the same old 
world is already transfigured with the “glory of God,” though to his less 
fortunate coreligionists it is as sinful and corrupt as ever. Cf. Dame Julian’s 
Revelations of the Divine Love: “See! I am God: see! I am in all thing; see! I 
do all thing: see! I lift never mine hands off my works, nor ever shall, 
without end: see! I lead all thing to the end I ordained it to from without 
beginning, by the same Might, Wisdom and Love whereby I made it. How 
should anything be amiss?” (xi). “Sin is behovable (i.e., permissible), but 
all shall be well, and all shall be well, and all manner of thing shall be 
well” (xxvii). 

5 Protestantism, with its greater interest in Biblical Christianity, is therefore 
more Hebraic in its attitude to sexuality than Catholicism, as witness 
Luther and Milton. But if it has to some extent liberalized sexual restraints, 
it has had as little notion as Catholicism of a positive sexual holiness. 


6 De Civitate Dei, xiv, 26. 


7 This misinterpretation of maya was largely corrected in Mahayana 
Buddhism, especially in its Chinese form. Thus the Lankavatara Sutra, ii, 
18, states that nirvana or release from maya is not to be understood as “the 
future annihilation of the senses and their fields.” So, too, the Chinese Zen 
master Seng-ts’an says explicitly: 


Do not be antagonistic to the world of the senses, 
For when you are not antagonistic to it, 
It turns out to be the same as complete Awakening. 


Likewise Kuo-an in his comments upon the Ten Oxherding Pictures says, 
“Things oppress us not because of an objective world, but because of a 
self-deceiving mind.” 


s Thus the Chinese and Japanese, who do not suffer from sexual guilt, have a 
strong sense of sexual shame, and have difficulty in appreciating our ready 
representation of the nude in art. Writing from Europe in 1900, a 
mandarin said, “The pictures in the palace set apart for them would not 
please the cultured mind of my venerable brother. The female form is 


represented nude or half nude. This would obtain fault from our propriety. 
... They have statues of plaster, and some of marble, in the public gardens 
and in this palace, most of them naked. In the winter’s ice it makes me 
want to cover them. The artists do not know the attraction of rich flowing 
drapery.” Hwuy-ung, A Chinaman’s Opinion of Us and His Own Country. 
London, 1927. 

9 Thus a recent summary of the compendia of Catholic moral theology, 
Jone’s Moral Theology (Newman Press, 1952), devotes 44 pages to a 
discussion of the various categories of sin, of which 32, in fine print, are 
occupied with sexual sins—snowing their relative importance with respect 
to murder, greed, cruelty, lying, and self-righteousness. 


7: Sacred and Profane Love 


Ir Is ALWAYS INSTRUCTIVE TO GO BACK To the original meanings of words 
to discover not only what new senses they have gained, but also 
what old senses they have lost. The word “profane,” for example, 
did not at first signify the blasphemous or irreligious, but an area 
or court before (pro) the entrance to a temple (fanum). It was thus 
the proper place of worship for the common people as distinct 
from the initiates, though here again the “common” is not the 
crude but the communal—the people living in society. By 
contrast, the sacred was not the merely religious but what lay 
outside or beyond the community, what was—again in an ancient 
sense—extraordinary or outside the social order. 

But we seem to have lost sight of the fact that there can be a 
position outside the communal and conventional order which is 
not subversive, a position free from rule but not against it. Almost 
invariably we confuse this position with its opposite—that which 
lies below order, and which is chaos rather than freedom. It is 
part of the same confusion that speaking with “authority” has 
come to mean speaking for the government, the Church, or 
tradition, or with the backing of well-documented footnotes. Yet 
it was not thus that Jesus was described as “speaking as one 
having authority, and not as the Scribes.” The point was that he 
spoke with inner conviction, which must again be distinguished 
from the dogmatism of inner uncertainty. The “original” has 
likewise come to mean the novel or even eccentric, but the 
deeper senses of authority and originality are to be the author 
and origin of one’s own deeds as a free agent. The socially 
conditioned persona or role-playing ego is, however, never a free 
agent. Man is free to the extent that he realizes his genuine self to 
be the author and origin of nature. 

Yet here again our accustomed confusion of levels makes this 
indistinguishable from the lunatic boast “I myself am God!” Out 
of this confusion the Western Church rejected the insight of 
Eckhart in saying: 


God must be very I, I very God, so consummately one that 
this he and this I are one “is,” in this is-ness working one work 
eternally; but so long as this he and this I, to wit, God and the 
soul, are not one single here, one single now, the I cannot 
work with nor be one with that he.1 


For the root of the confusion is that the Christian tradition of the 
West has lacked what we have called “inwardness.” Its official 
position has always been profane, conventional, and exoteric 
without knowing it to be so. Thus it has confused the profane 
with the sacred, the relative with the absolute, the social sphere 
of law and order with the divine nature. The social order has 
therefore been enforced with sanctions which are too strong, and 
its laws have been made absolute imperatives. We have already 
seen this in the notion that the love of God and the love of nature 
can be considered alternatives, like mutually exclusive creatures 
and things. But when God, the Absolute, is thus dragged down 
into the realm of creatures and made to compete with them, the 
order of creatures, of society and convention, is blasted. For when 
the ear is singing, all other sounds are lost. 

This is why Christian officialdom is itself the cause of the very 
secularism and shallow relativism which it so much condemns. 
For the secular revolution of the Renaissance and the 
Enlightenment and all that followed was a parody of the 
“mystery” which the Church had neglected. This was the strictly 
inner or sacred doctrine that in God, in reality, all men are free 
and equal, or, to put it in another way, that in God there are no 
classes or distinctions, no respect of persons. For the initiate into 
this mystery has 


put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the 
image of him that created him: where there is neither Greek 
nor Jew, circumcision nor  uncircumcision, Barbarian, 
Scythian, bond nor free; but Christ is all, and in all.2 


A state Church, which is to say a profane Church, could not 
possibly admit or cherish such a doctrine, and thus when it was 
dragged out of neglect it became a pretext for revolution, and the 
Church could not claim it, saying, “Come, this is nothing new. We 
have known it all the time and are now ready to explain it to you 


correctly.” 

Instead, the Church virtually disowned its inner meaning, 
retreated into an ever more rigid identification of God with law, 
and abandoned the position beyond good and evil and beyond 
distinctions to the secularists. But here it became the position 
below good and evil. Standards were not transcended but rejected, 
and equality in the sight of God became the assumption that all 
men are equally inferior. Freedom became mere individualism, 
and the classless society a dull uniformity. Art became 
monotonous eccentricity, and craft monotonous mass production. 
These are sweeping generalizations to which there have been 
happy exceptions, but the consistent trend of the so-called 
modern or progressive spirit has been toward an obliteration of 
social distinctions which is, in effect, a disorganization of society. 
For the organic is always differentiated, in function if not in 
worth. 

One of the most extreme forms of this parody is the attitude of 
so many Freudians which reduces all creative activity—art, 
philosophy, religion, and literature—to a manifestation of oral or 
anal eroticism, or infantile incestuousness, with the cynical 
implication that all men are thereby equally guilty. The 
transparent feeling of this attitude is not that these libidinous 
foundations are natural and pure, but that poets and sages can be 
debunked by being reduced to a level which, to these 
psychologists themselves, is still obscene. This resembles nothing 
so much as the “police psychology” which assumes that all men, 
the policemen included, are criminals and holds it over their 
heads. In such instances it comes out very clearly that this parody 
of the doctrine of equality is the tragic and destructive 
resentment of creativity by the underprivileged or unloved. 

These are not, however, the people of low status: they are the 
people of no status, bred in profusion by a society which confuses 
the moral law with the divine nature. For such a society cannot 
give any status to what is low—to the gambler, courtesan, 
drunkard, beggar, sexual deviant, or tramp. In a system of 
absolutist morals such people have no place at all. They are 
unacceptable to God since there are no longer allowed to be any 
least in the Kingdom of Heaven, and his sun may no longer shine 
upon the unjust unless they consent to reform. But the unjust are 
not only special classes of people; unjust or unadjusted elements 


exist in every member of society as the ignored aspects of nature 
which do not fit in with maya, the conventional order. They are, 
in a technical sense, obscene or “off-scene”3 because they do not 
come into the picture; they have no outward role or part in the 
social drama. Nevertheless, they are as essential to it as the 
stagehands behind the scenes, the faces behind the masks, and 
the bodies beneath the costumes. 

But when the conventional order and the divine nature are 
confused, the unjust and the obscene become metaphysically 
sinful—absolutely intolerable to God. And what is intolerable to 
God becomes, in another way, intolerable to man. He cannot 
support a situation in which the ignored and obscene parts of his 
nature are brought out onto the stage and condemned. His only 
defense is to accuse the accusers, to unmask and unfrock 
everyone, saying, “Look, you are really just like me!” Yet this in 
its own way is just as much a mistake as the confusion which 
provoked it. The off-scene is not the reality behind the outward 
drama: it is also part of the illusion, for what is to be off-scene is 
determined by the selection of what is to be on-scene; what is 
ignored is relative to what is noticed. Herein is the error of 
supposing that repressed sexual forces are the realities behind 
cultural achievements, for the relationship between them is one 
of mutuality and not of subordination. While the evil is defined 
by the choice of the good, it is not the reality determining the 
choice. 

Thus when the sacred idea of equality is profaned it turns out 
to be the parody that in reality, in God, all men are alike in their 
obscenity. What it should have meant is that in reality all men 
are alike in their essential innocence—that the division of their 
natures into the good and the evil, the on-scene and off-scene, is 
(in another original sense of a word) arbitrary or a decision of an 
independent spectator, none other than our old friend the 
isolated, observing ego. But to the eye of God there is no 
distinction of on-scene and off-scene, and all men are just as they 
are, as the Buddhists would say, of “one suchness.” When the 
curtain falls and all the actors come out in front with the author 
and the director as themselves and no longer in their roles, the 
hero and the villain, the men on-scene and the men off-scene are 
alike applauded. 


Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord 
come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of 
darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts: 
and then shall every man have praise of God.4 


At times, however, the audience will be moved to boo. But they 
will not boo the villain because he was the villain; they will boo 
him, at the end of the play, if he did not act true to character. 
They will boo if what should have stayed off-scene has kept 
coming on-scene, or vice versa. In other words, there is nothing 
wrong with the obscene so long as it remains off the scene and 
stays in its place. But in a moral absolutism it has no place— 
perhaps because the audience does not know that the play is a 
play. The social drama and its conventions are confused with 
reality. 

The proper distinction of the sacred from the profane, and of 
the profane from the obscene, is of the utmost importance for a 
philosophy of love as between man and woman. Failure to see the 
difference between the sacred and the profane is one of the main 
reasons why the Christian tradition has no adequate idea of 
sacred love. For sacred love is not the love of God as an 
alternative to the love of creatures. Sacred love is not matrimony, 
though it may sometimes exist between the married. Nor is 
sacred love the “grand passion” in its popular and romantic sense. 
Just as we have a parody of equality before God in modern 
secularism, we have also a parody of sacred love which has arisen 
in much the same way. 

It is common knowledge that the institution of marriage came 
to the West as a highly formal familial arrangement, a character 
which in some Latin countries it still retains. The founding of the 
branch of a family was by no means a matter of private choice, 
but a momentous decision involving many people. It was 
therefore arranged, not by the young couple, but by grandfathers 
and grandmothers, and stabilized by legal contracts which the 
modern version of the institution still involves. Whether the 
couple “loved” each other, or might come to do so, was a thing of 
minor importance. The marriage represented a familial alliance, 
and was’ governed by political, social, _and—however 
“primitive’—eugenic considerations. In cultures where this form 
of marriage still exists, concubinage and other forms of 


extramarital sexuality flourish as a matter of course for men, even 

when tolerated rather than provided for by law. In general, such 

extramarital relations are off-scene, existing by a social 
agreement which is tacit but not explicit. Marriage was therefore 

a profane institution—a matter of communal convention as 

between people who were playing social roles. Therefore those 

who were above role, or, as in India, above caste, did not marry 
or at least abandoned marriage when the time came for their 
liberation from maya. 

Now, Christianity arose in the West as an exceedingly strange 
mixture of social and religious ideas from many different sources. 
It comprised legal and social ideas of marriage that were mainly 
Jewish with notions of moral and spiritual chastity that were 
Greek or Essene, and probably garbled and remote influences 
from India. The resulting confusion was so involved that it may 
assist us to unravel it if we simply list the main factors that came 
into play: 

1. The Jewish idea that the physical universe is inherently good. 

2. The Orphic and garbled Indian idea that the physical universe 
is evil. 

3. The Jewish institution of marriage as a property and familial 
arrangement. 

4. The Jewish idea of the holiness of procreation, the duty of 
population increase, and the sin of sowing the human seed 
unprocreatively. 

5. The Orphic-Essene-Indian idea of withdrawal from the flesh 
through nonprocreation, and thus of the greater holiness of 
virginity. 

6. The Jewish idea of the sin of adultery as an infringement of 
property rights. 

7. The generally Greco-Indian tradition that the holy or sacred 
person stands apart from social involvement. 


8. The Jewish idea that the social conventions are the laws of 
God. 


9. Jesus’ own idea that women, too, have some rights since they 
are at least equal with men in having souls. 


It is no wonder that an attempt to combine these ideas plunged 


the relations between men and women into a fearsome mess, 
though it may perhaps have been worth while if only for the last 
idea involved—the recognition that “women are people.” 

But to appreciate the full extent of the confusion we must 
consider the fact that Indian ideas had reached the West in an 
extremely popularized and literal form, a form which they had of 
course assumed in India itself in the first place. The main feature 
of this distortion was the confusion of maya with evil on the one 
hand and with the natural universe on the other. This involved 
the further confusion of the virgin or sacred person with the 
totally abstinent, the person withdrawn not only from society but 
also from nature. But the original meaning of a parthenos or 
virgin was a woman who did not submit to arranged marriage, 
taking, instead, a partner of her own choice. She became an 
“unmarried mother” not because she was vicious or promiscuous, 
but because she was a person in her own right. 

Now the early Church combined all these diverse factors by 
preserving the legal, familial marriage, restricting it to one wife, 
and virtually outlawing divorce out of respect for women’s rights. 
Consistently, the next step would have been to extend the tacit 
recognition of off-scene sexuality to women, but instead it merely 
forbade it to men. Jesus attacked divorce because a divorced 
woman was like merchandise returned to the seller as unfit for 
use, as a result of which she lost social status altogether. The 
important point, however, was that the type of marriage which 
the Church monogamized and protected against divorce, and 
from which it excluded concubinage, was the familial arranged 
marriage.s Sexual love in any other sense than illicit and sinful 
lust is a matter which the New Testament totally ignores.« 

In short, the Church combined the Jewish insistence on 
procreation and the Greco-Indian ideal of sexual abstinence in a 
form of marriage which would effect the greatest possible 
restriction of sexual feeling. In this way the profane institution of 
marriage was identified, or rather confused, with the sacred state 
of chastity, which was in turn mistaken for joyless sexuality or, 
preferably, abstinent virginity. As St. Paul said, “Let those with 
wives be as though they had none.” The outcome, the sacrament 
of Holy Matrimony, was supposed to be the sanctification of the 
profane by the sacred by analogy with the union of the Word 
with the flesh in the Incarnation. But because the Word and the 


Spirit, as conceived, were really antithetical to the flesh, and the 
sacred opposed to the profane, the coming together of the two was 
not a union but an enslavement. Similarly, as the male stood for 
the spirit and the female for the flesh, the wife had no choice of 
her partner and must be subservient to her husband. 

This was obviously a conception of marriage which could not 
last, but it was some time before it was modified by the exercise 
of mutual choice by the two partners. As the Church became 
identified with the state and as its early zeal flagged, Holy 
Matrimony was in practice modified in many ways, mainly 
through reversion to polygyny, concubinage, and prostitution.7 
But the factor which transformed the Christian conception of 
marriage more than anything else was the emergence in the early 
Middle Ages of the cult of courtly love, which is the historical 
basis of what we now know as the romantic conception of love 
and marriage. 

Historians are not in clear agreement as to the origins and 
nature of this extraordinary movement, but the weight of opinion 
is that the Catharist heresy, from which it arose, was a form of 
the Persian religion of Manichaeism, of which vestiges remained 
in Western Europe from the days of the Roman Empire, or which 
was reintroduced by returning crusaders. Now, Manichaeism was 
a syncretist movement and seems to have been one of the 
principal carriers of distorted Indian ideas to the West. These 
included an extreme dualism of spirit and nature reminiscent of 
the Samkhya philosophy, and a conception of love as “pure 
desire” which is strangely similar to forms of the Indian cult of 
Tantra, in which the arousal and transmutation of sexual desire 
was employed as a type of yoga. The spiritual ideal of 
Manichaeism was the liberation of the world of light from the 
world of darkness, and thus the deliverance of the human spirit 
from its fleshly prison. 

The conception of “pure desire” as well as the dualist distortion 
of the maya doctrine had, indeed, reached the West before the 
appearance of Catharism, for we find St. John Chrysostom, St. 
Gregory of Nazianzus, and St. Jerome condemning the spread 
among Christians of taking to themselves agapetae or virgines 
subintroductae. This was the practice of forming a love 
relationship with virgin Christian girls which went as far as 
caressing and sleeping with them, and perhaps involved coitus 


reservatus, but avoided actual emission of the seed. By this means 
sexual desire was not “dissipated” in orgasm but was restrained 
and built up into passion. To put it in another way, its restraint at 
the sexual center caused it to irradiate the whole organism, 
transmuting the atmosphere of sexual feeling into every phase of 
the relationship between the partners. In such a way sexual 
attraction was personalized. It became a desire not just for 
“woman,” but for the particular woman whose whole body and 
whose day-to-day associations with her lover had become 
“perfumed” with restrained and irradiated lust. In this way, too, 
the beloved became idealized; she became more than mere 
woman; she became a goddess, image of the divine. 

Repressed for a time by the official Church, the practice 
appeared again in Europe in the twelfth century, now in the form 
of Catharism and courtly love. But here the women involved were 
not only or chiefly virgins, but married women, often the wives of 
feudal princes, with whom young knights formed the bond of 
donnoi. This was apparently an “ideal” or “sexually pure” love 
relationship wherein sexual feeling was transmuted into all the 
attentions and gallantries winch became expected of a gentleman 
toward a lady. These relationships formed the themes of 
troubadour poetry, the chief wellspring of all later European 
secular poetry, as well as the entire basis of the Western notion of 
ideal or romantic love. 

Historians disagree as to whether these relationships were 
genuinely “ideal” or simply a cloak for refined adultery and 
fornication, the latter impression being founded on the many 
references in the poetic literature to caressing and embracing the 
naked body of the beloved lady. At the same time, there are 
equally frequent references to the absolute necessity of avoiding 
actual sexual intercourse, for as one of the poets said, “He knows 
nothing of donnoi who wants fully to possess his lady.” Although, 
then, there is no direct evidence for the fact, the very ambiguity 
of the references suggests that the relationship often extended to 
coitus reservatus or, to use the Persian word, karezza—the 
prolonged sexual union without orgasm on the part of the male. 

But whether karezza was employed or not, it is clear that 
courtly love introduced a contemplative as distinct from an active 
mode of sexuality—a distinction parallel to the religious 
differentiation between the contemplative and active lives. For 


the ideal of the troubadour was at least to gaze upon and worship 
the unveiled form of his lady. In this respect the troubadours had 
grasped one of the elements of sacred love, that is, of a love 
relationship consistent with and _ patterned after the 
contemplative life. It is important to remember that the 
contemplative life is not to be confused with the merely 
cloistered life, which, however, sometimes includes it. Essentially 
the contemplative life is the summit of spiritual insight—the 
vision or theoria of God—a realization permeating all one’s 
ordinary and practical activities. In just the same way, the 
troubadour wished to contemplate his lady and have his whole 
life permeated by the atmosphere of her presence. 

Although courtly love was adopted by individual members of 
the clergy and the donnoi relationship was often blessed with 
ecclesiastical rites, the cult was in the end subject to the most 
ruthless persecution which the Church has ever sponsored, prior 
to the Reformation. The Dominican campaign against the Cathars 
or Albigenses involved also an attempt to substitute the Virgin 
Mary for the idealized woman of courtly devotion. But the 
persecution never eradicated the process which changed Christian 
matrimony into the ideal of a fulfillment of romantic love—an 
ideal which, in later times, the Church itself adopted. Thus 
modern Catholic theories of Christian marriage differ so radically 
from the conceptions of the Patristic age just because they have 
absorbed so much from the philosophy of courtly love. This, 
rather than the few hints of the idea in the Gospels and St. Paul, 
is the real root of the modern Christian doctrine of married love. 
Few modern Catholic theologians regard matrimony as the mere 
restriction of sexual relations to one woman for the purpose of 
procreating Christian children. The emphasis has now passed to 
the idea of loving a woman as a person, as this woman rather 
than “woman,” for in such a way marital love becomes analogous 
to God’s own love, conceived as his eternal faithfulness to each 
and every individual person. 

There is no doubt that this modern view of Holy Matrimony is 
a tremendous improvement upon what was originally nothing 
more than a rigid restriction of the arranged marriage and a total 
condemnation of sexual feeling. But it is still a parody of sacred 
love, and arises from the Church’s inability to distinguish the 
profane from the sacred by making the two mutually exclusive, 


which is to say, of the same kind.s 

One of the best apologists for the modern ideal of Holy 
Matrimony is the Catholic-minded Protestant Denis de 
Rougemont, whose important work Love in the Western World is at 
the same time a marvellous clarification and a profound 
misunderstanding of the differences between sacred and profane 
love. The gist of his thesis is that mature sexual love is total 
devotion to the entirety of another human being—as distinct from 
bodily lust or passion, which he describes as being in love with 
being in love, passion in particular being an infatuation with the 
subjective feelings aroused by postponing sexual intercourse with 
an idealized woman. But he is surely mistaken in thinking that 
passion, as cultivated by the troubadours, stands alongside pure 
eroticism or “pagan love” in opposition to his own ideal of 
matrimony. For he sees both of the former as an attitude to 
woman in which she is merely the pretext for an ecstasy, whether 
it be self-frustrating passion or self-indulging lust. Yet the 
problem is not so simple, for it is precisely from courtly love that 
modern Christianity has obtained the idea that, in Holy 
Matrimony, sexual love may be completely fused with personal 
love. 

We must repeat that in its early centuries Christianity had no 
conception of the hallowing of sexual feeling. Sexual intercourse 
between a married couple was pure to the extent that it was a 
brief physical exchange for procreation. The wife was loved and 
cherished inasmuch as, having an immortal soul, she was, after 
all, as good as another man. To lust after one’s wife was little 
short of adultery. It was, then, from Manichaeans and Cathars 
that Christians learned the art of personalizing sexual desire, that 
is, of delaying the haste of lust so that sexual feeling would attach 
itself not merely to the subpersonal organs and limbs of the 
woman but to her total personality. The modern view of Holy 
Matrimony is therefore a middle position between the early 
Christian and the courtly, allowing sufficient passion, or delay of 
lust, to personalize the relationship and, unlike the Cathars, 
permitting the male orgasm so as to produce children and to 
prevent passion from becoming an end in itself. But the historical 
roots of this view are not purely Christian. 

Even so, this conception of matrimony is far short of realizing 
what the sexual relationship may be at the sacred level. This is 


evident in the fact that de Rougemont identifies the sacred 
element in matrimony with fidelity to the legal or profane 
contract between the partners. As he sees it, the whole dignity 
and responsibility of being a person is realized in strength of will 
—in being able to stand by one’s word, in the irrevocable decision 
of the couple to make their contractual pledge stand firm against 
all nonverbal, natural, fleshly, or emotional considerations. This 
is, he confesses, an absurdity against all practical reason, but such 
is precisely the divine absurdity of Christianity, of which 
Tertullian said, Credo quia absurdum est—“I believe because it is 
absurd.” 


Forgoing any rationalist or hedonist form of apology, I 
propose to speak only of a troth that is observed by virtue of the 
absurd—that is to say, simply because it has been pledged— 
and by virtue of being an absolute which will uphold the 
husband and wife as persons.... I maintain that fidelity thus 
understood is the best means we have of becoming persons. 
The person is manifested in the making. What is person within 
each of us is an entity built up like a work of art—built up 
thanks to constructiveness and in the same conditions as we 
construct things.... Neither passion nor the heretical faith out 
of which it sprang could have inspired the belief that the 
control of Nature should be the aim of our lives. 


Here in a nutshell is the whole story of the identification of the 
absolute, the personal, and the divine with artifice in opposition 
to nature. In its original meaning the persona, the mask, is indeed 
a construct, a maya in its proper sense. But for this very reason it 
should have been distinguished from the divine and the absolute. 
For the divine, the real, is not the construct; it is the natural, 
nonverbal, and indescribable order (li) from which construction 
emerges and to which it is subordinate. To set the principle of 
artifice and construction outside and against nature is to tear the 
universe apart in such a way that the rift can only be healed upon 
the terms of the total submission of nature to the will and its 
legal violence. Such a view of the divinity of the law and the 
word issues in a conception of the marriage contract where man 
is made for the Sabbath, not the Sabbath for man. For man is held 
to acquire personality or spiritual dignity by submitting himself 


irrevocably to an absolute law. Faithfulness is thereby confused 
with complete mistrust of oneself, for on these terms the human 
organism is to be trusted only in so far as it binds itself to a law— 
a law which it has itself invented, and whose order and structure 
is far inferior to his own. 

It was for this reason that Confucius made jen or “human- 
heartedness” a far higher virtue than i or “righteousness,” and 
declined to give the former any clear definition. For man cannot 
define or legalize his own nature. He may attempt to do so only 
at the cost of identifying himself with an abstract and incomplete 
image of himself—that is, with a mechanical principle which is 
qualitatively inferior to a man. Thus Confucius felt that in the 
long run human passions and feelings were more trustworthy 
than human principles of right and wrong, that the natural man 
was more of a man than the conceptual man, the constructed 
person. Principles were excellent, and indeed necessary, so long 
as they were tempered with human-heartedness and the sense of 
proportion or humor that goes with it. War, for example, is less 
destructive when fought for greed than for the justification of 
ideological principles, since greed will not destroy what it wishes 
to possess, whereas the vindication of principle is an abstract goal 
which is perfectly ruthless in regard to the humane values of life, 
limb, and property. 

Zealots and fanatics of all kinds revolt at Confucian 
reasonableness, with its spirit of compromise and mellow humor, 
feeling it to be ignoble and tame, lacking the heroism and fire of 
irrevocable commitment to principle—and this is precisely the 
attitude of Chinese Communism in its present attempt to destroy 
the Confucian tradition.10 But from the Confucian standpoint the 
zealotry of irrevocable commitment to principle is not only a silly 
bravado and a striking of heroic attitudes; it is also a total 
insensitivity to inner feeling and to the subtle intelligence of the 
natural order. “The superior man,” said Confucius in the Analects, 
“goes through life without any one preconceived course of action 
or any taboo. He merely decides for the moment what is the right 
thing to do.” 11 

From our standpoint such a precept is the recommendation of 
caprice and disorder, for we feel that unless the artifice of law is 
held over our heads like a club we shall revert to our “basic” and 
“natural” depravity, as if this is what we really are under the 


“veneer” of civilization. This is not, however, what we are really, 
naturally, and basically. It is what we are off-scene, which, as we 
saw, is no more real than what we are on-scene. Unseemly 
disorderliness is, in fact, the last thing of which anyone would 
accuse followers of the Confucian and Taoist philosophies, since 
they have formed the foundations of one of the most stable 
societies in the world. 

It will now be clear that we must discover the character of 
sacred love by analogy with the sacred or contemplative life in its 
other aspects. But it had first to be clear that the sacred is not in 
competition with the profane as if it were something of the same 
kind. In other words, the sacred is not in the conceptual and 
conventional order of things, and thus neither fights with them, 
avoids them, nor struggles to dominate them. It has no need to do 
so, for it is the superior order out of which they proceed and to 
which they are always eventually subordinate—and this is why 
every attempted escape from sexuality transforms itself into 
prurience. “Tao is that from which one cannot for a single instant 
depart. That from which one may depart is not Tao.”12 

In the life of spontaneity human consciousness shifts from the 
attitude of strained, willful attention to kuan, the attitude of open 
attention or contemplation. This attitude forms the basis of a 
more “feminine” and receptive approach to love, an attitude 
which for that very reason is more considerate of women. It will 
have been obvious that most of the attitudes hitherto discussed 
are one-sidedly and ridiculously male. Save among _ the 
practitioners of karezza, they know nothing of the female orgasm, 
which, for purposes of simple procreation, is almost irrelevant. 
They are thus exclusively concerned with the rights and wrongs 
of male pleasure in sex, and, furthermore, of a male approach 
which is one-sidedly aggressive, domineering, and grasping. In 
short, they are attempts to make rules for sexuality by people 
who knew extremely little about it. 

The idea of equality in the sacred sphere has often been taken 
to mean the disappearance of sexuality, since St. Paul said that in 
Christ there is neither male nor female, and Jesus said that in 
heaven there is neither marriage nor giving in marriage. But the 
latter remark is only to say that heaven, the sacred sphere, stands 
above the social institutions of the profane sphere. Conversely, 
the secular notion of sexual equality is one that merely permits 


women to behave like men, and the two parodies, the Churchly 
and the secular, are equally sexless rather than sexually equal. 
Sexual equality should properly mean sexual fulfillment, the 
woman realizing her masculinity through man, and the man 
realizing his femininity through woman. For the “pure” male and 
the “pure” female have nothing in common and no means of 
communication with each other. They are cultural stereotypes 
and affectations. What a real man or woman is always remains 
inconceivable, since their reality lies in nature, not in the verbal 
world of concepts. 

Sexual equality therefore implies a sexual life which is free 
from, but not against, the profane definitions of man and woman. 
It implies that they do not need to play roles in loving each other, 
but enter into a relationship for which we may borrow words 
which St. Augustine used in another context, “Love—and do what 
you will.” Given the open and mutually considerate attitude of 
attention to each other, they are in a situation where, without 
restraint, “anything goes.” 

Role-playing is so automatic that we seldom notice how deeply 
it pervades our lives, and readily confuse its attitudes with our 
own natural and genuine inclinations. This is so much so that the 
love relationship is often far more of an “act” than anything else. 
Love itself is frequently an assumed emotion which we believe we 
ought to feel. Its presence is supposed to be identifiable by 
certain known symptoms which men and women learn to expect 
in each other, and which we are very clever at imitating in such a 
way that the right hand does not know what the left is doing. 
Lovers are expected to be jealous of one another. The man is 
supposed to act protectively and the woman a little helplessly. 
The man is supposed to take the initiative in expressing love and 
the woman to wait longingly for his attentions. Certain types of 
feature, voice, and figure are supposed to be peculiarly lovable or 
sex-appealing, and the intimacies of sexual intercourse are 
governed by rituals in which the man is active and the woman 
passive, and in which the verbal and symbolic communications of 
love adhere to an extremely limited pattern. 

Nor is this all, for roles lie within roles like the layers of an 
onion. The man playing husband to wife may also be playing son 
to mother, or the woman daughter to father. Or the normal role- 
playing may be dropped deliberately so as to assume the role of 


99 66 


“naturalness,” “sincerity,” or “emancipatedness.” Lustfulness itself 
may be subconsciously cultivated so that the man may assure 
himself that he is really male and gets from women the socially 
expected thrills and excitements. More than often we make love 
to prove that we are lovable, which is to say that we can identify 
ourselves with a role which is conventionally acceptable. 

Anyone who becomes conscious of role-playing will swiftly 
discover that just about all his attitudes are roles, that he cannot 
find out what he is genuinely, and is therefore at a loss what to 
do to express himself sincerely. Thereupon he is self-conscious 
and blocked in his relationships, finding himself in the double- 
bind predicament where every road is closed. This leaves him in a 
state of complete paralysis if he persists in thinking that there is 
some “right” course of action and some particular set of feelings 
which constitute his real self. Where he expected to find the 
specific truth about himself he found freedom, but mistook it for 
mere nothingness. For human freedom does indeed comprise an 
order, yet because it is the nonlinear order of li and of the Tao, it 
cannot be classified; it cannot be identified with any particular 
role. Therefore at this point of the double bind he must wait, and 
see what happens of itself, spontaneously. He will find that the 
sensation that every road is barred abruptly switches into the 
sensation that every road is open. He can play all roles, just as in 
Hindu mythology the true self is pictured as the godhead acting 
all the parts of the multitude of finite creatures. 

Strictly speaking, it is not quite true that one must wait for 
something to happen spontaneously. For the heart is beating, the 
breath is moving, and all the senses are perceiving. A whole 
world of experience is coming to the organism of itself, without 
the slightest forcing. This spontaneous arrival of experience is not 
actually passive; it is already spontaneous action. When it is 
watched and felt to be action in this sense, it flows naturally into 
further action. But blocking takes place if this action is ignored 
and its apparent passivity interpreted as “nothing happening.” It 
is true that it may not be what was expected to happen, but then 
the expected is always liable to be forced rather than 
spontaneous. The constant action of spontaneous experiencing 
which, considered as an act, is the organism’s creation of its 
world and the world’s creation of the organism, is the basis and 
style of action from which love and its expressions arise. In this 


open and ungrasping mode of awareness the beloved, the other, 
is not possessed but is rather received into oneself with all the 
richness and splendor of the unpremeditated surprise. 

In almost every culture love is an intimacy between two 
particular people in which conventions that govern other 
relationships are set aside. In this respect it already suggests, even 
if only symbolically, the sacred rather than the profane, and the 
lovers’ removal of clothes in one another’s presence is already a 
sign of taking off the personal mask and stepping out of role. 
Only a society which is seriously ignorant of the sacred could 
regard the taboo, the secrecy of love, as a cloak hiding an 
unfortunate but necessary reversion to animality. But this is just 
what would be expected in a culture which conceives of spirit as 
other than nature, and which tries to dominate the order of 
nature with the order of the word. To such a mentality the 
identification of sexuality with the sacred is a far more serious 
threat than the most crass and brutish bawdiness. Its censorship 
can tolerate sexuality so long as it is a matter of “dirty” jokes, or 
so long as it is kept at the merely physiological level of medical 
language, so long, in other words, as it is kept as far as possible 
from the sacred. The association of sexuality with the sacred 
conjures up the most superstitious fears and fantasies, including 
the suspicion that it must have something to do with Satanism 
and the weird practices of black magic and the left-hand path! 

But if the union of lovers is already a symbolic transition from 
the profane to the sacred, from role to reality, it is a relationship 
peculiarly fitted for the actual realization of liberation from maya. 
Yet this can happen only if the minds and senses of the 
participants are in the state of open attention whereby nature is 
received in its unknown reality, since closed or strained attention 
can perceive only its projection of the known. Here is the ideal 
sphere for the type of awareness which Freud considered essential 
for psychoanalysis. 


For as soon as attention is deliberately concentrated in a 
certain degree, one begins to select from the material before 
one; one point will be fixed in the mind with particular 
clearness and some other consequently disregarded, and in this 
selection one’s expectations or one’s inclinations will be 
followed. This is just what must not be done, however; if one’s 


expectations are followed in this selection there is danger of 
never finding anything but what is already known, and if one 
follows one’s inclinations anything which is to be perceived 
will most certainly be falsified.i3 


It is commonly thought that, of all people, lovers behold one 
another in the most unrealistic light, and that in their encounter 
is but the mutual projection of extravagant ideals. But may it not 
be that nature has allowed them to see for the first time what a 
human being is, and that the subsequent disillusion is not the 
fading of dream into reality but the strangling of reality with an 
all too eager embrace? 


1 Tr. Evans (1), vol. 1, p. 247. 
2 Colossians 3, 10-11. 


3 On second thought I forget the source of the article in which I came across 
this suggestive but probably dubious derivation of the word. According to 
the Oxford English Dictionary the etymology of “obscene” is unknown, 
whereas Webster derives it from obs-caenum, with caenum meaning “filth,” 
though such a combination would ordinarily have appeared in English as 
“occene.” However, the sense of “off-scene” is consistent with an 
alternative derivation from ob-scaenum (Greek, oxatés), designating the 
left-hand, sinister, and inauspicious. For both the off-scene and the sinister 
have to do with the indispensable underside or dark aspect of things. 
Inauspicious as it may be, the left must always accompany the right. 


41 Corinthians 4, 5. St. Paul is often so quotable in senses that are probably 
out of context and which would doubtless have horrified him. However, I 
would like to see someone make a case for the idea that the Apostles really 
did hand down an inner tradition to the Church, and that through all these 
centuries the Church has managed to guard it from the public eye. If so, it 
has remained far more secret and “esoteric” than in any of the other great 
spiritual traditions of the world, so much so that its existence is highly 
doubtful. For in the West the philosophia perennis has always been an 
individual matter, often condemned and sometimes barely tolerated by the 
official hierarchy. It would, however, be much easier to make a case of 
this kind for the Eastern Orthodox Church than for the Roman Catholic. 
On the other hand, a true esotericism is not a matter of “secret 
information,” formally withheld from public knowledge. It is secret in the 
sense of ineffable, that is, a mode of knowledge which cannot be described 
because it does not fall into any class. 


5 “The girl is not consulted about her espousals, for she awaits the judgment 
of her parents, inasmuch as a girl’s modesty will not allow her to choose a 
husband.” St. Ambrose, De Abraham, i, ad fin. St. Basil, Ep. ad Amphilocium, 
ii, says that a marriage without paternal sanction is fornication, and under 


the laws of Constantius and Constans it was a capital offense. 


6 However, the celebrated text of Matthew 5, 28, imputing adultery to so 
much as looking on a woman to lust after her should be taken in context. 
The whole passage from verse 17 to the end is an ironical discussion of the 
legal righteousness of the Pharisees. Jesus shows the shallowness and 
absurdity of legal righteousness by taking it to an extreme. He begins with 
what to any but the most simple-minded literalist would be the obvious 
jest that the very punctuation marks and calligraphic ornaments of the law 
are now to be sacrosanct. He then arranges various types of anger and 
abuse in descending order of gravity, but assigns penalties for them in the 
reverse order. For unreasonable anger, the magistrate’s court is assigned; 
for saying “Raca” or “silly idiot,” the high court; and for saying “You fool,” 
hellfire itself. But in Matthew 23, 17, Jesus uses the selfsame expression, 
“You fools” (Hwpoty in speaking to the followers of the Pharisees. In the 
verse in question he satirizes the property law against adultery by 
extending it to a similar extreme, and then goes on to recommend the 
excision of the lustful eye. The passage can be taken at its face value only 
on the assumption that Jesus was totally lacking in humor. 


7G.R. Taylor (1), pp. 19-50. 


s There are other instructive examples of the confusion. Thus the term 
“person,” originally the per-sona or megaphone-mask indicating the 
assumed role of the player in classical drama, is used to designate the 
basic spiritual reality of the human being and God alike. The human being 
is said to have spiritual dignity because he is a person, as God is three 
Persons. But a person is strictly what one is as a mask or role, at the social 
and conventional level. The word which should have been used for the ego 
is used for the self (atman) or spirit (pneuma), which in other traditions is 
supra-individual. Hence the Christian identification of the spirit with the 
ego, and the inability to see that man is more than ego, that his true and 
basic selfhood is divine. Another instance appears in the celibacy of the 
secular priesthood, indicating a confusion of the sacerdotal caste (profane) 
with the casteless (sacred) contemplatives—the monks and hermits who 
have abandoned worldly (or social) estate (or class). As we have seen, 
matters are made worse by the confusion of abandoning estate or status 
with abandoning nature. 


9 De Rougemont (1), pp. 307-8. 

10 See Arthur F. Wright, “Struggle versus Harmony: Symbols of Competing 
Values in Modern China,” in Bryson, et al., Symbols and Values, pp. 589- 
602. Harper, New York, 1954. 

11 Cf. de Rougemont (1), p. 308: “The pledge exchanged in marriage is the 
very type of a serious act, because it is a pledge given once and for all. The 
irrevocable alone is serious!” 

12 Chung-yung, i. 

13 Freud (2), p. 324. 


8: Consummation 


LOVE BRINGS THE REAL, AND NOT JUST THE ideal, vision of what others are 
because it is a glimpse of what we are bodily. For what is 
ordinarily called the body is an abstraction. It is the conventional 
fiction of an object seen apart from its relation to the universe, 
without which it has no reality whatsoever. But the mysterious 
and unsought uprising of love is the experience of complete 
relationship with another, transforming our vision not only of the 
beloved but of the whole world. And so it remains until the 
relationship is itself abstracted by the anxiety of the grasping 
mind to be guarded from the rest of life as a possession. 

The bodily and the physical is not to be mistaken for the world 
of atomic and discrete entities, and bodily union must not be 
confined to things so obviously visible as the juncture of Siamese 
twins. We need to recognize the physical reality of relationship 
between organisms as having as much “substance” as the 
organisms themselves, if not more. Thus however defective its 
doctrine of marriage in many respects, the Christian Church is 
perfectly correct in saying that husband and wife are one flesh. It 
is similarly correct to think of the members of the Church as the 
Body of Christ, especially if the Church is considered to be the 
process of realizing that the whole universe is the Body of Christ 
—which is what the doctrine of the Incarnation really implies.1 

This makes it the more strange that conventional spirituality 
rejects the bodily union of man and woman as the most fleshly, 
animal, and degrading phase of human activity—a rejection 
showing the extent of its faulty perception and _ its 
misinterpretation of the natural world. It rejects the most 
concrete and creative form of man’s relation to the world outside 
his organism, because it is through the love of a woman that he 
can say not only of her but also of all that is other, “This is my 
body.” 

Despite the Christian intuition of the world as the Body of 
Christ, the natural universe has been considered apart from and 


even opposed to God because it has not been experienced as one 
body. Considered as nothing more than a multiplicity of transient 
bodies, it appears that the natural world is finite and contingent 
upon something other than itself. No part of it remains, no part of 
it is being but only has being, and if the whole is only the sum of 
the parts, the whole cannot exist of itself. But all this comes from 
the failure to see that individual bodies are only the terms, the 
end-points, of relationships—in short, that the world is a system 
of inseparable relationships and not a mere juxtaposition of 
things. The verbal, piecemeal, and analytic mode of perception 
has blinded us to the fact that things and events do not exist apart 
from each other. The world is a whole greater than the sum of its 
parts because the parts are not merely summed—thrown together 
—but related. The whole is a pattern which remains, while the 
parts come and go, just as the human body is a dynamic pattern 
which persists despite the rapid birth and death of all its 
individual cells. The pattern does not, of course, exist 
disembodiedly apart from individual forms, but exists precisely 
through their coming and going—just as it is through the 
structured motion and vibration of its electrons that a rock has 
solidity. 

The naive philosophical thinking upon which Western theology 
was founded assumed that what moved did not fully exist, since 
true existence must be stable and static. We see now that being 
and motion, mass and energy, are inseparable, and need no 
longer assume that what moves and changes is a defective form 
of reality. We can see that the eternal is the transient, for the 
changing panorama of sense experience is not just a sum of 
appearing and disappearings things: it is stable pattern or 
relationship manifested as and by transient forms. Our difficulty 
is that human consciousness has not adjusted itself to a relational 
and integrated view of nature. We must see that consciousness is 
neither an isolated soul nor the mere function of a single nervous 
system, but of that totality of interrelated stars and galaxies 
which makes a nervous system possible. We must come to feel 
what we know to be true in theory, to have a sense of ourselves 
compatible with what we know about the inseparability of the 
parts of nature. 

In this light it will be clear that consciousness is no mere 
phosphorescent scum upon the foundations of fire and rock—a 


late addition to a world which is essentially unfeeling and 
mineral. Consciousness is rather the unfolding, the “e-volution,” 
of what has always been hidden in the heart of the primordial 
universe of stars. For a universe in which consciousness is no 
more than a statistical probability is still a universe in which 
consciousness is implicit. It is in the living organism that the 
whole world feels: it is only by virtue of eyes that the stars 
themselves are light. Relationship is a kind of identity. The stars 
and human eyes are not mutually alien objects brought into 
relation by mere confrontation. Suns, stars, and planets provide 
the conditions in which and from which organisms can arise. 
Their peculiar structure implies organisms in such a way that, 
were there no organisms, the structure of the universe would be 
entirely different, and so that organisms, in their turn, imply a 
universe of just this structure. It is only the time lag and the 
immense complexity of the relations between stars and men 
which make it difficult to see that they imply one another just as 
much as man and woman, or the two poles of the earth. 

The failure to realize the mutuality and bodily unity of man 
and the world underlies both the sensual and the ascetic 
attitudes. Trying to grasp the pleasure of the senses and to make 
their enjoyment the goal of life is already an attitude in which 
man feels divided from his experience, and sees it as something to 
be exploited and pursued. But the pleasure so gained is always 
fragmentary and frustrating, so that by way of reaction the 
ascetic gives up the pursuit, but not the sense of division which is 
the real root of the difficulty. He accentuates dividedness by 
pitting his will against the flesh, by siding with the abstract 
against the concrete, and so aggravates the very feeling from 
which the pursuit of pleasure arose. Ascetic spirituality is a 
symptom of the very disease which it intends to cure. Sensuality 
and conventional spirituality are not truly opposed; their conflict 
is a mock battle staged, unconsciously, by partisans to a single 
“conspiracy.”2 

Ascetic and sensualist alike confuse nature and “the body” with 
the abstract world of separate entities. Identifying themselves 
with the isolated individual, they feel inwardly incomplete. The 
sensualist tries to compensate for his insufficiency by extracting 
pleasure, or completeness, from the world which appears to stand 
apart from him as something lacking. The ascetic, with an 


attitude of “sour grapes,” makes a virtue of the lack. Both have 
failed to distinguish between pleasure and the pursuit of pleasure, 
between appetite or desire and the exploitation of desire, and to 
see that pleasure grasped is no pleasure. For pleasure is a grace 
and is not obedient to the commands of the will. In other words, 
it is brought about by the relationship between man and his 
world. Like mystical insight itself, it must always come unsought, 
which is to say that relationship can be experienced fully only by 
mind and senses which are open and not attempting to be 
clutching muscles. There is obviously nothing degrading in 
sensuous pleasure which comes “of itself,” without craving. But in 
fact there is no other kind of pleasure, and the error of the 
sensualist is not so much that he is doing something evil as that 
he is attempting the impossible. Naturally, it is possible to 
exercise the muscles in pursuing something that may, or may not, 
give pleasure; but pleasure cannot be given unless the senses are 
in a state of accepting rather than taking, and for this reason they 
must not be, as it were, paralyzed and rigidified by the anxiety to 
get something out of the object. 

All this is peculiarly true of love and of the sexual communion 
between man and woman. This is why it has such a strongly 
spiritual and mystical character when spontaneous, and why it is 
so degrading and frustrating when forced. It is for this reason that 
sexual love is so problematic in cultures where the human being 
is strongly identified with the abstract separate entity. The 
experience neither lives up to expectations nor fulfills the 
relationship between man and woman. At the same time it is, 
fragmentarily, gratifying enough to be pursued ever more 
relentlessly for the release which it seems to promise. Sex is 
therefore the virtual religion of very many people, the end to 
which they accord more devotion than any other. To the 
conventionally religious mind this worship of sex is a dangerous 
and positively sinful substitute for the worship of God. But this is 
because sex, or any other pleasure, as ordinarily pursued is never 
a true fulfillment. For this very reason it is not God, but not at all 
because it is “merely physical.” The rift between God and nature 
would vanish if we knew how to experience nature, because what 
keeps them apart is not a difference of substance but a split in the 
mind. 

But, as we have seen, the problems of sexuality cannot be 


solved at their own level. The full splendor of sexual experience 
does not reveal itself without a new mode of attention to the 
world in general. On the other hand, the sexual relationship is a 
setting in which the full opening of attention may rather easily be 
realized because it is so immediately rewarding. It is the most 
common and dramatic instance of union between oneself and the 
other. But to serve as a means of initiation to the “one body” of 
the universe, it requires what we have called a contemplative 
approach. This is not love “without desire” in the sense of love 
without delight, but love which is not contrived or willfully 
provoked as an escape from the habitual empty feeling of an 
isolated ego. 

It is not quite correct to say that such a relationship goes far 
beyond the “merely sexual,” for it would be better to say that 
sexual contact irradiates every aspect of the encounter, spreading 
its warmth into work and conversation outside the bounds of 
actual “love-making.” Sexuality is not a separate compartment of 
human life; it is a radiance pervading every human relationship, 
but assuming a particular intensity at certain points. Conversely, 
we might say that sexuality is a special mode or degree of the 
total intercourse of man and nature. Its delight is an intimation of 
the ordinarily repressed delight which inheres in life itself, in our 
fundamental but normally unrealized identity with the world. 

A relationship of this kind cannot adequately be discussed, as 
in manuals of sexual hygiene, as a matter of techniques. It is true 
that in Taoism and Tantric Buddhism there are what appear to be 
techniques or “practices” of sexual relationship, but these are, 
like sacraments, the “outward and visible signs of an inward and 
spiritual grace.” Their use is the consequence rather than the 
cause of a certain inner attitude, since they suggest themselves 
almost naturally to partners who take their love as it comes, 
contemplatively, and are in no hurry to grasp anything from it. 
Sexual yoga needs to be freed from a misunderstanding attached 
to all forms of yoga, of spiritual “practice” or “exercise,” since 
these ill-chosen words suggest that yoga is a method for the 
progressive achievement of certain results—and this is exactly 
what it is not.s Yoga means “union,” that is, the realization of 
man’s inner identity with Brahman or Tao, and strictly speaking 
this is not an end to which there are methods or means since it 
cannot be made an object of desire. The attempt to achieve it 


invariably thrusts it away. Yoga “practices” are therefore 
sacramental expressions or “celebrations” of this union, in rather 
the same sense that Catholics celebrate the Mass as an expression 
of Christ’s “full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice.” Means are 
irrelevant to what is already sufficient. Thus contemplation or 
meditation which seeks a result is neither contemplation nor 
meditation, for the simple reason that contemplation (kuan) is 
consciousness without seeking. Naturally, such consciousness is 
concentrated, but it is not “practicing concentration”; it is 
concentrated in whatever happens to be its “eternal now.” 

Sexual yoga or, as it is technically called, maithuna is a 
common theme of Hindu sculpture, though it has been suggested 
that its origins are Chinese, arriving in India as the backwash of 
the spread of Buddhism. Westerners, including missionaries and 
Theosophists and Indians under their influence, have rather 
naturally spread the idea that these images are pornographic, and 
that sexual yoga represents a perverse and depraved degeneration 
of Eastern spirituality. Such a reaction is only to be expected from 
spectators to whom the idea of spiritualized sexuality is 
completely unfamiliar. But such serious and responsible scholars 
as Woodroffe (1), S. B. Dasgupta (1), and Coomaraswamy (1) 
have made it plain not only that such images have no 
pornographic intention, but also that what they represent is at 
once a metaphysical doctrine and a sacrament at least as sacred 
as Christian matrimony. For the maithuna figures have nothing to 
do with promiscuous ritual orgies. On the one hand, they are 
emblems of the eternal union of spirit and nature; on the other, 
they represent the consummation of contemplative love between 
mutually dedicated partners.4 

According to Tantric symbolism, the energy of the kundalini is 
aroused but simply dissipated in ordinary sexual activity. It can, 
however, be transmuted in a prolonged embrace in which the 
male orgasm is reserved and the sexual energy diverted into 
contemplation of the divine as incarnate in the woman.s The 
partners are therefore seated in the cross-legged posture of 
meditation, the woman clasping the man’s waist with her thighs 
and her arms about his neck. Such a position is clearly unsuitable 
for motion, the point being that the partners should remain still 
and so prolong the embrace that the exchange between them 
would be passive and receptive rather than active. Nothing is 


done to excite the sexual energy; it is simply allowed to follow its 
own course without being “grasped” or exploited by the 
imagination and the will. In the meantime the mind and senses 
are not given up to fantasy, but remain simply open to “what is,” 
without—as we should say in current slang—trying to make 
something of it. 

In trying to understand anything of this kind, the modern 
Westerner must be careful not to confuse the symbology of the 
kundalini and the ascension of the sexual force with any 
physiological situation. Indeed, anatomical symbolisms of this 
kind are so strange to us that they hinder rather than help our 
comprehension of the real intent. Furthermore, almost all ancient 
sexual ideas are bound up with notions of the semen and its 
properties which we no longer share, and thus we do not regard 
it as a vital fluid to be conserved like blood. Our physiology does 
not support the idea that the male orgasm is a debilitating 
leakage of strength, and therefore the mere avoidance of the 
orgasm will have little significance in any modern application of 
sexual yoga. 

The importance of these ancient ideas to us lies not so much in 
their technicalities as in their psychological intent. They express 
an attitude to sexuality which, if absorbed by us today, could 
contribute more than anything else to the healing of the 
confusion and frustration of our marital and sexual relations. It 
remains, then, to separate the underlying sexual philosophy of 
Tantra and Taoism from symbolic and ritual elements which have 
no meaning for us, and to see whether it can be applied in terms 
of our own culture. 

To clarify the basic intent of sexual yoga we must study its 
practice in context with the underlying principles of Buddhist and 
Taoist philosophy. For Buddhism the basic principle is to have 
one’s consciousness undisturbed by trishna, or grasping desire, in 
such a way that the senses do not receive a distorted and 
fragmentary vision of the world. For Taoism the principle differs 
only in terminology: it is wu-wei, or noninterference with the Tao 
or course of nature, which is the organic and spontaneous 
functioning of man-in-relation-to-his-environment. Both involve 
the contemplative or open-sensed attitude to experience, the 
Buddhist dhyana (in Japanese, zen) and the Taoist kuan. In their 
respective yogas, both practice “watching over the breath” 


because the rhythm of breathing determines the total disposition 
of the organism. Now, their attitude to breathing is one of the 
main keys to understanding their attitude to sexuality. 

According to some accounts, perfect mastery of the breath is 
attained when its rhythm comes to a total stop—without loss of 
life. This is obviously a literalistic caricature, based on a crude 
version of the meaning of nirvana—“breathed out.” Actually, 
“watching over the breath” consists in letting the breath come 
and go as it wants, without forcing it or clutching at it. In due 
course its rhythm automatically slows down, and it flows in and 
out so smoothly that all rasping and hissing ceases as if it had 
stopped. This is both a symbol of and a positive aid to letting 
one’s whole life come and go without grasping, since the way a 
person breathes is indicative of the way he lives. 

In the sexual sphere the stopping of the male orgasm is just as 
much of a literalism as the stopping of breath; the point in both 
instances is not to stop but not to grasp. As contemplation of the 
breathing process automatically slows it down, sexual 
contemplation naturally delays the orgasm. For there is no value 
in prolonged and motionless intercourse as such; the point is to 
allow the sexual process to become spontaneous, and this cannot 
happen without the prior disappearance of the ego—of the 
forcing of sexual pleasure. Thus the orgasm is spontaneous (tzu- 
jan) when it happens of itself and in its own time, and when the 
rest of the body moves in response to it. Active or forced sexual 
intercourse is the deliberate imitation of movements which 
should ordinarily come about of themselves. Given the open 
attitude of mind and senses, sexual love in this spirit is a 
revelation. Long before the male orgasm begins, the sexual 
impulse manifests itself as what can only be described, 
psychologically, as a melting warmth between the partners so 
that they seem veritably to flow into each other. To put it in 
another way, “physical lust” transforms itself into the most 
considerate and tender form of love imaginable. 

A valuable attempt to work out something of this kind for 
modern conditions has been made by von Urban (1), but for these 
purposes his approach is too much at the level of sexual hygiene 
and too preoccupied with technical directions that are somewhat 
inelastic and compulsive. Furthermore, just as the Tantric 
discussions are overlaid with their elaborate anatomical 


symbolism, von Urban has introduced some highly speculative 
ideas about electrical exchanges between sexual partners which 
resemble the “orgone” theories of Reich (1). But mechanistic 
symbolisms of mysterious “forces” and “fluids,” to account for the 
intense feeling of interchange between the partners, are 
unnecessary in a philosophy of nature which gives due weight to 
the fact that organisms exist only by relation to each other and to 
their environment. Sexual love in the contemplative spirit simply 
provides the conditions in which we can be aware of our mutual 
interdependence and “oneness.” 

The point is so important that it can bear repetition: 
contemplative love—like contemplative meditation—is only quite 
secondarily a matter of technique. For it has no specific aim; 
there is nothing particular that has to be made to happen. It is 
simply that a man and a woman are together exploring their 
spontaneous feeling—without any preconceived idea of what it 
ought to be, since the sphere of contemplation is not what should 
be but what is. In a world of clocks and schedules the one really 
important technical item is the provision of adequate time. Yet 
this is not so much clock time as psychological time, the attitude 
of letting things happen in their own time, and of an ungrasping 
and unhurrying interchange of the senses with their objects. In 
default of this attitude the greater part of sexual experience in 
our culture falls far short of its possibilities.6 The encounter is 
brief, the female orgasm relatively rare, and the male orgasm 
precipitate or “forced” by premature motion. By contrast, the 
contemplative and inactive mode of intercourse makes it possible 
to prolong the interchange almost indefinitely, and to delay the 
male orgasm without discomfort or the necessity of diverting full 
attention from the situation. Furthermore, when the man has 
become accustomed to this approach, it is possible also for him to 
engage in active intercourse for a very much longer period, so 
affording the greatest possible stimulation for the woman.7 

One of the first phases of contemplative love is the discovery of 
the depth and satisfaction of very simple contacts which are 
ordinarily called “preliminaries” to sexual activity. But in a 
relationship which has no goal other than itself, nothing is merely 
preliminary. One finds out what it can mean simply to look at the 
other person, to touch hands, or to listen to the voice. If these 
contacts are not regarded as leading to something else, but rather 


allowed to come to one’s consciousness as if the source of activity 
lay in them and not in the will, they become sensations of 
immense subtlety and richness. Received thus, the external world 
acquires a liveliness which one ordinarily associates only with 
one’s own bodily activity, and from this comes the sensation that 
one’s body somehow includes the external world. 

It was through the practice of za-zen or “sitting meditation” in 
this particular attitude that Japanese Zen Buddhists discovered 
the possibilities of such arts as the tea ceremony (cha-no-yu), 
wherein the most intense aesthetic delight is found in the 
simplest social association of drinking tea with a few friends. For 
the art developed into a contemplation of the unexpected beauty 
in the “primitive” and unpretentious utensils employed, and in 
the natural simplicity of the surroundings—the unchiselled 
mountain rocks in the garden, the texture of paper walls, and the 
grain of rough wooden beams. Obviously, the cultivation of this 
viewpoint can lead to an infinitely refined snobbery when it is 
done with an eye to oneself doing it—when, in other words, the 
point becomes not the objects of contemplation but the “exercise” 
of contemplating. For this reason, lovers who begin to relate 
themselves to each other in this way need not feel that they are 
practicing a skill in which there are certain standards of 
excellence which they ought to attain. It is simply absurd for them 
to sit down and restrain themselves just to looking at each other, 
while fighting off the intense desire to fall into each other’s arms. 
The point is to discover the wonder of simple contacts, not the 
duty of it, for which reason it may be better at first to explore this 
type of relationship after intercourse than before. 

The fact remains, however, that if they let themselves come 
gradually and gently into contact, they create a situation in which 
their senses can really work, so that when they have discovered 
what it can mean just to touch hands, the intimacy of a kiss or 
even of lips in near proximity regains the “electric” quality which 
it had at the first meeting. In other words, they find out what the 
kiss really involves, just as profound love reveals what other 
people really are: beings in relation, not in isolation. 

If we say that from such contacts the movement toward sexual 
intercourse grows of itself, it may be supposed that this is no 
more than what ordinarily happens. Intimacy just leads to 
passion; it certainly does not have to be willed. But there is all 


the difference in the world between gobbling and actually tasting 
food when one is hungry. It is not merely that appetite needs 
restraint; it needs awareness—awareness of the total process of 
the organism-environment moving into action of itself. As the 
lead and response of good dancers appears to be almost 
simultaneous, as if they were a single entity, there comes a 
moment when more intimate sexual contact occurs with an 
extraordinary mutuality. The man does not lead and the woman 
follow; the man-and-woman relationship acts of itself. The feeling 
of this mutuality is entirely distinct from that of a man initiating 
sexual contact with a perfectly willing woman. His “advance” and 
her “response” seems to be the same movement. 

At a particular but unpredetermined moment they may, for 
example, take off their clothes as if the hands of each belonged to 
the other. The gesture is neither awkward nor bold; it is the 
simultaneous expression of a unity beneath the masks of social 
roles and proprieties by the revelation and contact of the intimate 
and off-scene aspects of their bodies. Now, these aspects are 
ordinarily guarded because of their extreme sensitivity, or 
awareness of relationship. Only the eyes are as sensitive, and in 
ordinary social intercourse prolonged eye-contact is avoided 
because of its embarrassing intimacy—embarrassing because it 
creates a sense of relationship belying and overpassing the 
separative roles which we take so much trouble to maintain. For 
the sensitive organs of the body which we call most intimate and 
private are not, as might be supposed, the most central to the 
ego. On the contrary, they are those which most surpass the ego 
because their sensitivity brings the greatest contact with the 
outside world, the greatest intimacy with what is formally 
“other.” 

The psychic counterpart of this bodily and sensuous intimacy is 
a similar openness of attention to each other’s thoughts—a form 
of communion which can be as sexually “charged” as physical 
contact. This is the feeling that one can express one’s thoughts to 
the other just as they are, since there is not the slightest 
compulsion to assume a pretended character. This is perhaps the 
rarest and most difficult aspect of any human relationship, since 
in ordinary social converse the spontaneous arising of thought is 
more carefully hidden than anything else. Between unconscious 
and humorless people who do not know and accept their own 


limitations it is almost impossible, for the things which we 
criticize most readily in others are usually those of which we are 
least conscious in ourselves. Yet this is quite the most important 
part of a deep sexual relationship, and it is in some way 
understood even when thoughts are left unsaid.s 

It is significant that we commonly say that those with whom 
we can express ourselves most spontaneously are those with 
whom we can most fully be ourselves. For this already implies 
that the full and real self is not the willing and deliberating 
function but the spontaneous. In the same way that our most 
sensitive organs are guarded because they transcend and break 
the bonds of the ego, the flow of thought and feeling—though 
called one’s “inner self’—is the most spontaneous and role-free 
activity of all. The more inward and central the form of activity, 
the less it partakes of the mask of the ego. To unveil the flow of 
thought can therefore be an even greater sexual intimacy than 
physical nakedness. 

In contemplative love we do not speak of the sexual “act,” since 
this puts intercourse into its own _ special dissociated 
compartment, where it becomes what Albert Jay Nock called very 
properly and humorously the “culbatising exercise.” Perhaps one 
of the subordinate reasons why sex is a matter for laughter is that 
there is something ridiculous in “doing” it with set purpose and 
deliberation—even when described with so picturesque a phrase 
as the Chinese “flowery combat.” Without wanting to make rules 
for this freest of all human associations, it is certainly best to 
approach it inactively. For when the couple are so close to each 
other that the sexual parts are touching, it is only necessary to 
remain quietly and unhurriedly still, so that in time the woman 
can absorb the man’s member into herself without being actively 
penetrated.9 

It is at this juncture that simple waiting with open attention is 
most rewarding. If no attempt is made to induce the orgasm by 
bodily motion, the interpenetration of the sexual centers becomes 
a channel of the most vivid psychic interchange. While neither 
partner is working to make anything happen, both surrender 
themselves completely to whatever the process itself may feel like 
doing. The sense of identity with the other becomes peculiarly 
intense, though it is rather as if a new identity were formed 
between them with a life of its own. This life—one might say this 


Tao—lifts them out of themselves so that they feel carried 
together upon a stream of vitality which can only be called 
cosmic, because it is no longer what “you” and “I” are doing. 
Although the man does nothing either to excite or withhold the 
orgasm, it becomes possible to let this interchange continue for 
an hour or more, during which the female orgasm may occur 
several times with a very slight amount of active stimulation, 
depending upon the degree of her receptivity to the experience as 
a process taking charge of her. 

In due course, both partners feel relieved of all anxiety as to 
whether orgasm will or will not happen, which makes it possible 
for them to give themselves up to whatever forms of sexual play 
may suggest themselves, however active or even violent. We say 
“suggest themselves” because this is a matter of immediate 
feeling rather than learned technique—a response to the 
marvellously overwhelming urge to turn themselves inside out for 
each other. Or it may happen that they prefer simply to remain 
still and let the process unfold itself at the level of pure feeling, 
which usually tends to be the deeper and more psychically 
satisfying way. 

Feelings which at the height of intercourse are often taken for 
the extremity of lust—that question-begging word—are simply 
the ananda, the ecstasy of bliss, which accompanies the 
experience of relationship as distinct from isolated selfhood. 
“Abandon” expresses the mood better than “lust,” because the 
two individuals give themselves up to the process or relationship 
between them, and this abandonment of wills can become so 
intense that it feels like the desire to give up life itself—to die 
into the other person. De Rougemont (1) maintains—I think 
wrongly—that this “death wish” distinguishes mere passion or 
eros from divine love or agape. He feels that the former, being a 
purely creaturely love, seeks the nonbeing which was its origin, 
and that the latter is the love of the Creator which seeks life 
because its origin is pure Being. This entirely neglects the 
Christian mystery of Death and Resurrection, which is the 
Christian version of the more widely held truth that death and 
life are not opposed, but mutually arising aspects of a Whole—so 
that life emerges from plunging into death, and death from 
plunging into life. But the death wish in love is figurative, the 
giving up of life being a poetic image for the mystical, self- 


transcending quality of sexual transport. Death in the same 
figurative sense, as “dying to oneself,” is commonly used in 
mystical literature for the process whereby the individual 
becomes divine. It is no more literal than the “death” of a grain of 
corn planted in the soil, or of a caterpillar sleeping in its 
chrysalis. 

The mood of intense sexual delight is not, however, always 
quite so overwhelming as a desire to “die.” The sense of 
“abandon” or of being carried out of oneself may equally find 
expression in gaiety, and this is peculiarly true when the 
experience brings a strong sense of fulfillment. Rare as such 
gaiety may be in cultures where there is a tie between sex and 
guilt, the release from self brings laughter in love-making as 
much as in mysticism, for we must remember that it was Dante 
who described the song of the angels in heaven as “the laughter 
of the universe.” “Love,” said Coventry Patmore, “raises the spirit 
above the sphere of reverence and worship into one of laughter 
and dalliance.” This is above all true when the partners are not 
working at their love to be sure that they attain a “real 
experience.” The grasping approach to sexuality destroys its 
gaiety before anything else, blocking up its deepest and most 
secret fountain. For there is really no other reason for creation 
than pure joy. 

It is no matter for timing by the clock how long this play 
should continue. Let it be repeated again, its timeless quality is 
not attained by endurance or even duration, but by absence of 
purpose and hurry. The final release of orgasm, neither sought 
nor restrained, is simply allowed to “come,” as even the popular 
expression suggests from our intuitive knowledge that it is not a 
deed but a gift and a grace. When this experience bursts in upon 
fully opened feelings it is no mere “sneeze in the loins” relieving 
physical tension: it is an explosion whose outermost sparks are 
the stars. 

This may seem irreverent, or just claiming too much, to those 
who are unwilling to feel it completely, refusing to see anything 
mystical or divine in the moment of life’s origin. Yet it is just in 
treating this moment as a bestial convulsion that we reveal our 
vast separation from life. It is just at this extreme point that we 
must find the physical and the spiritual to be one, for otherwise 
our mysticism is sentimental or sterile-pure and our sexuality just 


vulgar. Without—in its true sense—the lustiness of sex, religion is 
joyless and abstract; without the self-abandonment of religion, 
sex is a mechanical masturbation. 

The height of sexual love, coming upon us of itself, is one of 
the most total experiences of relationship to the other of which 
we are capable, but prejudice and insensitivity have prevented us 
from seeing that in any other circumstances such delight would 
be called mystical ecstasy. For what lovers feel for each other in 
this moment is no other than adoration in its full religious sense, 
and its climax is almost literally the pouring of their lives into 
each other. Such adoration, which is due only to God, would 
indeed be idolatrous were it not that in that moment love takes 
away illusion and shows the beloved for what he or she in truth is 
—not the socially pretended person but the naturally divine. 

Mystical vision, as has always been recognized, does not 
remain at the peak of ecstasy. As in love, its ecstasy leads into 
clarity and peace. The aftermath of love is an anticlimax only 
when the climax has been taken and not received. But when the 
whole experience was received the aftermath finds one in a 
marvellously changed and yet unchanged world, and here we are 
speaking of spirituality and sexuality in the same breath. For the 
mind and senses do not now have to open themselves; they find 
themselves naturally opened, and it appears that the divine world 
is no other than the everyday world. Just as they come and just 
as they are, the simplest sights and sounds are sufficient, and do 
not have to be brushed aside in the mind’s eagerness to find 
something more significant. One is thereby initiated from the 
world of clock time to the world of real time, in which events 
come and go of themselves in unforced succession—timed by 
themselves and not by the mind. As the accomplished singer does 
not sing a song but lets it sing itself with his voice—since 
otherwise he will lose the rhythm and strain the tone—the course 
of life is here seen to happen of itself, in a continuum where the 
active and the passive, the inward and the outward are the same. 
Here we have at last found the true place of man in nature which 
underlies the imagery of the Chinese poem: 


Let us live 
Among the white clouds and scarlet woodlands, 
Singing together 


Songs of the Great Peace. 10 


1 Thus St. Cyril of Alexandria in Epist. ad Rom., vi, says that in a sense the 
flesh of Christ “contained all nature, just as when Adam incurred 
condemnation the whole of nature contracted the disease of his curse in 
him.” 

2 See the marvellous discussion in L. L. Whyte (1), ch. 3, where the author 
attempts a physiological and historical analysis of the origins of the 
conflict. A current instance of this mock battle is the alliance of organized 
crime with conservative church groups to maintain the legal suppression 
of certain types of vice. 


3 See the excellent discussion of this point in Guénon (1), pp. 261-67. 


4 Woodroffe (1), p. 578, states that the partners are normally husband and 
wife, though in special circumstances, valid in a polygynous culture, the 
woman is a permanent wife-in-religion chosen because of spiritual 
compatibility with the man. The notion that sexual yoga is involved with 
“black magic” is one of the many distortions of Asian philosophy 
circulated by Theosophy—a Westernized version of Hindu-Buddhist 
teachings carrying over essentially Christian notions of evil. The 
Theosophists were in the first place misled by the fact that practitioners of 
sexual yoga adhered to the “left-hand path,” a nomenclature to which they 
attached the purely Western associations of “sinister.” But in Indian 
symbolism the right- and left-hand paths do not depart in opposite 
directions: they converge upon the same point like the two halves of a 
circle. The right-hand path seeks liberation by detachment from the world, 
and the left-hand by total acceptance of the world; the right is the— 
symbolically—male way, and the left the female, so that in the left man 
finds liberation through nature and through woman. Hence the discipline 
is called sahaja, the natural or spontaneous way. It must furthermore be 
remembered that Theosophical attitudes reflected the nineteenth-century 
prudishness of middle-class England and America. A similar confusion was 
the Theosophical invention of a “lodge” of “dugpas” or black magicians, 
based on what was at the time mere hearsay about the now well-known 
Drug-pa Sect of Tibetan Buddhism. On the complex metaphysical 
symbolism of maithuna or yab-yum (Tibet) figures, see S. B. Dasgupta (1), 
pp. 98-134. The correspondence is not always strictly that of spirit and 
nature, but also of wisdom (prajna) and activity (upaya), voidness 
(sunyata) and compassion (karuna).The general idea of Tantric maithuna, 
as of its Taoist counterpart, is that sexual love may be transformed into a 
type of worship in which the partners are, for each other, incarnations of 
the divine. Perhaps this statement must be somewhat modified with 
respect to Buddhism and Taoism, to which the notion of worship is really 
foreign, and one must substitute the contemplation of nature in its true 
state. The embrace of maithuna involves also a transmutation of the sexual 
energy which it arouses, and this is described symbolically as sending it 
upwards from the loins to the head. Yoga, as is well known, involves a 
peculiar symbolism of human anatomy in which the spinal column is seen 


as a figure of the Tree of Life, with its roots in the nether world and its 
branches, or its flower, in the heavens beneath the “firmament” of the 
skull. The base of the spinal-tree is the seat of kundalini, the Serpent 
Power, which is an image of the divine life-energy incarnate in nature and 
asleep under the illusion of maya. Yoga consists in awakening the Serpent 
and allowing it to ascend the tree to the heavens, wherefrom it passes 
liberated through the “sun-door” at the apex of the skull. Thus when the 
Serpent is at the base of the spinal-tree it manifests its power as sexual 
energy; when it is at the crown it manifests itself as spiritual energy. 


5 The Taoist practice permits the orgasm in due course, and the female 
orgasm was felt to nourish and strengthen the male force. See Needham 
(1), vol. 2, pp. 149-50. 


6 Kinsey (1), p. 580, states that “for perhaps three-quarters of all males, 
orgasm is reached within two minutes after the initiation of the sexual 
relation, and for a not inconsiderable number of males the climax may be 
reached within less than a minute or even within ten or twenty seconds 
after coital entrance.” He goes on to point out that this seems natural 
enough if man be compared with other mammals, but that unfortunately 
this makes it difficult for most women to experience the orgasm. He feels, 
therefore, that it is “demanding that the male be quite abnormal in his 
ability to prolong sexual activity without ejaculation if he is required to 
match the female partner.” It has been pointed out by Ford and Beach (1), 
pp. 30-31, that we have little evidence to show the extent of the female 
orgasm among mammals, but that it is supposedly rare or absent among 
the primates. However, the considerable physical differences between man 
and the higher mammals require caution in using these species to 
determine what is “natural” for man. Kinsey’s statistical estimates, so often 
questioned, may be compared with those of Dickinson and Beam (1), 
quoted by Ford and Beach, p. 32, giving the duration of intercourse of a 
sample of 362 American couples as less than 10 minutes for 74 per cent 
and less than 20 minutes for 91 per cent. 


7 Rarezza, or intercourse without the male orgasm (coitus reservatus), is also 
possible in this way, though there is considerable difference of opinion as 
to its psychological healthiness, especially when used frequently as a 
means of contraception. Possible psychological dangers are perhaps 
diminished by the great satisfaction of sexual contact alone in the 
contemplative mood. However the “spirituality” of karezza is connected 
with unverified notions about the sublimation of the semen and the loss of 
psychic “power” involved in its ejaculation. 


s Obviously, we are speaking here of a very special relationship which is 
seldom to be found in the ordinary marriage contracted between 
emotionally immature and socially rigid people, when the more mature 
partner should express his or her mind only with the utmost consideration 
for the other. Complete self-expression is really a form of self-indulgence 
in circumstances where it cannot be received. While it may sometimes be 
“good” for another person to be frank with them, husbands and wives 
should be the last people to take on programs of mutual improvement. It 


may be cynical, but it is good-naturedly and humanly so, to assume that 
one’s spouse is going to remain just as he or she is, and that one is going to 
have to live with these limitations. If they are going to change at all, this is 
the only way to begin. For this is already an act of deep acceptance of the 
other person, which may become mutual by a kind of psychic osmosis. 


9 Von Urban (1) does not recommend the cross-legged “Tantric” posture, 
which is naturally difficult for those not used to sitting in this way. 
Instead, he suggests lying at right angles to each other, the woman on her 
back with one leg between the man’s thighs and the other resting on his 
hip. In this way the contact is purely genital and the whole relationship 
between the two “pours through” this center. While this is an excellent 
way of beginning, there is no need to make it a fixed rule, though there is 
an extraordinary intensity in letting the whole feeling-relationship pass 
through the sexual centers alone. The “absorption” of the male member 
depends, of course, upon the sufficient secretion of vaginal moisture. 


10 Teiwa shu, ii. Tr. Ruth Sasaki, in Zen Notes, III, 10. New York, 1956. 


Bibliographical References 


This is neither a bibliography of the subject of this book nor a list 
of works read in its preparation, but simply a reference list of 
sources mentioned or quoted. 


BATESON, G., with JACKSON, D. D., HALEY, J., and WEAK- 
LAND, J. H. “Towards a Theory of Schizophrenia,” Behavioral 
Science, vol. I, 4. October, 1956. Pp. 251-64. 

BONPENSIERE, L. New Pathways in Piano Technique. Philosophical 
Library, New York, 1953. 

BURROW, T. Science and Man’s Behavior. Philosophical Library, 
New York, 1953. 

CH’U TA-KAO. Tao Te Ching. The Buddhist Society, London, 
1937. 

COOMARASWAMY, A. K. The Dance of Shiva. Noonday Press, 
New York, 1957. 

DASGUPTA, S. B. An Introduction to Tantric Buddhism. University 
of Calcutta Press, 1950. 

DE ROUGEMONT, D. Love in the Western World. Pantheon Books, 
New York, 1956. 

DICKINSON, R. L., and BEAM, L. A Thousand Marriages. Williams 
and Wilkins, Baltimore, 1931. 

DODS, M. The City of God (St. Augustine). 2 vols. Clark, 
Edinburgh, 1872. 

ECKERMANN, J. P. Conversations of Goethe. J. M. Dent, London, 
1930. 

ELLIS, H. Studies in the Psychology of Sex. 2-vol. ed. Random 
House, New York, 1942. 

EVANS, C. de B. Meister Eckhart. 2 vols. Watkins, London, 1924. 

FORD, C. S., and BEACH, F. A. Patterns of Sexual Behavior. 
Harper, New York, 1951. 


FREUD, S. (1) Civilization and Its Discontents. Hogarth Press, 
London, 1949. 


(2) Collected Papers. Vol. 2. Hogarth Press, London, 1924. 


FUNG YU-LAN. History of Chinese Philosophy. 2 vols. Princeton 
University Press, 1953. 


GILES, H. A. Chuang-tzu. Kelly and Walsh, Shanghai, 1926. 


GILES, L. Taoist Teachings. Translations from Lieh-tzu. John 
Murray, London, 1925. 


GUENON, R. Introduction to the Study of the Hindu Doctrines. 
Luzac, London, 1945. 


HUME, D. Treatise of Human Nature. Oxford University Press, 
1946. 


JUNG, C. G. Answer to Job. Routledge, London, 1954. 


KINSEY, A. C., POMEROY, W. B., and MARTIN, C. E. Sexual 
Behavior in the Human Male. Saunders, Philadelphia and 
London, 1948. 


LIN YUTANG. (1) My Country and My People. Halcyon House, 
New York, 1938. 


(2) The Wisdom of Lao-tse. Modern Library, New York, 1948. 


NEEDHAM, J. Science and Civilization in China. Vol. 2. Cambridge 
University Press, 1956. 


NORTHROP, F. S. C. The Meeting of East and West. Macmillan, 
New York, 1946. 


REICH, W. The Function of the Orgasm. Orgone Institute Press, 
New York, 1948. 


SIU, R. G. H. The Tao of Science. John Wiley, New York, 1957. 


SUZUKI, D. T. (1) Essays in Zen Buddhism. Vol. 2. London and 
Kyoto, 1933. Repr., Rider, London, 1950. 


(2) Manual of Zen Buddhism. Kyoto, 1935. Repr., Rider, London, 
1950. 


(3) Training of the Zen Buddhist Monk. Eastern Buddhist Society, 
Kyoto, 1934. 


TAYLOR, G. R. Sex in History. Thames and Hudson, London, 
1954. 


VATSYAYANA. Le Kama Soutra (Kamasutra). J. Fort, Paris, n. d. 


VON URBAN, R. Sex Perfection and Marital Happiness. Dial Press, 
New York, 1955. 


WALEY, A. The N? Plays of Japan. Allen and Unwin, London, 
1950. 


WATTS, A. W. (1) The Supreme Identity. Noonday Press, New 
York, 1957. 


(2) Myth and Ritual in Christianity. Thames and Hudson, London, 
and Vanguard, New York, 1954. 


WELCH, H. The Parting of the Way. Beacon Press, Boston, 1957. 


WHITEHEAD, A. N. Science and the Modern World. Cambridge 
University Press, 1933. 


WHYTE, L. L. The Next Development in Man. Henry Holt, New 
York, 1948. 


WOODROFFE, Sir J. Shakti and Shakta. Luzac, London, 1929. 
ZIMMER, H. (1) Myths and Symbols in Indian Art and Civilization. 
Pantheon Books (Bollingen Series), New York, 1946. 
(2) Philosophies of India. Pantheon Books (Bollingen Series), New 
York, 1951. 
(3) The Art of Indian Asia. 2 vols. Pantheon Books (Bollingen 
Series), New York, 1955. 


About the Author 


Atan Watts, who held both a master’s degree in theology and a 
doctorate of divinity, has earned the reputation of being one of 
the most original and “unrutted” philosophers of the century. He 
is best known as an interpreter of Zen Buddhism in particular, 
and of Indian and Chinese philosophy in general. He was the 
author of more than twenty books on the philosophy and 
psychology of religion, including (in Vintage Books) Behold the 
Spirit, Does It Matter? The Joyous Cosmology, Nature, Man and 
Woman, The Supreme Identity, The Way of Zen, The Wisdom of 
Insecurity, This Is It, Beyond Theology, Psychotherapy East and West, 
and Cloud-Hidden, Whereabouts Unknown: A Mountain Journal. He 
died in 1973. 


