"TAOISM 


798 | Way BEYOND SEEKING 


THE EDITED TRANSCRIPTS 


Ae /? s 
- “ 
bes . 
3 a 
if * 


: r > 
Ba PHE “LOVE OF WISDOM” r “ 


This book will introduce a new generation to 
Waus'’s lucid and readable re-creation of Eastern 


philosophtes. . . 
—Booklist review of The Philosophies of Asia 


_ although bis famous voice and happy laughter 
are missing now, his penetrating vision remains, 
and his lectures become brilliant prose in book form. 

Publishers Weekly review of Buddhism: 
The Religion of No Religion 


Beyond Seeking is a companion to the 
tts “Love of Wisdom” audio series heard 
nationally on public radio. 


il 


| 
| 
| 
H 


4 


$16.95 


It has been said that Alan Watts touches the 
beart of wisdom in ways that continue to 
flower and inspire. 


This book is derived from lectures by Alan Watts 
between 1968 and 1973. With colorful titles 
such as “The Philosophy of the Tao,” “Being 
in the Way,” and “Landscape, Soundscape” his 
seminars drew an enthusiastic crowd of diverse 
interests. Some came because they were stu- 
dents of Watts, others because they were look- 
ing for the latest trend in the counterculture 
movement, and some came because they were 
captivated by the intrigue of a philosophy in 
tune with the course of nature. All came away 
with a newfound fascination with the Tao, and 
in the possibility that an ancient Oriental way of 
being in touch with the true “nature of nature” 
might guide a technological culture toward 
reunification with the rest of the planet. 


Taoism: Way Beyond Seeking recaptures the 
energy of these seminars and shows that the 
words of Alan Watts are as relevant and 
prophetic today as they were over twenty-five 
years ago. 


ALAN WATTS was born in England in 1915 and 
received his early education at King’s School, 
Canterbury and at the Buddhist Lodge (London) 
where he met D.T Suzuki. He received a mas- 
ter’s degree from Seabury-Western Theological 
Seminary in Illinois and an honorary doctorate 
of divinity from the University of Vermont. He 
wrote his first book, The Spirit of Zen, at the age 
of twenty and went on to write over twenty 
other books including The Way of Zen, The 
Wisdom of Insecurity and The Book. In addition 
to being an acclaimed author and philosopher, 
Dr. Watts was also an Episcopalian minister, 
professor, graduate-school dean and research 
fellow of Harvard University. By the early 1960s, 
he moved to Sausalito, California and held 
seminars and lectures throughout the United 
States. Alan Watts died in 1973. 


Also available in The “Love of Wisdom” Library 
by Alan Watts 


THE PHILOSOPHIES OF ASIA 
THE TAO OF PHILOSOPHY 
MYTH AND RELIGION 
BUDDHISM: THE RELIGION OF NO RELIGION 


Jacket design by Sherry Fatla 
PRINTED IN THE U.S.A. 


Charles E. Tuttle Co., Inc. 


Bosten « Rutland, Vermont * Tokvo 


“LAOISM 


WAY BEYOND SEEKING 


THE EDITED TRANSCRIPTS 


Ay was 


ALAN WATTS 
at a seminar aboard the SS Vallejo, 1966 


“LAOISM 


WAY BEYOND SEEKING 


THE EDITED TRANSCRIPTS 


Charles FE. Tuttle Co., Inc. 
Boston + Rutland, Vermont + Tokyo 


First published in 1998 by Tuttle Publishing, an imprint of Periplus Editions 
(HK) Ltd., with editorial offices at 153 Milk Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02109. 


Copyright © 1997 Mark Watts 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or utilized in 
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, 
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without prior writ- 


ten permission from Tuttle Publishing. 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Watts, Alan, 1915-1973. 
Taoism : way beyond seeking / by Alan Watts. 
p. cm. — (The Alan Watts love of wisdom library ; 5) 
ISBN 0-8048-3058-4 (hard) 
1. Taoism. I. Title. II. Series: Watts, Alan, 1915-1973. Alan 

Watts “Love of wisdom” library ; 5. 
BL1920.1375 1998 


299 -514—de21 97°49648 
CIP 
Distributed by 

USA Southeast Asia 
Charles E. Tuttle Co., Inc. Berkeley Books Pte. Ltd. 
RR 1 Box 231-5 5 Little Road #08-o1 
North Clarendon, VT 05759 Singapore 536983 
Tel.: (802) 773-8930 Tel.: (65) 280-3320 
Fax.: (802) 773-6993 Fax.: (65) 280-6290 
Japan 
Tuttle Shokai Ltd. 
1-21-13, Seki 


Tama-ku, Kawasaki-shi 
Kanagawa-ken 214, Japan 


Tel.: (044) 833-0225 
Fax.: (044) 822-0413 


First edition 
0504030201 009998 13579108642 


Design by Frances Kay 
Cover design by Sherry Fatla 


Printed in the United States of America 


CONTENTS 


Introduction 
I. Philosophy of the Tao I 
Il. Philosophy of the Tao II 
Ill. The World as Organic Process 
IV. Being in the Way I 
V. Being in the Way II 
VI. Landscape, Soundscape 


INTRODUCTION 


or the contemporary Western reader, the phi- 

losophy of the Tao holds a particular fascina- 

tion. On one hand we admire the ingenuity of a 

way of life having the sensibility to flow with 
the current of the river, split wood with the grain, and 
ride the wind by raising a sail. On the other we are 
intrigued by the suggestion that men should hold the 
passive in high regard, seek the obscure or lowest posi- 
tion, and model their strategy according to the yielding 
principle. With its inclusive approach, the Taoist world- 
view reconciles the underlying mysteries of existence to 
the pragmatic concerns of daily life and finds a unique 
equilibrium between balance and imbalance. 


INTRODUCTION 


In the passages of the Tao Te Ching, “The Book of 
the Way” one finds advice that is at once practical and 
profound, both natural and elegant, wise and sophisti- 
cated yet unassuming. The Taoist texts we have come to 
know in the translations of the Tao Te Ching were col- 
lected during the Warring States period in China, a time 
of great turmoil and danger for the common man. As 
such, the philosophy embodied in the legendary texts of 
Lao-tzu and Chuang-tzu places great emphasis upon the 
value of survival and points to the path of least resis- 
tance as the surest road to security and peace of mind. It 
makes a strong case for the wisdom of “lying low,” 
without aspirations or pretensions, which may bring 
inner turmoil, discontent, or even physical harm. It is 
interesting to note that the collected texts of the Tao Te 
Ching make frequent references to sages, but in context 
they are understood to be princes and kings, that is, the 
rulers of the domain. One theory is that the texts 
embody an attempt to bring the oral tradition of a cer- 
tain kind of popular story expressing the wisdom of the 
“old boy” to the attention of the nobility. It was perhaps 
thought that by doing so the perspective of the rulers 
might be transformed for the benefit of both the state 
and the common man. 

These stories were often set on a remote mountain 
or in a cave where a wise hermit would greet the unin- 
formed seeker, who at times was Confucius himself. In a 
typical story, Confucius sought the advice of the sage, 
only to be told to shed his vanity and conceit to see his 
own nature more clearly, and to then act accordingly. 
Another common theme developed around the power of 
the Tao is seen in the harmony between these legendary 
hermits and the world. In one of Alan Watts’s favorite 
stories, an old man wandering near a wild river plunged 
into a cataract, only to emerge downstream, unharmed 
and unconcerned. However, underneath the wide variety 


INTRODUCTION 


of these refreshing stories lie two essential themes, 
repeated time and time again. 

The first involves a practical appreciation of empti- 
ness, of the vacant, the fundamental, and therefore, the 
useful. We read in Lao-tzu’s book that “profit comes 
from what is there, usefulness from what is not.” And, 
“Thirty spokes has the wheel, but it is its hub that makes 
it useful.” The strategic advantage of recognizing the 
value of space is not only practical, however, because the 
bowl, representing space, is also a metaphor for the ves- 
sel of consciousness, and what is true of a ceramic bowl 
is also true of the mind—it works best when empty. So 
the idea of the Tao is often equated with emptiness in 
the first book, although, paradoxically, it is also referred 
to as “the One” or “the Way.” 

The second theme of the Tao Te Ching is virtue. 
To clearly understand this designation it is useful to shed 
our common associations with the words virtue and 
nature and go back to their earlier English usage. 
Formerly these terms did not carry moral connotations 
or imply division—of the virtuous as opposed to the 
wicked, or of nature as opposed to man. In their original 
sense these terms referred to the virtues, qualities, or 
nature of something, that is to say, its true character. 
The second book of the Tao emphasizes the subtle trans- 
forming aspect of Tao, deriving directly from the first 
book, which emphasizes the essential power of empti- 
ness. Once the mind is clear, and therefore open, one 
may discover the true nature of life. Or, in other words, 
if your mind is not full of preconceived notions, you may 
learn something new. 

So then, like Buddhism, Hinduism, and early 
forms of almost all religions, Taoism is in essence a 
transformative discipline. However, discipline is a mis- 
leading word to use in the context of the philosophy of 
nature, for its practice is as easy as falling into the river. 


INTRODUCTION 


During the 1960s and early 1970s, Alan Watts delighted 
audiences across the country with stories about wise 
Taoist hermits. In his earliest works on Zen, written in 
England before he was twenty-one, he noted the Taoist 
influence on the school of Mahayana Buddhism in China 
known as Chan Buddhism. Chan became Zen in Japan, 
and although in its Japanese form Zen became associat- 
ed with the samurai, it retains to this day a Taoist flavor 
in its appreciation of the advantages of emptiness. 
Numerous Zen koans, which take the form of a puzzle 
or riddle (although koan actually means “case”), portray 
instances in which the master, in one way or another, 
points out to the student his fixation on a limited way of 
seeing, and then offers, in a somewhat clever way, an 
opportunity for the student to grasp the essence with an 
empty mind. In his later years, Watts became increasing- 
ly fascinated with the Tao, and in his last book he dedi- 
cated himself to a comprehensive review of the subject, 
much as he had done in his classic 1957 work on Zen, 
The Way of Zen. 

The following chapters are derived from lectures 
delivered between 1968 and 1973 by Watts during 
weekend seminars. With such colorful titles as “The 
Philosophy of the Tao,” “Being in the Way,” 
“Landscape, Soundscape, in Painting, Music, and 


and 


Mystical Vision,” his seminars drew an enthusiastic 
crowd with diverse interests. Some came because they 
were students of Watts’s, others because they were look- 
ing for the latest trend in the counterculture movement, 
and a few came because they were intrigued by a philos- 
ophy that pointed out the wisdom of putting up a sail to 
catch the wind instead of rowing. However, all came 
away with a newfound fascination with the Tao and 
with the possibility that a classic Oriental way of being 
in touch with the true “nature of nature” might guide a 


INTRODUCTION 


technological culture toward reunification with the rest 
of the planet. 

Alan Watts died in 1973 before completing Tao: 
The Watercourse Way, but while I worked with him on 
the early chapters on Chinese writing and the Tao, my 
father told me that after he finished the groundwork of 
presenting the primary aspects of Taoism, he was going 
to enjoy its more playful and artistic aspects in the later 
chapters. In this volume, and in the previous volume 
entitled, The Tao of Philosophy, (from the Love of 
Wisdom Library series) we have endeavored to complete 
his intended presentation of the philosophy of the Tao, 
by presenting the Tao first in terms of contemporary cul- 
ture and now in the spirit of its delightful simplicity and 
disarming candor. 


—Mark Watts 


PHILOSOPHY OF THE [AO I 


CHAPTER ONE 


n order to go into Taoism at all, we must begin by 
being in the frame of mind in which it can be 
understood. You cannot force yourself into this 
frame of mind any more than you can smooth dis- 
turbed water with your hand. But let’s say that our start- 
ing point is that we forget what we know, or think we 
know. And that we suspend judgment about practically 
everything, returning to what we were when we were 
babies—before we learned the names or the language. In 
such a state, although we have extremely sensitive bodies 
and very alive senses, we have no means of making an 
intellectual or verbal commentary on what is going on. 


CHAPTER ONE 


In this state you just feel what is, without calling it 
anything at all. You know nothing at all about anything 
called an external world in relation to an internal world. 
You don’t know who you are, you haven’t even the idea 
of the words you or J—it is before all that. Nobody has 
taught you self-control. You don’t know the difference 
between the noise of a car outside and a wandering 
thought that enters your mind. They are both something 
that happens. You don’t identify the presence of a 
thought that may be just an image of a passing cloud in 
your mind’s eye or the passing automobile; they simply 
happen. Your breath happens. Light, all around you, 
happens. Your response to it by blinking, happens. 

You are simply unable to do anything. There is 
nothing you are supposed to do. Nobody has told you 
anything to do. You are completely unable to do any- 
thing but be aware of the buzz. The visual buzz, the 
audible buzz, the tangible buzz, the smellable buzz—all 
buzz. It’s going on, so watch it. 

Don’t ask who is watching it; you have no infor- 
mation about that yet. You don’t know that it requires a 
watcher for something to be watched. That is some- 
body’s idea. You don’t know that. Lao-tzu says, “The 
scholar learns something every day, the man of Tao 
unlearns something every day, until he gets back to non- 
doing.” Just simply, without comment, without an idea 
in your head, be aware. What else can you do? You 
don’t try to be aware; you are. You will find, of course, 
that you cannot stop the commentary going on inside 
your head, but at least you can regard it as interior 
noise. Listen to your chattering thoughts as you would 
listen to the singing of a kettle. 

We don’t know what it is we are aware of, espe- 
cially when we take it altogether, and there’s this sense 
of something going on. I can’t even really say “this,” 


PHILOSOPHY OF THE TAO I 


although I said “something going on.” But that is an 
idea, a form of words. Obviously I couldn’t say some- 
thing is going on unless I could say something else isn’t. I 
know motion by contrast with rest, and while I am 
aware of motion I am also aware of at rest. So maybe 
what’s at rest isn’t going on and what’s in motion ts 
going on, but I won’t use that concept because in order 
for it to make sense I have to include both. If I say, 
“Here it is,” that excludes what isn’t, like space. If I say 
“this,” it excludes that, and I am reduced to silence. But 
you can feel what I am talking about. That’s what is 
called tao, in Chinese. That’s where we begin. 

Tao means basically “way,” or “course”; the 
course of nature. Lao-tzu said the way of the functioning 
of the Tao is tzu-jan, or “so of itself”; that is to say, it is 
spontaneous. Watch again what is going on. If you 
approach it with this wise ignorance, you will see that 
you are witnessing a happening. In other words, in this 
primal way of looking at things there is no difference 
between what you do, on the one hand, and what hap- 
pens to you, on the other. It is all the same process. Just 
as your thoughts happen, the car happens outside, and 
so the clouds and the stars. 

When a Westerner hears that he thinks it is some 
sort of fatalism or determinism, but that is because he 
still preserves in the back of his mind two illusions. One 
is that what is happening is happening to him, and there- 
fore he is the victim of circumstances. But when you are 
in primal ignorance, there is no you different ffom what 
is happening, and therefore it is not happening to you. It 
is just happening. And so is “you,” or what you call you, 
or what you will later call you. It is part of the happen- 
ing, and you are part of the universe, although strictly 
speaking the universe has no parts. We only call certain 
features of the universe parts. But you can’t disconnect 


CHAPTER ONE 


them from the rest without causing them not only to be 
nonexistent but never to have existed at all. 

When one experiences oneself and the universe as 
happening together, the other illusion one is liable to 
have is that what is happening now follows necessarily 
from what happened in the past. But you don’t know 
anything about that in your primal ignorance. Cause and 
effect? Why, obviously not, because if you are really 
naive you see that the past is the result of what is hap- 
pening now. It goes backward into the past, like a wake 
goes backward from a ship. All the echoes are disappear- 
ing finally; they go away, and away, and away. And it is 
great _void,.and- ee comes out bof. the great void. If 
you shut your eyes and contemplate reality only with 
your ears, you will find there is a background of silence, 
and all sounds are coming out of it. They start out of 
silence. If you close your eyes and just listen, you will 
observe that the sound comes out of nothing and then 
floats off, and the echo dies and becomes a memory, 
which is another kind of echo. It is very simple; it all 
begins now, and therefore it is spontaneous. It isn’t 
determined; that is a philosophical notion. Nor is it 
capricious; that’s another philosophical notion. We dis- 
tinguish between what is orderly and what is random. 
But of course we don’t really know what randomness is. 
What is “so of itself,” sui generis in Latin, means coming 
into being spontaneously on its own accord, and that, 
incidentally, is the real meaning of virgin birth. And that 
is the world, that is the Tao. 

But perhaps that scares us. We may ask, “If all 
that is happening spontaneously, who’s in charge? I am 
not in charge, that’s pretty obvious, but I hope there is 
God or somebody looking after all this.” But why 
should there be someone looking after it? Because then 


PHILOSOPHY OF THE TAO I 


there is a new worry that you may not have thought of, 
which is, “Who takes care of the caretaker’s daughter 
while the caretaker is busy taking care?” Who guards 
the guards? Who polices the police? Who looks after 
God? You may say, “God doesn’t need looking after.” 
Oh? Well, then, nor does this. 

The Tao is a certain kind of order, and this kind of 
order is not quite what we call order when we arrange 
everything geometrically in boxes or in rows. That is a 
very crude kind of order, but when you look at a bam- 
boo plant, it is perfectly obvious that the plant has 
order. We recognize at once that it is not a mess, but it is 
not symmetrical and it is not geometrical. The plant 
looks like a Chinese drawing. The Chinese appreciated 
this kind of nonsymmetrical order so much that they put 
it into their painting. In the Chinese language this is 
called /i, and the character for li originally meant the 
markings in jade. It also means the grain in wood and 
the fiber in muscle. We could say, too, that clouds have 
li, marble has li, the human body has li. We all recognize 
it, and the artist copies it whether he is a landscape 
painter, a portrait painter, an abstract painter, or a 
nonobjective painter. They are all trying to express the 
essence of li. The interesting thing is that although we 
know what it is, there is no way of defining it. Because 
Tao is the course, we can also call li the watercourse, 
and the patterns of li are also the patterns of flowing 
water. We see those patterns of flow memorialized, as it 
were, as sculpture in the grain in wood, which is the 
flow of sap, and in marble, in bones, in muscles. All 
these things are patterned according to the basic princi- 
ples of flow. In the patterns of flowing water you will 
see all kind of motifs from Chinese art. They are imme- 
diately recognizable, and often include the S-curve in the 
circle of yang-yin. So li suggests, then, the order of flow, 


CHAPTER ONE 


the wonderful dancing pattern of liquid, because Lao-tzu 
likens Tao to water: 


The great Tao flows everywhere, 
to the left and to the right, 
It loves and nourishes all things, 


but does not lord it over them. 


For as he comments elsewhere, water always seeks 
the lowest level, which men abhor because we are 
always trying to play games of one-upmanship. But Lao- 
tzu explains that the top position is the most insecure. 
Everybody wants to get to the top of the tree, but if they 
do the tree will collapse. That is the fallacy of American 
democracy. You, too, might become president, but the 
result is that no one in their right mind would want to 
be president. After all, who wants to be put in charge of 
a runaway truck? 

Lao-tzu says the basic position is the most power- 
ful, and this we can see at once in judo or in dikido}In 
the arts of self-defense, you always get underneath the 
opponent, so he falls over you if he attacks you. The 
moment he moves to be aggressive, you either go lower 
than he is or move in a smaller circle than he is moving. 
And you have spin, if you know aikido. You are always 
spinning; and you know how something spinning exer- 
cises centrifugal force, and if someone comes into your 
field of centrifugal force, he gets flung out by his own 
bounce. It’s very curious. 

So, the watercourse way is the way of Tao. Now, 
that seems to Anglo-Saxon Protestants, and to Irish 
Catholics, lazy, spineless, passive. And I am always 
being asked when I talk about things, “If people did 
what you suggest, wouldn’t they become terribly pas- 
sive?” Well, from a superficial point of view I would 
suggest that a certain amount of passivity would be an 
excellent corrective for our kind of culture, because we 


PHILOSOPHY OF THE [AO I 


are always creating trouble by doing good to other peo- 
ple. We wage wars for other people’s benefit and 
attempt to help those living in “underdeveloped” coun- 
ties, not realizing that in the process we may destroy 
their way of life. Economies and cultures that have coex- 
isted in ecological balance for thousands of years have 
been disrupted all around the world, with often disas- 
trous results. 

So, a certain amount of doing nothing would 
allow everything to cool down. And in ceasing to rush 
around, it will come to light that passivity is the root of 
action. After all, where do you suppose your energy 
comes from? From simply being energetic? No, that is 
how you exhaust yourself! To have energy you must 
sleep, but even more important than sleep is passivity of 
mind, or mental silence. These things are not important 
because they are good for you but because you’ve come 
to the realization that there is nothing else you can do. 
For goodness’ sake, don’t cultivate passivity as a form of 
progress: that is like playing because having fun is good 
for your work. So don’t force it, because when you try 
to force an issue, that just wears you out. When you 
force a lock, you usually bend the key, so instead, jiggle 
gently. Anyone who knows how to conduct business 
always jiggles the key to find the right moment to open 
the lock, and then it all happens as if it were natural and 
not forced. 

Therefore, appreciation of the watercourse will 
give you the sense that your life is a “flowing.” The 
flowing is equally you and not you, or what at least is 
called not-you. It is the process, what is happening, and 
when you understand that, you will stop asking ques- 
tions about it. You will see that all the question-asking 
of questions about it is tautological. You receive expla- 
nations, but they don’t explain. All explanations call for 
further explanations because, to paraphrase an old 


CHAPTER ONE 


(3) 


poem, big explanations have little explanations on their 
backs to bite them, and little explanations have lesser 
explanations upon them, and so on, ad infinitum. This is 
the analytic process that leads from the visible universe 
to the atomic universe to the subatomic universe to the 
protonic universe, and so on, ad infinitum. And from the 
earth it leads outward to the solar system, to the galaxy, 
to systems of galaxies, and on and on. It leads in the 
other direction too, because the universe, as it seeks to 
know itself, must run away from you because you are 
the universe. Your eyes are apertures through which it is 
aware of itself—holes in the wall, as it were. So as you 
look, you blink: now you see it, now you don’t. It is very 
simple. And therefore the big questions—What is it? 
What am I supposed to do? What is human destiny? 
Why are we here?—will slowly disappear, and their dis- 
appearance will be their answer. The answer is that what 
is going on cannot be described. The Tao cannot be 
described. It is simultaneously departing and arriving, 
always flowing, constantly changing. That is the mean- 
ing of “the eternal Tao.” So, Lao-tzu says of Tao: “Tao 
does nothing, but nothing is left undone.” 

Along with the idea of the watercourse, there is 
another Taoist idea called wu wei by Lao-tzu. Wu means 


‘<5 99 6¢ 


not.” Wei has a complex of meanings: “action,” “striv- 


ing,” “straining,” or “doing.” But the best translation of 
all is “forcing.” So, “not forcing” is wu wei. In other 
words, Tao_accomplishes all things without_forcing 
them. And so, I was about to say, “When you master 
Tao,” but master is the wrong word because it implies 
the possibility of being superior to Tao, which is impos- 
sible. Therefore let us say, when you come to wu wei, 
you are working on the same principle as the Tao. This 
principle is likened, poetically, to the difference between 
a willow and a pine in a snowstorm. The pine is a rigid 
tree and the snow and ice will pile up on its branches 


PHILOSOPHY OF THE TAO I 


until they crack. The willow is a springy tree. When the 
weight of the snow becomes too much for its branches, 
they droop, the snow falls off them, and then they 
bounce up again. That is wu wei. 

Chuang-tzu tells a lovely tale about a sage who 
was wandering along the bank of a river near an enor- 
mous cataract. Suddenly, way up at the top of it, he saw 
an old man roll off the bank into the water, and he 
thought, “This man must be old and ill and is putting an 
end to himself.” But a few minutes later, way down 
below the cataract, the old man jumped out of the 
stream and started running along the bank. So the sage 
and his disciples hurried, scooting after him and, having 
caught up with him told him that what he’d done had 
been the most amazing thing they’d ever seen. “How did 
you survive?” they asked. “Well,” he answered, “there is 
no special trick. I just went in with a swirl and came out 
with a whirl. I made myself like the water, so that there 
was no conflict between me and the water.” 

In this same way, when a baby is in an automobile 
accident, it will often remain uninjured, because it doesn’t 
tense up and become rigid during the crash to protect 
itself. Likewise, in judo, you are taught to curl up limply 
when you fall and yet make your arms very heavy, so 
that they flop against the ground with an immense thud. 
That “making heavy” is again like water, and absorbs 
the shock. 

Therefore, you must realize that the watercourse 
way is not a way of complete limpness. Water has 
weight, and its energy is gravity, and therefore it has 
strength. That is the secret of wu wei. If the earth were 
to encounter some obstacle in space, there would be an 
enormous release of energy because of gravity. The earth 
is falling around the sun, and the sun is falling around 
something else, and so the whole universe itself is falling. 
But since there is nothing outside it, and therefore 


[9 | 


CHAPTER ONE 


nowhere for it to fall, it is not falling “at” anything. It is 
just falling around itself, and so gravity is its energy. 
That is the secret of judo. 

Now, if you want to find an intelligent solution to 
a problem, your brain can do the work. You have all the 
necessary intelligence inside the bone of your skull. 
However, most people never use their brains; they use 
their minds instead, and they use their minds the same 
way they use their muscles. You can strain your head 
just as if it were a muscle, and work very hard trying to 
arrive at an answer, but it doesn’t really work that way. 
When you_really want to find_an answer to something, 
what you need to dois contemplate_the_problem. 


Visualize your question as well as you can, and then sim- 


vee te ee 


ply wait. it. If you uu don’t, and if instead you try to find the 
solution through brute mental strength, you may be dis- 
appointed, because any solution that comes in that way 
is likely to be wrong. But when you have waited for a 
while, the solution will come of itself. That is how to use 
your brain, and it will work for you in the same way 
that your stomach will digest your food for you without 
your having to supervise it consciously. Our attempts to 
supervise everything consciously have all led to conse- 
quences that aren’t too good for our stomach, and the 
reason for that is quite simple. Conscious attention, 
which employs words, cannot think of very much. We 
are forced, therefore, to ignore almost everything while 
we are thinking. We think along a single track, but the 
world doesn’t proceed along a single track. The world is 
everything happening altogether everywhere, and you 
just can’t take all of that into consideration because 
there isn’t time. However, your brain can take it all into 
consideration because it is capable of handling innumer- 
able variables at once, even though your conscious atten- 
tion cannot. Verbal symbols are not capable of handling 


4 Io 1 
keep 


PHILOSOPHY OF THE [Ao I 


any more than a single very crude and simple track, and 
that is why we have to trust our brains. We are much 
more intelligent than we understand ourselves to be. So, 
when a neurologist admits that he has only begun to 
scratch the surface of understanding the nervous system, 
he is actually saying that his own nervous system is 
smarter than he is. It has outwitted him so far, and all of 
this is remarkable. What you are is necessarily more 
than anything you can understand, for the simple reason 
that an organism cannot completely understand itself 
any more than you can kiss your own lips or lift yourself 
up by your own bootstraps. So, there is always this ele- 
ment of the unknown in any process of consciousness. 
And if that fact irritates you, remember that fire doesn’t 
need to burn itself, and light doesn’t need to shine on 
itself. If light were to ask, “What am I?” how could you 
answer it? 

For many hundreds of years, human beings have 
wanted to know the nature of isness. “What is matter, 
substance?” Obviously, it would seem, there must be a 
basis for all the shapes that we see. After all, clay is the 
basis of vessels. Iron is the basis of tools. Wood is the 
basis of furniture. But what is the basis of wood, iron, or 
clay? What is the substance common to everything? 
Well, we have tried to find out, but when you consider 
the question, you must ask yourself what sort of answer 
you are looking for. Suppose you did find out what mat- 
ter is. In what sort of language would you be able to 
describe it? If you thought about the world, then you 
would realize that you couldn’t describe it at all, because 
the only thing language can describe—whether it be the 
language of words or of numbers—is pattern and form. 
We can measure form, we can outline it, we can explain 
it. But we couldn’t possibly explain plain old basic stuff. 
There would be no way of talking about it. Therefore 


CHAPTER ONE 


the question about the isness of matter is a silly question. 
We are demanding that it be answered in terms that can- 
not convey an answer to that kind of question. 

Therefore, all we can talk about is form or pattern. 
I could use a pun to talk about that idea and say it is the 
form that matters in anything. When you look at the 
world as form, you do not ask questions about what it is 
made of, or what these shapes are made of, because they 
are not made. Wu wei means “not making” as well as 
“no action,” and making is very different ffom growing. 
When a plant grows, it is not assembled. All its so-called 
parts grow out of it all together at once. Whereas, when 
you construct a machine, you assemble the parts and put 
them together one at a time. This is not the way a plant 
works, and it is not the way that you and I work. It is 
ridiculous to suppose that when you eat your food, it 
consists of body parts that are going to be added to your 
body to replace parts that-have worn out. That is a silly 
idea, because things are grown, not made. So, you don’t 
ask, first of all, what they are made of. And the next 
thing you don’t ask is how they manage to grow. 

This brings us to a very fascinating fact that we are 
unaware of, which is that so-called separate things are 
not really separate: they are joined by space. We always 
think of space as separating, but remember that which 
separates also joins. That is why the word cleave is so 
interesting. It means both to stick to and to divide. We 
are cleaved by space. So, when you look at a distant 
galaxy, it seems to be a single object because you are see- 
ing it ffom a long way away. However, when you get 
close to it, that appearance disappears, and you see indi- 
vidual stars. We are living in the middle of a galaxy. 
From a long way away, all the stars in it would appear 
to form a single object. But right close up, where we’re 
sitting, we can’t see that object. 


PHILOSOPHY OF THE TAO I 


Now, what is it that keeps all these stars together? 
We might say gravity. Gravity is a word that in many 
ways means “we don’t know.” Gravity is like the ether 
that was once supposed to be the fluid through which 
light was transmitted but was later discovered not to 
exist because light could somehow do without it. It 
could go through nothing, through apparently empty 
space. It’s marvelous, really. So, here in our galaxy are 
all sorts of things that are not joined to each other by 
strings, and yet they constitute what we call a thing. And 
similarly, when we got down to the level of our own 
atomic structure, we see that we are like galaxies, with 
the atoms of our bodies vastly distant from each other 
like stars. But don’t ask what holds us together; that is 
the wrong question. What matters is our form. 

When I see you, and then meet you again some- 
time later, how do I know it’s you? I know because I rec- 
ognize your shape. If I haven’t seen you for a few years, 
when I meet you the second time there is very little of 
you that I knew before. Almost all of your so-called sub- 
stance has changed. If I visit a waterfall a few seconds 
later, it is not the same waterfall. It is falling the same 
way, in the same style, but the water is all new. So, in 
the same way, when I meet you today, you have the 
same pattern, even though all your atoms may be new. 
Therefore, it is the pattern that matters. 

If you look at a newspaper photograph under a 
magnifying glass, you will discover that what had once 
appeared to the naked eye as a clear picture now seems 
to be a series of dots. The dots are all alike, they form no 
apparent pattern, and there are no strings joining them. 
But if you change your level of magnification, and step 
away from it, suddenly there is a picture. 

Now, you can magnify time as well as space. To 
magnify something in time you would speed it up and 


CHAPTER ONE 


make a fast motion picture of it. If you put a seed in the 
earth and expose one frame of a motion picture per day, 
when you run that movie you will suddenly see the seed 
moving. You will see it put out a little feeler, and the 
feeler will grow, and suddenly the stalks and leaves will 
open out from it. Then up will come a plant. Let us sup- 
pose we could look at thousands and thousands of peo- 
ple in this same manner. We’d see little fetus cells 
turning rapidly into baby faces, into children, adoles- 
cents, adults, old people, and then, finally, into skulls 
and bones and dust. Face after face, just coming and 
going through the whole span of life, over and over 
again. 

In watching all this we would begin to see the 
emergence of patterns and continuities that move much 
too slowly or are much too complex to be seen normal- 
ly. But stand off at a distance, as it were, “magnify” 
time, and you would see.the same rhythms occurring 
again and again. They would form a continuity connect- 
ing apparently unconnected lives. To use naive language, 
they would be what we might call the reincarnation of 
forms. This reincarnation would happen again and again 
and again, but with no “spook” traveling from one hap- 
pening to the next. That would not be necessary, any 
more than it is necessary to have a line joining one dot in 
a newspaper photograph with another in order for them 
to form a coherent picture. 

Do you know that when you watch television, you 
are actually watching a moving dot? It moves so fast 
that it creates the television image in your mind all by 
itself. However, suppose you had a different kind of eye 
altogether, one without memory. In that case you would 
look at the television screen and see nothing but a dot 
racing across it, and no trace of a picture at all. You 
would say that it doesn’t make any sense, but when seen 


PHILOSOPHY OF THE [TAO I 


in another way, of course, it makes perfect sense: it cre- 
ates a picture. Mysteries, like reincarnation, therefore, 
don’t require anything mystical to be understood. They 
can be understood by “magnifying” time by stepping 
back from the disconnected dots of life and seeing the 
whole picture. From that position, reincarnation is 
understandable in terms of a recurrence of life’s complex 
forms and patterns. 

The real world is right out there in front of you, 
and inside you. And you will discover that I can’t tell 
you a thing you didn’t already know. 


PHILOSOPHY OF THE [AO II 


CHAPTER [Wo 


reviously I wrote about the three basic princi- 

ples of Taoist philosophy, namely, Tao itself, 

the course of nature; wu wei, not forcing, the 

watercourse character of the course of nature; 

and te, the seeming magical power that comes of follow- 

ing the watercourse way and taking the line of least 
resistance. 

Following the watercourse way argues always for 

a high order of intelligence, for it is more intelligent to 

sail a boat than to row it, even though sailing is a lazier 

way of doing it. Technologically it is easier to use the 

wind than to work against it, but in the West we haven’t 

really awakened to the fact that it would be much more 


CHAPTER Iwo 


intelligent for us to use the sun, the wind, and the tides 
as sources of energy rather than using fossil fuels. And 
so we live in a state of foolish ignorance. 

To understand anything about the philosophy 
of the Tao, you really need to be in a state of wise 
ignorance. I am often cast among people who are franti- 
cally conceptualizing and defending their frameworks of 
conceptualization, who have very fixed, elaborate theo- 
ries of the nature of the universe and of man’s destiny in 
it, and of the way to fulfillment. These conceptions are 
very ambitious, but once people enter into the frame- 
work of conceptualization, they become increasingly 
abstracted from the natural world, and they start living 
in books rather than in life, or in the movies rather than 
with people. 

When you enter into the world of conceptualiza- 
tion, you begin to fall into the fundamental fallacy of 
civilization, which is to value the world of symbol above 
the world that the symbol represents. In our culture we 
have taken this to the wildest extremes, so that legally 
you don’t exist unless you possess a birth certificate or a 
passport, which of course are nothing but pieces of 
paper. For us, the record of what has happened is far 
more important than what is actually happening, and 
therefore we waste incalculable energy on recording triv- 
ia and filling out income tax forms. In our universities 
we are anxious that the registrar’s records are properly 
protected, but the books in the library can be damaged 
or stolen at will. 

In the same way, a lot of people don’t believe that 
they are real unless they can read about themselves in 
the newspaper, and many people feel uncomfortable if 
something fantastic occurs and nobody is there with a 
camera to take a picture of it. And so some children 
commit crimes to get their names in the newspaper so 


EJ 


PHILOSOPHY OF THE [AO II 


that they will know they are there, because their parents 
are always using appearance in the newspaper as a stan- 
dard of importance. Obviously, the message is that you 
are not important unless you, too, appear in the newspa- 
per, in the record to go down in history. 

We are making records, on film and tape, of what 
we call vanishing civilizations, vanishing cultures, van- 
ishing arts, and vanishing species. And we seem to think 
it’s all right, it can go ahead and vanish, just so long as 
we have them on record. It is all right if there aren’t any 
whales or condors now, just so long as you can read 
about them in the Encyclopedia Brittanica! 

This confusion of the world of representations 
with the world of nature is just disastrous. Therefore it is 
tremendously important for us to get back to the world 
of nature. However, you may have a concept that the 
physical world, the world of nature, is unspiritual. A lot 
of people do, and similarly, a lot of people are at odds 
with their bodies. But what they are at odds with, really, 
is not their bodies but their ideas of their bodies. A lot of 
people resent change. They resent the idea of the dissolu- 
tion process that is involved in physical change, and the 
idea that as you get older, from a conceptual point of 
view, you get uglier. However, that just isn’t true. If they 
are alive and alert, old people are not ugly at all by 
virtue of just being old. But unfortunately, we have very, 
very rigid concepts of what is beautiful and what is not. 
It is important to abandon those ideas, at least occasion- 
ally, in order to see clearly. You can always take them 
up again later if you want, but it’s good to stop thinking 
about them for a while. For if you think all the time, it is 
much like talking all the time. And although I may seem 
to be a very talkative person, I assure you that I am also 
a good listener. The minute somebody says something 
interesting, I am very silent and attentive. If I talk all the 


CHAPTER Iwo 


time, I won’t hear the interesting things someone else 
may have to say, and likewise, if I think all the time, I 
won’t have anything to think about except my own 
thoughts. Now, that would leave me high and dry, and I 
would become like a library to which the only books 
being added were books about the books that were 
already in it. It would be as if a painter never saw any- 
thing but art galleries or a musician heard nothing but 
concerts. Through these self-imposed limitations, we are 
falling out of touch and are unable to be with the world 
that is naturally with us. 

Lao-tzu said, “The five colors make a man blind. 
The five tones make a man deaf.” This means that if you 
think there are only five colors, you are blind, and if you 
think there are only five tones, you are deaf. There is, as 
you know, an infinite continuum of sound and color, 
and the spectrum is merely a matter of convenience in 
classification. 

When in ancient texts of mysticism you read that it 
is necessary to go beyond the senses, that necessity can 
very easily be misunderstood. The texts are not saying 
that it is the senses—the eyes, the ears, and so on—that 
falsify. It is our conceptions of what the eyes and the 
ears bring to us that cause the falsification. In other 
words, it is not the precept but the concept wherein we 
find the root of maya—illusion—and magic. Of course, 
you can use conceptualization creatively, if you know 
what you are doing, but if you don’t know what you are 
doing, your concept of reality can completely delude 
you. To escape that delusion, you must begin again to be 
generally aware of yourself and your surroundings with- 
out taking seriously any idea whatsoever about them, 
and without using particular words. You see? 

I am using words, of course, but for the time being 
follow them as if they had no meaning, as if I were just 


PHILOSOPHY OF THE [TAO II 


making nonsense. Now, in that marvelous state of 
ignorance, there is nothing called time, nothing called 
space, nothing called self, and nothing called “the 
other.” There is just the happening, and the happening is 
not supposed to be anything in particular. Whatever 
state of feeling you find yourself in, that is the way it is 
going, and you have no standards for criticizing it, for 
approving of it or disapproving of it. It is quite simply 
what there is, and sometimes it is just delightful to sim- 
ply sit and be there. Of course, in the fancy world, sit- 
ting and being there is called meditation. 

It is awfully important that we know what we are 
talking about, and not only can I tell you about Tao but 
I can also show it to you, and meditation is the way to 
show it. It is extraordinarily simple, but because of our 
concepts, it is difficult to understand. Our minds are 
caught up in two questions: Why are we doing it, and 
what is the use of it? 

It is amazing how we are conditioned to turn 
everything into profit, and to feel guilty if we do not, 
and that is a very dangerous idea to impose on children. 
We all have a kind of conscience instilled in us—I call it 
the commercial conscience—that asks, “In what way is 
this bettering your situation?” If not financially, are you 
bettering your mind, or becoming more spiritual—what- 
ever that is. However, we don’t really understand that 
we cannot be in a state of what could truly be called 
meditation, or contemplation, as I prefer, if we are seek- 
ing that state for some purpose or profit, or in the expec- 
tation that some kind of result or benefit might flow 
from it. The moment you have those desires or expecta- 
tions, you are no longer in a state of meditation, you are 
bothered about concepts instead. Meditation is the one 
activity, or the one science, as it were, that has no goal 
in the sense of seeking an objective for the future. 


CHAPTER Iwo 


The stream begins in the mountains and runs 
down to the ocean. We are apt to say that the stream has 
the ocean as its goal, but when it gets to the ocean, the 
water is evaporated by the sun’s heat and returns to the 
mountains. And then it comes down again. It has no 
desire to reach the ocean. Indeed, the stream is simulta- 
neously in the sky, in the mountains, on its course, and 
in the ocean. It is in all places at once, and therefore it is 
not going anywhere, it is simply going. 

When a Zen master was asked, “What is Tao?” he 
replied, “Walk on.” And really, nothing will top that. 
One cannot not walk on. The flow is there, whether or 
not you resist it. When you resist it, though, you are like 
somebody swimming against the current, and that is a 
good way to drown. The skill of it, as in sailing, lies in 
going intelligently with the current, steering with it and 
using it. But it bothers us, especially if we are Western 
industrial people, to encounter a philosophy of no pur- 
pose or future objective. When we say of something “It 
has no future,” that is equivalent to saying it is bad. But 
the word purpose and the word meaning can be used in 
different ways. Often when we speak of a meaningless 
life or a purposeless life, in a negative, derogatory way, 
we are actually referring to a person who lives life for 
extremely short-term purposes. 

Short-term goals produce the same sort of restless- 
ness that is encouraged in you when you turn over the 
pages of a glossy “news” magazine. You soon realize 
that a magazine of that character is really designed to 
keep you away from any sort of serenity. No article in it 
is satisfactory, in the sense of giving you anything to 
chew on, and it ends too soon. It gives you just a glimpse 
here and a peek there, but it never goes into anything 
deeply. It gives you a set of impressions, and it gives you 
pictures that are exciting or sensational or unusual, 


PHILOSOPHY OF THE [Ao II 


which momentarily entertain you. You can go through a 
whole issue and remember nothing, but it keeps you in a 
state of the kind of pacified agitation you might want 
while you are flying on an airplane or waiting in an 
office or thumbing through something before breakfast. 
This kind of agitation is characteristic of a person who 
lives for short-term purposes. And doing that is what 
one would normally call a meaningless life. In contrast 
to that, a meaningful life is generally understood to be 
one devoted to long-term purposes, what we call serious 
matters. However, the Taoist standpoint is neither of 
these because a Taoist would probably have thought 
through the question of meaning very carefully and 
would have realized that there is something spurious 
about most of our purposes, whether long-term or short. 
When you look realistically at the state of human civi- 
lization, you see little more than people muddling 
through a mess. One might well ask, “What, then, are 
we talking about then when we talk about a meaningful 
life?” I think we should use a little more precision here 
than we usually employ in answering that question. In a 
very strict sense, words have meaning, but reality is 
meaning, and therefore it has none. The word, or the 
idea—which is a complex of words or other symbols— 
functions as a pointer to something other than itself. 
And that “other” is its meaning. So when you ask the 
question, “What do trees and rivers mean?” the answer 
is that they don’t, because they are not words and they 
are not signs, unless you say, “A river is a sign of rain.” 
This is a redundant statement because a river is rain 
draining from the land. The splendor of a river is that it 
is the meaning and has none, and there is about it a 
quality of meaninglessness, of having no meaning and 
yet being meaning to all nature. 

Ludwig Wittgenstein makes the curious point that 


CHAPTER I WO 


there are people who, after long questing, feel that they 
understand the sense of life and yet nevertheless cannot 
say wherein that sense consists. If I experience some- 
thing, whether it be a human being or some quality of 
light or a tree or a flower or a work of art that I find 
important, I might say it has tremendous meaning for 
me. And yet when asked what that meaning is, I am at a 
loss for words, because actually, in a very high sense, 
nature is non-sense. And in this way also, music is non- 
sense, especially classical music, whether it be the classi- 
cal music of the West or of India or China, because all 
classical music is nonrepresentative. It is nonsymbolic, 
and it does not represent anything other than itself. It is 
a patterning of sound. It is like a fern, which is a veg- 
etable patterning, or crystals, which are chemical pat- 
ternings, or like animals, with all their marvelous 
routines. 

When we look at the routines of the animals and 
the plants, we with our purposive minds say that all this 
is for the purpose of survival. But for the survival of 
what? If we have already defined the entire organism in 
terms of its survival, then all the plants can be shown to 
have as their purpose is the survival process. In the end, 
the survival process has as its fundamental purpose 
nothing other than the continuation of the survival 
process. So, in saying that a plant’s purpose is survival, 
nothing has been said. It is a tautological statement. We 
are going on, so as to go on. 

I would call this an engineering approach to 
nature. It looks at nature purely from the standpoint of 
efficiency. The engineer has no interest in inefficient 
processes. If I wanted to go from here to there, the engi- 
neer would direct me to take the shortest possible route 
so as to complete the journey in the shortest possible 
time. That would be the efficient way to go about it: by 


PHILOSOPHY OF THE [AO II 


taking a straight route rather than a wiggly one. But one 
takes a wiggly route not only to better fit one’s path to 
the contours of the land but also just for the pleasure of 
winding along and enjoying the ride. Enjoyment of 
winding and wiggling is really fundamental to life. Life is 
wiggly, and it isn’t wiggly just because that is the easiest 
way to be. It is wiggly for the pure love and beauty of 
wiggling. 

Shirts covered with interesting floral wiggles some- 
how please the eye and are restful, whereas geometric 
surfaces and straight lines are not often restful, unless 
handled very skillfully. But in a floral setting, the eye can 
wander. Of course, one can overdo this sort of thing, the 
way Victorian wallpaper does, which becomes too 
much, used repetitively. 

The Japanese do this kind of arrangement very 
skillfully, however, by using emptiness and displaying 
against it a very clear wiggle—as in a flower arrange- 
ment or a calligraphic painting. So arranged, the space 
and the wiggle complement each other. 

When people run, those with an engineering men- 
tality go jogging; they plod, chunking along a course. 
Those who really understand running, however, dance 
the course. They will swerve and run delightfully on 
their toes, and they are really more effective runners 
than joggers are because they wind along in a rhythmic 
pattern and do not have “getting there” in mind. They 
are not just exercising out of a sense of duty. And as 
they run they have no real particular purpose. 

If you travel with a destination in mind, your 
whole journey will become a chore. That is why, when 
you are traveling in a car, or by any other means, you 
wear yourself out in your hurry to get somewhere. You 
arrive absolutely exhausted, because all along you have 
been pushing it, and there was no need to. You would be 


CHAPTER IT Wo 


amazed to see how astonishingly soon you seem to 
arrive if you were to set out to go somewhere in no 
hurry. But if you set out in a hurry, it will take forever to 
get there. 

In becoming acquainted with the Chinese and the 
Japanese appreciation of natural form—which is derived 
essentially from Taoism and secondarily from Zen, 
which is Buddhism as influenced by Taoism—you find 
that what characterizes their whole approach to art is 
the purposelessness of nature. In religious art, one usual- 
ly finds paintings and sculptures of very symbolic fig- 
ures. These figures are normally symmetrical, but what 
you find in the Taoist and the Zen feeling for nature is 
that the focal point of reverence, of fascination, will be 
the unsymmetrical. The focus could be a rock of peculiar 
shape that has been set in space in a certain way, but the 
rock is not intended to have any symbolic meaning 
whatsoever. 

The same sense is’also apparent in Zen stories. 
When somebody in a Zen story asks for the fundamental 
meaning of Buddhism, the master is likely to answer, “I 
didn’t feel like wearing shoes today.” I know very well 
that ignorant people will look for symbolism in this and 
will treat this answer as some sort of allegorical perfor- 
mance. But that is not the meaning of it at all, and this is 
not the sense of a Zen remark. 

You cannot understand the sense of the Zen 
remark without being rather stupid. That is to say, by 
taking it simply, for what it is. In the anecdote I just 
recounted, the master wasn’t talking about not wearing 
shoes. Neither was he speaking symbolically to lead you 
around through symbols that are a kind a code known 
only to the initiates. What would be the point in that? 
The master was talking quite simply and directly about 
the Tao, and that is also the fundamental meaning of 


PHILOSOPHY OF THE TAO II 


Buddhism. It is the happening, the universe. Get with it. 
How can you not? 

So, those Zen stories and Chinese and Japanese 
works of art give the feeling of the Tao. A favorite scene 
is of a mountain landscape, with a tiny little human fig- 
ure in it somewhere, a poet wandering through pine 
trees beside a stream. Where is he going? Where is the 
stream going? Where are the clouds going? Where are 
the birds going? We don’t know, really. They are wan- 
dering on. And so, within this idea of wandering you can 
discover the quality that the Japanese call yugen. Yugen 
is made up of two characters that mean “mysterious” 
and “deep.” In Japanese poetry yugen is what you feel 
when you watch wild geese and they are suddenly hid- 
den by a cloud. It is what you feel when you are looking 
at ships far out to sea and they slowly sail behind a far- 
off island. Yugen is to wander on and on in a great for- 
est without thought of return. 

Now, you get a certain kind of feeling from these 
poetical expressions. As Porgy sang in Porgy and Bess, 
“T got plenty of nothing, and nothing’s plenty for me.” 
See? This is the same sort of idea. One Chinese poem 
starts out “My thoughts will wander in the great void.” 
This is yugen. Yugen, therefore, is the sensation of life, 
of nature, of going, but going nowhere. But it is not the 
sort of nowhere that we imagine when we see a sign that 
says NO THROUGH ROAD or when we come to a blank 
wall. Going nowhere is going into pregnant space. We 
do not know, as it were, what will come of it. It is to use 
space in such a way that our imagination just flows into 
it without taking on any specific forms. It is like when a 
certain kind of music hints at something but doesn’t 
spoil its subtlety by explaining it. And it is like a joke, 
for a joke is funny only as long as it is not explained. Do 
not even explain to yourself why you laugh, because 


CHAPTER [Wo 


even that would spoil it. In the same way there is this 
mysterious quality to yugen that is not defined but that 
you understand and see the beauty of just as you see the 
humor in a joke without defining it. That is why, inci- 
dentally, there is no adequate philosophy of humor, and 
certainly no funny philosophy of humor. A lot of 
philosophers and psychologists have written about the 
psychology of laughter in an extremely boring way. And 
in a similar way, it is futile to discuss aesthetics in a 
philosophical or practical manner, as if trying to find out 
the formula for creating a beautiful object. 

Japanese and Chinese poets repeatedly bring up 
images that evoke the marvel of purposelessness. Let me 
give you an illustration. In Japan and in China they love 
building temples on the sides of mountains, and especial- 
ly forested mountains. Trees called cryptomeria that are 
very much like sequoia grow in Japan, and they grow in 
vast, cathedral-like forests on the sides of mountains. 
Well, in Japan you will frequently see at the bottom of 
such a mountain a great gate opening into a cryptomeria 
forest. The gate will have all kinds of ornate carvings on 
it in the style of the ancient T’ang dynasty of China, 
which is the style of Japanese temple architecture. There 
will be clouds and dragons and upsara girls and all sorts 
of wonders carved in this gate. 

When you go through it, there will be a grand set 
of stone steps flanked by guardian dogs and bronze 
lanterns. It is a marvelous approach, and at the top of 
the steps there will be another such gate. There may be 
great sliding doors in it. And when you go beyond that, 
there may be a courtyard surrounded by maple trees in 
front of the cryptomerias, and there will be the temple, a 
splendid, great building. If you go inside it you will find 
a marvelous golden altar with Buddhas around it and 
incense and golden lotus flowers and candles. It is all 


PHILOSOPHY OF THE TAO II 


very splendid, and there the Buddha will be sitting on his 
lotus throne, smiling down at you. 

Well, these shrines are arranged so that, somehow 
or other, you will next find yourself behind the temple. 
And low and behold, there will be another flight of 
steps, perhaps not quite so grand as the preceding stair- 
cases, but leading up and away and deeper into the for- 
est. And if you climb those stairs, you will come at last 
to a different kind of temple. It may be a Shinto shrine, 
and it will be very simply constructed. Or it might be the 
hermitage, the personal house of the chief priest of the 
temple. Buddhism grew up in the fertile soil of Taoism in 
China and Shinto in Japan, and often the temples were 
built on the same sites. So, the gate to this temple or her- 
mitage will be rustic, and there may be a small garden 
around it, and a garden path that will lead to a further 
ascent of steps beyond it. And if you go up those steps, 
you will finally find a graveyard among the trees. 

Here you will not find the kind of ugly tombstones 
Westerners tend to use, however. Instead there will be 
simple square wooden pillars with the names of the 
deceased written in characters. And the sense of that 
graveyard is not quite as depressing as we are used to 
because it gives one the feeling that everything simply 
flows away. And right at the back of the graveyard there 
will be another small shrine. It will draw you in, and 
when you get to it you will look inside. And what will 
you find there, in that place of honor? A mirror. 

And then, oh my goodness, there will be still 
another flight of steps going up. It will be nothing more 
than a very crude, narrow trail rising up yet higher into 
the trees. And if you follow it, it suddenly vanishes into 
the bushes. And a haiku poem says, “This is all there is. 
The path comes to an end among the parsley.” 

Do you remember that as a child? When you 


CHAPTER [Wo 


explored a garden, you looked at things from close to 
the ground. Unable to look over the tops of things like 
an adult, you just explored a little way around, through 
the bushes. And there was a little trail that finally just 
vanished into what might very well have been the pars- 
ley? I so vividly remember that, and how magical it was. 
I felt I could disappear at that point and never be discov- 
ered. I felt, too, that there were all sorts of secrets hidden 
in those bushes. I never specified what they were, 
though. That would have ruined the feeling. 

We cannot conceive of the real thing that we want; 
it would spoil everything to do so, because it would then 
become a mere conception. What we are seeking is the 
great surprise, and to the degree that we preconceive it, 


it will fall flat. The whole-psinciple.ol the universe 1s sut- 
_Prise, rise, and-so. the Tao’s-principle_is spontaneity and sur 
prise. It is to accomplish a miracle without amas 
~ anything, without planning it. You will see here a coinci- 
dentia appositorum, a coincidence of opposites, as in, 
for example, the relationship between d ing and hapy 
pening, or between freedom and necessity\And you can 
see that, because you can’t visualize one! without the 
other, all process can be understood as being simultane- 
ously free and necessary. That is a contradiction in ordi- 
nary logic, in ordinary forms of conception. But when 
we say of something that it happens necessarily, we are 
separating the happening from its cause, and that is a 
purely conceptual separation. Strictly speaking, every- 
thing that happens is part of the same event as its cause. 
As I demonstrated earlier, for instance, river, ocean, and 
rain are all one event. You can’t say that a river is 
caused by its source. And if it were not flowing, there 
would be no water in the ocean to be evaporated and 
returned to the river as rain. 
You look at the Tao, and from one point of view, 


ae 


PHILOSOPHY OF THE [AO II 


you can see that it is free. That is to say, it is emerging 
from the void quite freely, quite spontaneously. But 
when you look at it from another point of view, you can 
see that everything that happens, happens necessarily. 
Actually, the truth is neither one view nor the other. 
Those views are just different ways of classifying, of 
looking at it and chopping it up. 

If I have a magnet and IJ start at its north pole, 
chopping, cutting off sections, approaching the south 
pole, every piece that I cut off will have a north pole. 
And the original magnet will still have a north pole too, 
all the way until I get right to the end and the whole 
magnet has been chopped up and disappears. And if I 
begin from the south pole, every time I chop, getting 
closer to the north, the original magnet will still have a 
south pole. 

In the same way, if you approach the world from 
the end called necessity and you start chopping, chop- 
ping, chopping to get to the end called freedom, it will 
always be necessity that you will find, right up to the 
end. You will see that everything that is happening is 
happening necessarily. But then, if you turn around and 
begin at the end of the world called freedom and start 
chopping away, it will always be freedom that you will 
find, until you get to necessity, at which point everything 
will disappear. It is for this reason, then, that the poet— 
who next to the musician speaks most eloquently about 
the Tao—doesn’t philosophize. The poet merely pro- 
vides us with an image: this is all there is, the path comes 
to an end in the parsley. 

And one could say, enough said. 


THE WORLD AS 
ORGANIC PROCESS 


CHAPTER IHREE 


he Book of Changes is based on sixty-four 
unique six-line symbols known as hexa- 
grams. Two kinds of lines form these hexa- 
grams: solid yang lines and broken yin lines. 
These two types of lines can be grouped into a total of 
eight different three-line figures, which are known as tri- 
grams, and which represent an intermediary step 
between basic yin or yang lines and the final six-line 
hexagram. The names of these trigrams are Heaven, 
Earth, Water, Fire, Wind, Mountain, Thunder, and 
Lake. These eight trigrams can be grouped, in turn, into 
the sixty-four two-trigram parts that, to return us to the 
beginning, are the sixty-four hexagrams of the I Ching, 


CHAPTER I HREE 


or the Book of Changes. For the Chinese, these sixty- 
four different pairings of the eight different trigrams rep- 
resent the elements or the forms of life. 

The quality of any given moment or situation can 
be represented by a hexagram generated during that 
moment or situation. There are various methods, using 
coins or sticks, for arriving at a situation’s representative 
hexagram, and many people using these techniques 
employ the Book of Changes as a book of divination. 
Now, I have seen a Zen priest look at flowers arranged 
in a bowl and then say to the person who had arranged 
them, “Ah yes. You were in a melancholy mood at the 
time you did that.” He was somehow able to interpret 
the quality of the mood, in the moment the flowers had 
been arranged, by the pattern of their grouping. 

In the Book of Changes, each hexagram is also 
accompanied by an interpretation. However, you know 
how oracles are: sometimes the things they say are very 
specific, and sometimes they are so vague that you can 
project anything you want onto them, in much the same 
way that one can project a story or a picture onto a 
Rorschach blot. But the I Ching has a very peculiar qual- 
ity, and one that is very difficult to pin down. It is like 
having a conversation with a great sage, especially when 
you turn to it with a specific problem in mind. 

Now, there is an old Western custom of opening 
the Bible at random and picking out a verse to see what 
it tells you, and this is called bibliomancy. Consulting 
the I Ching is a somewhat more complex activity than 
that, and it is pursued by some very sophisticated 
people. One reason for its effectiveness is that coming to 
a firm decision is better, for almost all purposes, than 
coming to a weak decision. And also, since the informa- 
tion available to us about any particular decision is extra- 
ordinarily incomplete, since you could not possibly have 
complete knowledge of any situation, it is sometimes 


‘THE WORLD AS ORGANIC PROCESS 


enormously effective to make decisions at random. This 
raises the question that is implicit in all discussions 
about noninterference, or wu wel. It raises the great 
question of the difference between the artificial and the 
natural, which is absolutely central to Taoist attitudes— 
and later, to Zen—and which lies strongly in the back- 
ground of Chinese life. 

One might, of course, say that a distinction 
between the artificial and the natural is itself an artificial 
distinction. If bees’ nests are natural, for instance, so are 
human buildings. Therefore, what on earth do we mean 
by the word nature? How do the Chinese use this word, 
and how do we use it? Let us look first at how we use it. 
We do so in at least two ways. The most common use, 
aside from a general notion of nature’s being something 
that is undisturbed by man, is when we ask, “What is 
the nature of this thing?” 

When we ask about something’s nature, we are 
usually after its classification: is it animal, vegetable, or 
mineral? Therefore, all the early Western treatises on 
nature, such works as John Scotus Erigena’s De divi- 
sione naturae, were concerned with the divisions or cate- 
gories of nature. After his work came books on natural 
history, and the main thing they taught was how to clas- 
sify the various kinds of creatures of the bestiary. The 
Middle Ages was a time devoted to the classification of 
the creatures of the world, and later on Western studies 
of natural history tell us what families all the various 
fishes and birds and moths and butterflies and flowers 
and trees belong to. In this context the word nature 
refers to classification according to type, kind, or family. 
However, this use of nature is based on its earlier mean- 
ing, which is derived from the idea that everything in the 
world behaves according to its nature. In this sense of 
the word, there are different varieties of natures, and 
they are connected to the Latin natura, which means 


CHAPTER I HREE 


“birth,” and are related to our word nativity. Therefore, 
when you are born, you have a certain nature, which has 
been given to you by God. In the beginning, God said, 
““Come, humm, be my bee, and buzz as I bid.’ And sure 
enough, it was, and it did.” God, in the beginning, is 
supposed to have established the nature of all things, 
and to have laid down the laws for their behavior. 
Therefore, this idea of natural law lies at the basis of the 
Western idea of nature. 

The Western idea of nature also included the 
notion that there was, in the beginning, a lawgiver who 
conceived of an ideal plan for the universe. This plan 
was called the Logos, or the Word, which in Christianity 
is the second person of the Holy Trinity, that element of 
the divine nature which, according to Christian theolo- 
gy, is supposed to have been incarnate in Jesus Christ. It 
is said in the Christian creed that one believes in “one 
God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth 
and of all things visible and invisible, and in one Lord 
Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God. God of God, 
light of light, true God of true God; begotten, not made, 
being of one substance with the Father, by whom all 
things were made.” 

However, people don’t usually understand this 
concept. They think it is the Father by whom all things 
were made, but no, it is not. It is the Son, the Word, by 
whom all things were made. 

To put it another way, the law—the ideal pattern 
of the universe—is the actual creative agent in Christian 
philosophy. This leads to our idea of the law of nature 
as being, as it were, the supernatural rail upon which the 
cosmic streetcars are forever to run. And so, there is the 
idea that “all flesh is grass, but surely the word of the 
Lord abideth forever.” So, to act according to nature 
means to act according to the laws that the Lord God 
has laid down for every particular species and for every 


ie] 


THE WORLD AS ORGANIC PROCESS 


particular member of that species. But of course, this 
idea gives rise to the possibility of being unnatural, of 
behaving unnaturally, of breaking the law of nature, and 
of doing things that you were never supposed to do. So 
in this way, the West has the thought that one can be 
unnatural, and that you can break the laws of nature. 

Now, the Chinese also have the conception of 
people acting in an unnatural way, and there is a long 
discussion of this in the inner chapters of the Chuang-tzu 
book. He describes the pure men of old, who made no 
plans for the future, who were affectionate without 
knowing that they were being loving, and who were 
faithful without calling it loyalty. He describes the way 
they lived and how they went about in the world. They 
were never in a hurry, they just strolled around, and it 
was a fine life. Nobody had a thought about anything. 
There were no police, no laws, and nobody ever talked 
about virtue or anything like that. Then the great Tao 
was lost, and the idea of duty came to man, and the idea 
of right conduct. 

The point of Chuang-tzu’s story is that the deci- 
sions and the planning we do might just as well be left to 
the Tao, just as the cats and birds appear to leave every- 
thing to the Tao. But we argue, “Well, we can foretell 
the future and make plans, and therefore we can control 
our lives better than the animals can, and survive longer, 
as individuals. We can live more elegantly, and we have 
greater control.” However, we pay a price for all that 
control, and the price is anxiety. The more we learn 
about the future, so as to be able to control it, the more 
we worry about it. We lie awake nights thinking, “Did I 
do the right thing? Did I take everything into considera- 
tion? Will it work out?” If you feel poor, for example, 
and you don’t have enough money, and then if you get 
enough money so that you don’t have to worry about 
bills anymore, you will probably start worrying about 


CHAPTER I HREE 


something else. “Will I get sick? Will I be involved in 
an accident? Will the police come after me?” You 
know, it could be anything, but if you are an anxious 
person you are going to be anxious about something, 
come what may. 

There are people, of course, who throw all this off 
and say, “To hell with the whole thing. I’m not going to 
bother about all this stuff anymore.” Incidentally, it is 
very difficult to be one of those people because of other 
people who think they are important. Since they are 
making all their plans, they start pushing you around, 
and they say, “Come on, you have to join our game. 
You can’t be outside our game, or else you have to go 
away.” They may put you in jail, and of course, in jail 
you don’t have to make any plans. You don’t have to 
make any decisions at all because you just do what you 
are told. So, this is one way to stop making plans, but it 
is kind of depressing. 

Taoism, as practiced in China, is adopted by older 
men or women who say, “Well, all right, the young can 
take over in this game that we’ve been playing.” They 
can take off and live in the mountains. And so the 
Chinese have created a huge romance about the Old 
Man of the Mountain. One of their lovely poems is 
called “Inquiring for the Master”: 


I asked a boy beneath the pines. 
He said the master’s gone alone, 
herb-gathering, 

somewhere on the mount. 


Cloud-hidden, whereabouts unknown. 


Now, this idea of going back into the mountain is 
comparable to the Hindu idea that after being a house- 
holder, you should go on to the vanaprastha state and 
leave society and become a forest dweller. This is the 


‘THE WORLD AS ORGANIC PROCESS 


same idea, except that the Chinese have romanticized it 
more than the Hindus have. The poet Han-shan—his 
name means “cold mountain”—has composed absolute- 
ly marvelous expressions of this idea of going off to the 
floating life, to a life of drifting like a cloud and flowing 
like water. The mood associated with this idea is one of 
the components of what the Japanese call yugen. We 
have no translation for that word, but one senses it in 
the feeling one would have if one were wandering on 
and on in a great forest without thought of return. 

There is another Chinese poem that starts out with 
the line, “My thoughts shall wander in the great void.” 
And so the Old Man in the Mountain owns nothing, and 
nothing owns him. Or, to put it another way, he has 
nothing but possesses all things. “The beggar,” says — 
another poem, “has heaven and earth for his summer 
clothes.” 

To become an Old Man of the Mountain is to 
carry out the ideal of being natural in a very literal sort 
of way. The idea that one should actually go back to the 
forest, should actually give up concern about “what you 
shall eat and what you shall drink, and wherewithal you 
shall be clothed” is the most subversive and supposedly 
impractical passage in the Bible. But, given a certain 
toughness of muscle and hardiness of health, this can be 
done by any human being. 

After all, if you live that way and stop planning 
and prognosticating, all you are doing is ceasing to build 
up a huge edifice on which you have got to make house 
payments, and all that jazz. Because, you see, once you 
get involved in that game, and start acquiring things, 
everybody starts trying to pick them away from you: 
with a little pick here, a little pick there, here a pick, 
there a pick, everywhere a pick, pick. So, you must 
watch out for that kind of trap, or else you will have to 


CHAPTER I HREE 


hire people to help you watch out for it. But if you are 
doing that, you are probably also developing ulcers and 
getting gray hair while sorting out these difficulties, and 
its probably not working for you. So, you can go back to 
the natural life, where even death is no problem, because 
when you die, you’ll just die. You will just go, and 
instead of worrying about what it will be like afterward, 
you just go along. If there is an accident, and you have 
not made the proper plans, then, whoops, it’s all fin- 
ished. But you see, it’s better to have one day without 
anxiety than thousands of days filled with anxiety. 

Now, that is the philosophy of nature according to 
Lao-tzu; however, certain things must be remembered. 
The first one is that Taoists in general, and Chuang-tzu 
in particular, are given to exaggeration in their writings, 
and you may have come across this. In our culture it is 
very commonplace for a group of people who have a 
certain set of ideas to get together, and after a few drinks 
they begin to exaggerate their own philosophy, knowing 
very well that they are exaggerating it. I have heard, for 
example, among the clergy, when they get together, all 
sorts of amazing schemes come forth. For example, 
Roman Catholic priests wear birettas—black hats with 
bladelike things on them and a pom-pom on top. One 
priest I knew was going to hang a biretta in his pulpit 
and put a set of false teeth under it that would open and 
close while a recorded sermon was being delivered. 

And in this same way of spoofing the thing you are 
supposed to hold important and sacred, Chuang-tzu 
spoofs us about the idealized principles of Taoism. The 
things he says are very, very exaggerated, and you 
always have to allow for that when reading Taoist texts. 
When they want to describe the person who is perfectly 
natural, they depict him as somebody with a long beard 
who is absolutely unwashed, who does nothing whatever, 


‘THE WORLD AS ORGANIC PROCESS 


but just sits around, opening his mouth when it rains 
and getting a drink that way. But that’s an exaggeration, 
and this image is largely symbolic. 

The best creation of this sort is a character called 
Pu-tai in Chinese, and Hotei in Japanese. He is immense- 
ly fat, and he carries a long staff. He has a huge bag in 
which he collects things that have been discarded and 
are unimportant, and he gives them to children. This is 
the happy old rogue of Taoist legends. Of course, he is 
an exaggeration, but he humorously makes his point. 

Now, if it is true that the Tao is that from which 
nothing can deviate, then it is also true that the distinc- 
tion between the artificial and the natural is an artificial 
distinction. Therefore it is possible to live a life of busi- 
ness or raising children and still be like Hotei/Pu-tai. It is 
possible to live a natural life, but to do this requires 
some unconventional wisdom. 

Consider that if all objects of art are essentially 
natural, like bees’ nests, what is it that allows us to say 
that one work of art is more natural than another? If 
everything a human does is natural, what allows us to 
say that one kind of life is more natural than another? 

Remember that we understand words by means of 
their contrast with other words. We understand black by 
means of its contrast with white, one by contrast with 
many, and so on. The Hindus needed a word for that 
which transcended all differentiations and contrasts. 
Instead of calling this transcendental thing “the one,” 
they called it the nondual, with the understanding that, 
although this word has a logical opposite—namely 
dual—they were going to use it as if it had no opposite. 
This understanding is a social convention. In much the 
same way, we have a social convention with regard to 
the artistic depiction of perspective. We use lines in such 
a way that even though they are drawn on a flat surface, 


CHAPTER [THREE 


we interpret them as being drawn with the dimension of 
depth. 

In exactly the same way, although everything is 
natural, there are certain conventions of art that are 
understood by the culture to be more natural than oth- 
ers, or to more fully represent the spontaneous spirit. 
This idea comes from two fundamental Taoist notions, 
which are called the uncarved block and the unbleached 
silk. Now, a shirt made of unbleached silk has a nice 
kind of texture, like unbleached muslin. It has a kind of 
rough elegance to it. There is an art in Japan called bon- 
seki, which means “the cultivation of rocks,” and this 
implies the appreciation of rocks with a rough elegance 
to them. To pursue the art of bonseki means to go out 
and find a rock that looks more like a rock than other 
rocks. 

Now, I have been talking about the Chinese idea 
of nature; however, the Chinese don’t conceive of nature 
as following laws. Nevertheless, they do apprehend in it 
a principle of order that they call wu tze, that is to say, 
“Without law and yet orderly.” And I have tried to sug- 
gest various ways in which we too can somehow appre- 
hend this order. I use the word apprehend rather than 
comprehend advisedly. We can understand what the 
Chinese mean by order through their concept of li, 
which originally meant the markings in jade, the grain in 
wood, and the fiber in muscle. But the principle of order 
in nature, and the organic patterns in which nature 
plays, are never able to be completely reproduced in 
mechanical terms. Yet just such reproductions of the 
patterns of physical nature in mechanical terms are how 
our Western forefathers defined explanation. Unless you 
could explain something in those mechanical terms, well, 
you hadn’t really explained it. And so, too, in the whole 
academic world of the West, that which cannot be writ- 


‘THE WORLD AS ORGANIC PROCESS 


ten down and discussed in an accurate way is not matter 
for academic learning. This is a very limited point of 
view, because the world that can be described is never 
the same as the world that exists. The described world 
and the real world are incommensurable, and one must 
never lose sight of that fact, because you start eating the 
menu instead of the dinner and swallowing the money 
instead of the food it can buy. Yet people characteristi- 
cally do just that. And therefore, the people who have 
been hypnotized and bewitched by words have to be 
dehypnotized and brought back to the world in which 
we live. 

Now, we call the world in which we live the physi- 
cal world, or the material world, and that bugs people 
who are what I call spiritual types. They want to find 
behind the material world—which changes and perish- 
es—a spiritual world that is more real and endures for- 
ever. But they are often fouled up because their thoughts 
about the two worlds are exactly backward. It’s the 
material world that is a world of pure abstraction. The 
physical world, as we use that phrase, is a completely 
abstract creation. It is not concrete at all. 

That may surprise you, but a little investigation 
into the origin of words will show you conclusively that 
this is so. Question: How does a scientist treat what he 
calls the material world? Answer: By quantitative meth- 
ods. How do you establish quantity? By measure, by 
number, which is to say, by representing nature in terms 
of abstract categories—meters, inches, seconds, degrees, 
and so on—all of which are exactly as abstract as the 
lines of latitude and longitude on a globe. And the word 
meter—as in the metered world, the measured or mea- 
surable world—derives from the Sanskrit word matra, 
the root from which also maya, or illusion, is derived. 

I have said that one of the great meanings of 


CHAPTER I HREE 


nature in the West is “classification”: “What is the 
nature of this thing?” In Greek, physis—from which 
comes our physics—has to do with the world as appre- 
hended in a certain way: the world as apprehended 
according to its classes, and those classes are abstract. 
When we say of something, “It is immaterial,” “It doesn’t 


>P) 


matter,” that means it has no quantitative measure. It 
doesn’t amount to anything; it doesn’t add up to any- 
thing. It is unquantified. But what we need in life is not 
so much quantity as quality. Mere quantity is absolutely 
abstract. It’s the quality, the essential taste, the flavor of 
life, the meaning of it, that is the important thing. 

There are ways of measuring qualities, but in our 
language you always have to turn them into quantities. 
When a cook, standing over a stewpot, adds salt, takes a 
taste, puts in a little more, tastes again, and then says, 
“Now that’s just right,” we can have somebody stand 
behind him and record the actual quantity of salt added. 
And that would be the quantitative abstraction that cor- 
responds to a taste experience that was not an abstrac- 
tion at all. However, in order to bring people back to the 
real world, you have to temporarily suspend their 
abstract thinking, because it is through abstracting that 
you divide everything into differences. It is through 
abstracting that you get the notion that you are one 
thing and I am another, and that events are separate 
from each other, in the same way that minutes are sepa- 
rate. We try to draw the lines on our watches that sepa- 
rate one minute from another as finely as possible 
because we want to know exactly the moment one 
minute turns into another. And those lines, by their very 
thinness, show us how abstract, tenuous, filmy, and 
unreal they are. They are measures; but don’t confuse 
measure for what is measured. The world that can be 
seen and felt without abstractions is the world in which 


‘THE WORLD AS ORGANIC PROCESS 


you are connected to everything that is, to the Tao and 
the whole course of nature. However, you have been 
taught differently because you have been hoaxed and 
wangled by people who chatter and explain, and who 
have already hypnotized themselves into a view of the 
world that is quite abstract, quite arbitrary, and not nec- 
essarily the way things are at all. 

So the Taoist, in common with the Hindus and the 
Buddhists, is a great advocate of intellectual silence. 
Mind you, one doesn’t say that the intellect is a bad 
thing, or that one should be an anti-intellectual. Not at 
all. Thinking is just as much a part of the process of 
nature as a web woven by a spider is. The spider weaves 
the web to make a net for flies, and the mind weaves a 
net for catching the universe. And that is fine, but there 
is something more to the universe than the net made for 
catching it. But in order to find this something else, you 
must temporarily stop using the net, just as, if you want 
to hear what other people have to say, you have to stop 
talking. And if you want to talk, you must also know 
what you are talking about. In other words, if words 
represent the real world, then you must be open to the 
real world in order to translate it effectively into words. 
But we are not taught to do that. Most of us think com- 
pulsively all the time. That is to say, we carry on a per- 
petual interior conversation, because we are afraid that 
if that conversation were to cease, we too would cease. 
And, in a way, we would. So, the Taoists speak con- 
stantly of being thoughtless, of having an empty mind, 
so that one can communicate with the real world with- 
out distortion. 

I have already pointed out that Taoists exaggerate 
things. They overstress the things they are talking about, 
and you must allow for that. And so, when they say that 
a certain wise man was so quiet and so still that moss 


CHAPTER I HREE 


grew over his body, animals crawled over him without 
noticing his presence, his breathing ceased altogether. 
and his heart no longer beat, they are using fanciful 
exaggeration and imagery. Nevertheless, there is quite 
definitely a Taoist yoga, and there are Taoist meditation 
practices, just as there are Buddhist forms of meditation. 

The first element of Chinese Taoist yoga is to stop 
talking to oneself. Don’t explain the world. This method 
is in direct conflict with the Confucians, who made a 
great point of what Confucius himself—K’ung Fu-tzu is 
his proper name—called the rectification of names, 
which was a way of being sure that the language was in 
order so that there wouldn’t be any confusion. But the 
Taoists said, “How can you ever rectify names? You 
establish names by talking about them and you explain 
them by talking about them. How will you then explain 
the words you use to talk about them, and be sure they 
are fixed and in order?” As Lao-tzu says, “Naming is the 
mother of ten thousand things.” He also says, “No 
name, the nameless, is the origin of heaven and earth.” 
So one has to get to the nameless state, the nonthinking 
state, which is called in Chinese wu nien. Wu means 
“not” and nien means “the heart-mind.” Nien is also 
translated as “remember.” It is the equal to the Sanskrit 


>> mn 1 


word shana, and shana means “an atom of time,” “a 


>> nS 


moment,” “an instant.” It means to see the world with- 
out dividing it into instants, to see it all as one instant, 
not many instants in a series. 

Now, you will find, if you try, that it is a very diffi- 
cult thing indeed to stop thinking. “Stopping thinking” 
doesn’t mean to stop using your eyes and your ears and 
your hands and all your senses. It means that when you 
see a dog, you don’t say “dog” to yourself; you just see 
what is there. The Buddhists call this the state of suchness. 


Now, you see, if I hold a conversation with some- 


‘THE WORLD AS ORGANIC PROCESS 


body, they hear my words and they derive my meaning 
from those words. What is the meaning of that? What is 
the meaning of the fact that I can use words to convey 
something to someone else? It has no meaning at all. It is 
just something happening, as when flowers bloom like 
flowers and the water goes like water and the wind 
blows like the wind. I am writing and you are reading 
and some people are playing baseball and some are 
watching television and some are sailing boats and some 
are traveling in airplanes and some are riding on buses. 
It is like music. But what is the meaning of music? Some 
music is made to have a meaning, and it is what we call 
program music. But when music is simply music, it is 
simply going on. 

This is marvelous. When the birds fly in the sky, 
why are they flying? When the wind is high, the gulls go 
way up in the air. Normally, gulls are supposed to be 
busy fishing and surviving and doing all those really 
important things. But when the wind is high, they all 
start floating up into the sky, because they just simply 
like to float on the wind. It is just something that hap- 
pens, and when you begin to see the world in that way, 
then at once you begin to realize that it simply isn’t 
important whether you succeed or fail. Those are arbi- 
trary standards, imposed on the world in the same way 
we impose our other patterns and measures on it. 

There is a lovely Chinese poem that says: 


In the spring scenery 

there is nothing superior, 

nothing inferior; 

flowering branches grow of themselves, 
some short, some long; 

the morning glory blooms for an hour 
and yet is no different from a giant pine 


that lives for a thousand years. 


CHAPTER I HREE 


The essential thing is to be able to see everything 
thus, because this view is absolutely at the root of the 
Tao. And when you truly see everything thus, you fall 
silent. 

Lao-tzu said, “Those who know do not say; those 
who say do not know.” And yet he wrote the Tao Te 
Ching. And what am I doing? I am saying but I am also 
not-saying. I am not trying to tell you something. I am 
not hoping you will get a message, in the ordinary sense, 
from my words. I am playing with words. When I speak 
I enjoy the sound of my own voice, and the sound of my 
voice is a great deal more important than what I am say- 
ing. Do you get that? 

I have a friend who tries to make people listen, 
and while he is talking to them, trying to get them to lis- 
ten, he says, “Now don’t try to attach any meaning to 
the sounds you hear; just hear them.” 

In listening you would do the same thing with my 
words. You listen to the real world that’s outside them, 
and listening in that way is the entry into the real world 
where there are no distinctions, because all the distinc- 
tions are made by thinking. Nor is there, for that matter, 
any sameness. The universe is just the way it is. And that 
is the Tao, which can’t be spoken. 

Now, you may ask, “How on earth does one learn 
to listen like that? Because I think compulsively, and I 
can’t stop thinking.” Well, first of all, don’t start by try- 
ing to banish thoughts from your mind. That, as the 
Taoists say, is like “beating a drum in search of a fugi- 
tive.” In the same way exactly, if you try to stop think- 
ing, you end up thinking about stopping thinking, and 
that creates a great deal of confusion. What you have to 
do instead is let your mind think whatever it likes to 
think, but instead of paying attention to the meaning of 
the words within your thoughts, just become aware of 


THE WORLD AS ORGANIC PROCESS 


those words as sound. Hear everything that is said to 
you as a series of noises. 

We can do this very easily while listening to music. 
When you really listen to music, you don’t talk, you just 
go with the flow. And that is why listening to music is a 
form of meditation, especially music that doesn’t make 
you think. Now, some people can’t go with the flow. 
Music always stimulates ideas in them, and they will 
think about this and that, and not listen. But if you really 
listen to music, the sound of it becomes your whole mind. 

It is more difficult to stop thinking while looking 
at something than when listening, because we think with 
our eyes to an amazing degree. But you can learn to look 
at something without interpreting what you are looking 
at. This doesn’t mean that you don’t see. You look, but 
you don’t name. The world begins to be a very different 
place indeed when you look without naming, when you 
stop saying, “That’s a head, that’s a face, that’s hair, 
that’s a hand,” because the moment you say, “That’s a 
hand,” you stop seeing the hand. But if you really look 
at a hand, and don’t think about it, it becomes miracu- 
lous. You can’t force nonthinking, though. You cannot 
force thoughts out of your mind. But if you simply listen 
to them in a new way, as if they were music, you will 
slowly begin to divest yourself of your interpretative sys- 
tem and its terminology and the value system within 
which, like a straitjacket, you have been brought up to 
live, and that will be your entry into the real world, the 
world of the Tao. 


BEING IN THE Way I 


CHAPTER FOUR 


ne of the first things everyone should 
understand is that every creature in the 
universe that is in any manner of speaking 
conscious regards itself as a human being. 
That is to say, if a creature is sensitive, it knows and is 
aware of a hierarchy of beings above it and a hierarchy 
of beings below it. Even such a tiny creature as the fruit 
fly, which lives only a few days, is aware of all sorts of 
weird little animals and pollens and spores floating in 
the atmosphere that we don’t even notice, unless we 
happen to be looking through a microscope. Indeed, the 
fruit fly may well criticize these spores and think they 
are inferior to it, and at the same time human beings are 


CHAPTER FOUR 


incomprehensible, from its perspective, because we are 
as much outside its perceptual range as a quasar is out- 
side ours. And actually, our universe may be inside an 
atom in somebody else’s world, and all our galaxies may 
be part of the same speck of dust sitting on a giant 
piano. 

The relativity of one’s perspective is a fundamental 
principle that I think everybady must understand in 
order to know the meaning of the Tao, which is the 
Chinese sense of the course of nature. Wherever you are 
and whoever you are and whatever you are, you are in 
the middle. When you stand on the deck of a ship and 
you see the horizon all around you at exactly the same 
distance, you are in the center of a circle, and your senses 
extend a certain range in all directions and give you the 
impression of being in the middle. Everything in the 
world feels just like that! Also, everything feels itself to 
be at the center of its own kind, and they look natural to 
it. Spiders and hydras and sea urchins don’t look very 
natural to us, and so we say, “I wouldn’t want to look 
like that.” But when they see us, they say, “Well, what 
kind of an awful thing is that? And what a lot of non- 
sense it does, too.” 

Dogs have tried to catch on to human beings in a 
sort of funny way, but cats look at us and think, “You 
are out of your mind. You are absolutely crazy. Why do 
you sit there all day feverishly pecking away at a type- 
writer when you could be curled up in the sun purring?” 
From the cat’s point of view, we don’t understand what 
life is about at all. All cats—and cats in cat company— 
feel that they are people because they are in the middle 
of their world. The true definition of a person is a place 
to look from, that is, the middle position. And of course, 
this is the point of the very interesting Buddhist idea that 
says that a person can only become a buddha—that is to 
say, a human being can only become enlightened, 


BEING IN THE Way I 


liberated, aware of their unity with the universe—from 
the middle or human position. Therefore, Buddhism 
calls itself the Middle Way because it is the way for 
someone in the middle, and that is everyone. And believe 
it or not, there are forms of yoga and ways of liberation 
for worms, fruit flies, snails, spiders, birds, and every- 
thing else. 

Every creature in its situation feels just as cultured 
as we can possibly feel. All creatures have their distinc- 
tions and their snobberies, just as we do, because, you 
see, they are aware of all sorts of things that we don’t 
even notice. We think a person is cultured if they play 
the piano or the violin, or read poetry, have a big library 
or paintings, a fancy house, and so on. We say that this 
is truly a person of culture. We can see at once that this 
person is a rather elegant human being, but when you 
enter the world of fishes, they have exactly the same sort 
of thing going on. Only, instead of revealing their ele- 
gance by collecting books and things like that, they show 
it in the precise wiggles and very subtle tremors of the 
tail by which one fish reveals itself to be a very superior 
fish as compared with others, which makes all the other 
fish look at these wiggles and say, “Oh my, to be like 
that. What a genius! To be able to do that so well.” And 
airplanes flying formation cannot even begin to do what 
flights of birds and schools of fish can do in their com- 
munal swirling dances. 

Allow me to interject something rather important 
here. The nature of biological existence is such that we 
have to kill in order to live. Even vegetarians have no 
way out of this situation, because plants are also forms 
of life, and they are awake to a certain degree, and they 
also think they are people. When you chew up plants— 
cabbages and carrots and things like that—you are caus- 
ing a very painful experience for them, and you can’t get 
away from that. The only possible solution to the ethical 


CHAPTER FOUR 


dilemma that we have to eat in order to live, that being 
is killing, is to revere food, to prepare it as well as possi- 
ble, and to enjoy it to the fullest extent. There is no 
other ethical response possible in this situation. 
Remember that you are not the only pebble on the beach 
and that even human beings belong to mutual eating 
societies, just as much as fish and cows do, and that 
something in the end is going to eat you too. Of course, 
human beings are not, as a rule, eaten by large creatures 
because we have rid ourselves of things like lions and 
tigers. There are not many of those things around, and 
so instead we are eaten by tiny creatures, by the 
microorganisms. Our morticians are a very unreasonable 
group of people because they are trying to deprive all 
those microorganisms of their proper human food. 
When they preserve human bodies in formaldehyde and 
bury them in sealed bronze caskets instead of giving the 
worms a meal, those bodies just do nothing. They 
become more and more parchmentlike instead of contin- 
uing into the flow of the course of life, which is the 
proper thing to do when you die. To let the microorgan- 
isms eat us would be an act of respect for the earth from 
which we have gained all the years we were alive. To 
give ourselves back to the source of life is the courteous 
thing to do, and it would help keep the whole cycle 
going. So we should start a campaign at once to abolish 
the mortician’s profession and replace it with a new sys- 
tem in which dead human beings would be buried in 
great fields and left there, so those fields would have the 
most fertile soil for growing corn and lettuce and arti- 
chokes and grapevines. In this way you go back into the 
cycle and become everything that is beautiful. 

But now, to return to my main point, here is some- 
thing that is very strange. For every creature that feels it 
is a person and knows that it is here in the same way 


BEING IN THE Way I 


that you do, the experience of being here constitutes a 
sort of blockage. There are very few human beings who 
don’t feel this, and I am sure there are very few other 
creatures that don’t feel it in some way as well. It is the 
creation of a certain tension that constitutes the feeling 
of I-ness, of there-ness, of being here. After all, every 
creature is a particular form. Everything is individual, 
and that means that not only you as a total organism but 
each of the component cells of your body has a feeling 
that is its own. Look at your cells through a microscope 
and you can see that they have their individual lives. 
And if you examine the stream of your blood, you will 
find it full of all kinds of organisms that are having all 
sorts of conspiracies and games and plots, eating each 
other, and doing the same things that we do. However, 
we wouldn’t be a healthy organism unless there were all 
these wars and fights and plots and politics going on 
between the various cells in our blood. From their point 
of view, however, they feel a little bit put upon because 
they are part of a larger organization. We are in the 
same situation ourselves because very slowly we human 
beings are making ourselves into a planetary organism 
with an electronic nervous system. In science fiction pub- 
lished in the 1920s, it was always expected that future 
human beings would have enormous heads, because they 
would have very big brains, and they would be very 
wise. However, it didn’t work out that way because 
what is happening instead is that the human race is 
building a brain outside its body. It is an interlocking 
electronic network of telephonic, radionic, videonic 
communications that is rapidly being connected with 
computers, and within a few years you will be able to 
plug your brain into a computer. You will have a little 
gadget behind the ear like a hearing aid, and it will be 
integrated with your brain in such a way that you can 


CHAPTER FOUR 


plug in a computer. And perhaps that will be only an 
intermediate stage, and in the same way that we thought 
that all communications by electricity had to go through 
wires, and then discovered radio and television and got 
rid of the wires, so we may eventually get rid of tele- 
phones and radio and television and start communicat- 
ing by an entirely different method that at present is 
called ESP. But that will mean that nobody will have a 
private life anymore, since everybody will automatically 
read everybody else’s thoughts. There will be no defenses 
because everybody will see right through you, and some 
people will protest and say, “This is terrible, there is no 
privacy anymore, and that means there will be no me.” 

Now, that has already happened to our own cells 
and our own neurons, and at some time during the 
course of evolution, they probably objected that their 
private lives were being taken away and that they were 
being organized into a body. 

Now we are doing the same thing to ourselves here 
on the earth, and we need to be clever about it. That is 
to say, we need to do two things at once. First, we need 
to have a tremendous openness to each other so that you 
will not care if I read your thoughts and I will not care if 
you read mine. At the same time, though, each one of us 
needs to retain our peculiar individuality, almost in the 
same way that a stomach and a heart, or a kidney and 
the pituitary gland, have all retained their individuality 
and are nothing like one another. There is enormous dif- 
ferentiation inside the body, despite the fact that it is a 
single, distinct organism. I use the word distinct rather 
than separate because by separate I mean “disjointed” or 
“cut off from,” but by distinct I mean something I recog- 
nize as a distinguishable pattern perceived as a whole. 
So, something can be distinct without being separate, in 
just the same way as back and front can be very different 
and yet inseparable. 


BEING IN THE Way I 


So, there is within practically every living thing 
a sensation of being at a center of a field of tension and 
resistance, with a feeling of being a little bit blocked, 
or shall I say, of being in the way, or of being in one’s 
Own way. , 

Now, just for contrast, imagine the opposite. 
Suppose for example that you woke up each morning 
with a feeling of total transparency, without any resis- 
tance to the external world. Imagine you were just float- 
ing through it: you were part of it, it was part of you, 
but you were transparent. In just the same way you are 
not aware of your eyes if you see well. But if there is 
something wrong with your eyes, if you see spots in 
front of them, then you become aware of them, and you 
start noticing your eyes, and they start getting in your 
way. The Taoist sage Chuang-tzu said that when clothes 
fit well you are not aware of them, and when your belt 
fits properly, you do not notice it at all. 

In exactly the same way, the perfect form of man is 
unaware of himself, because he doesn’t get in his own 
way, and becomes perfectly transparent. Now, at this 
point you may be thinking that I am going to teach you 
some technique that will allow you to feel perfectly 
transparent, and that that is the proper way to feel and 
the way you ought to feel. But things are not quite that 
simple. 

Let us go back to the idea that we are in fact a sort 
of resistance in the middle of the flow of life, and that 
because we resist, we hurt a bit. It is through hurting a 
bit that we know we are here, and people very often 
really do go to extreme measures to know that they are 
here. I was in Mexico recently, and I tried to find out 
what is really behind the displays of blood and gore in 
Mexican Catholicism. Why do they love those pictures 
of Christ you see sold in the little shops where his face is 
green and contorted with horror, and blood is pouring 


CHAPTER FOUR 


down from a crown of the longest, spikiest thorns you 
ever saw stuck into his head? And why do they have cru- 
cifixes on which they have carefully modeled sores and 
open wounds on Christ’s body, and all that kind of 
thing? And why, at Guadeloupe, are there those girls 
walking on their knees for a mile down the avenue to the 
altar of the cathedral? What is that all about? 

Quite simply the answer is that if you hurt, you 
know you are there, and that is part of the meaning of 
penance. In all the trials that people go through, and all 
the adventures, and all the very difficult torments you 
subject yourselves to as a result of experiencing things 
like that, it becomes quite apparent to you that you do 
truly exist, and you are here. You are a kind of obstacle 
to the flow of life, and as life impinges upon you, you 
hurt a bit, and so therefore you know that you are here. 

Now then, although people constantly cultivate 


9 


this sense of “being here,” they are also constantly 
saying that they would rather not have that sense of 
individuality, and that they would like to forget them- 
selves. So, many people say, “Well, I want to lose myself 
in somebody else. I want to find a guru or a group to 
belong to. I want to join the kind of religion that will let 
me forget myself. I want to go to the movies or read a 
mystery story to forget myself. I want to fall in love and 
forget myself. I want to get drunk to forget myself.” The 
peculiar quality of the drug called alcohol is that it turns 
you off. It makes you increasingly insensitive to pain, 
and to the pain of being, and so on, so that you can 
achieve a certain vague, rather misty sense of floating 
above the pain. 

As things stand, one ordinarily doesn’t feel that 
way. And people therefore tend to take alcohol or some- 
thing else in order to disappear, or at least to be less 
aware of this sensation of resisting the flow of the world. 


BEING IN THE Way I 


Most people are constantly fighting the external world, 
and if you study your muscles and the dynamics of your 
body, you will find that you are fighting all the time. 

If you really pay attention to your body, and to 
your posture and muscle tension, then you often find 
you are fighting the world all of the time. As an experi- 
ment, my friend Charlotte Selver sometimes makes a 
person lie down on the floor, and then she tells the per- 
son, “Now look, the floor is solid, and it will hold you 
up. You don’t have to do anything to stay where you 
are, just lie on the floor.” And then she may touch the 
person slightly and say, “Do you realize you are making 
an effort just to lie there? Are you afraid that if you 
don’t, you will just turn into a kind of basically formless 
goo and will spread out all over the floor? But you 
won’t, you see. Your skin, your bones, and your muscles 
will hold you together. There is nothing to worry about. 
All you have to do is lie on the floor. You don’t have to 
make any special efforts to hold yourself together.” But 
many people are afraid that they will fall apart or disin- 
tegrate somehow if they don’t make a constant effort to 
hold themselves together. Or perhaps they are afraid 
that they will be absorbed into some outside agency if 
they are not constantly on the alert to protect them- 
selves. 

Now, I am not a preacher, and that is the most 
important thing you need to understand about me. I am 
not telling you that you shouldn’t do that. But I am 
inviting you to become immensely aware of the fact that 
if you are constantly afraid of falling apart, you must 
therefore have an inevitable sense of being alone, of 
being a particular, isolated form, unlike any other form 
on earth. You are just you, and if you concentrate on 
that, you ought to be able to feel that aloneness without 
the slightest difficulty. It isn’t as if ’m asking you to feel 


CHAPTER FOUR 


some kind of unusual transcendental sensation, or some- 
thing like that. ’'m just asking you to feel the very ordi- 
nary sensation of you being you, and being alone. 

Now, focus on that sensation of distinctness. I will 
even call it a sensation of separateness. We have all been 
brought up to feel separate. We have been brought up to 
feel actually disjoined from the external world, although 
that isn’t our true state at all, of course, because we are 
as much a part of the external world as a whirlpool is 
part of a stream. But we are brought up not to notice 
that. And if you have been brought up that way, and 
you don’t notice that you are as much a part of the 
world as a whirlpool is of a stream, then you feel an 
intense sensation of separateness. 

The thing to do with any feeling you don’t like is 
to experience it as deeply as possible, to go into the 
inmost depths of loneliness, for instance, and indeed 
even into the inmost depths of selfishness. Now, are you 
selfish? Lots of people try to pretend they aren’t. But 
Krishnamurti showed that all the people who seem to be 
very good and seem to have the highest ideals are really 
motivated by the same sort of desires as people who rob 
banks. Only they give their desires a more noble name, 
so as to better conceal them. 

It is the same with culture. Culture is a way of con- 
cealing the fact that we have to eat, or other unpleasant 
realities. The queen of Spain in the 1860s wore enor- 
mous skirts and seemed to float into a room as if she 
were an angel. Somebody once gave her a present of a 
dozen pairs of beautiful silk stockings, and her majesty’s 
chamberlain returned them with a letter saying, “Her 
majesty, the queen of Spain, does not have legs.” So, in 
many ways high cultures are actually just subtle ways of 
concealing reality, so that pretentious people can pretend 
they are above the level of the lower classes, whether 


BEING IN THE Way I 


human or animal. By now we are all too good to go 
around crudely banging a bull on the head with a mallet 
or sticking a knife through it and tearing it apart and 
eating it. All that is done for us way off in the stockyard, 
and the meat comes to us in the butcher shop as a com- 
pletely neutral-looking thing called a steak. But steak has 
absolutely nothing to do with a cow. A steak is some- 
thing wrapped up, packaged. Almost nobody picks up a 
steak and thinks, “Poor cow.” A plastic-wrapped steak 
doesn’t even look like a cow, and it doesn’t remind you 
of one in any way—that’s culture. 

Of course, the most religious people in the world, 
the greatest saints, are also the greatest rascals. I’ve 
known lots of them, and some of them are clergymen, 
and I must tell you in confidence that some of the filthi- 
est stories I have ever heard in my life were told to me by 
clergymen. 

And incidentally, in Hebrew theology there is a 
thing called the yetzer ha-ra. In the beginning of time, 
when God created Adam, he implanted in him the yetzer 
ha-ra, and that is a wayward spirit. With the yetzer ha- 
ra he put something funny into mankind so that we 
would all be a little odd, and it was a result of the yetzer 
ha-ra that Adam was tempted by Eve—and she was 
tempted by the serpent—to eat that famous fruit. But the 
Hebrews believed that everything that God created was 
good, including the yetzer ha-ra, because if it hadn’t 
been for that, nothing ever would have happened. 
Everybody would have obeyed God, and God would 
have been quite bored. However, if you are God you 
can’t just go out and say, “Disobey me,” because if they 
do, then they are obeying you. God had to be much 
more subtle than that, so he didn’t tell Adam to disobey, 
he told him to obey, but he slipped this yetzer ha-ra 
inside him, too, so that he would disobey, and then God 


CHAPTER FOUR 


could say, “I’m not responsible.” So this wayward- 
ness will happen on it’s own, and everyone ultimately 
wants that. 

No matter how you explain it, this “disobedience” 
is going to happen of its own anyway because everybody 
wants something to happen. And this is because the sen- 
sation of being you, of being a lonely center of awkward 
sensitivity subject to the most peculiar feelings and pains 
and anxieties, is an essential prerequisite for feeling 
something else as well, and the two experiences go 
together. If, on the one hand, you want to be omnipo- 
tent and live in a universe where nothing happens except 
exactly what you will to happen, then everything must 
come totally under your control and is absolutely trans- 
parent to your intelligence. But the problem is that once 
everything comes under your central control, even if you 
are God, everything becomes a bore, from beginning to 
end. So any being who has a sense of centrality, who has 
a sense of selfhood and identity, must also have the sense 
that their identity is separate from everything else that is 
going on at the same time. But remember that those 
other things are only arbitrarily defined as not-self, as 
being not under one’s own control, and they are defined 
that way so that they can jump out at you at any time— 
and might even eat you—because then you won’t 
become bored. 

So, first of all I want you to understand that these 
two sensations—one of being the lonely, central, sensi- 
tive, vulnerable self, and the other of living in the midst 
of a world that feels alien—are really only two aspects of 
the same sensation. You simply could not have the one 
without the other. Now, this is a rather good thing to 
know, because if you do, it means you won’t panic when 
you experience this sensation of personal disassociation. 
People who suffer from chronic anxiety are always in 


BEING IN THE Way I 


doubt about this curious relationship between what feels 
like a self and what feels like something else. 

Let us suppose you are anxious about your rela- 
tionship with other people. You walk into a restaurant 
and sit down to dinner, and there is a stranger opposite 
you. You know nothing about this person, and perhaps 
you begin to feel a little reluctant to start a conversation. 
You don’t know whether this person is going to be per- 
fectly fine or some kind of crackpot, or perhaps some 
kind of stuffed shirt. So you start fencing around a little, 
and you have the feeling you had better watch yourself. 
After all, you want to make a good impression, and you 
don’t want to make an enemy. So you watch yourself, 
and before long a funny kind of self-consciousness 
becomes apparent, because the secret game that people 
are playing all the time to defend themselves by putting 
others down enters the picture. These are really very 
wicked games because, if the truth be told, every living 
being is actually a manifestation of everything that there 
is. This is what was called God in religious language, 
and every human being is a manifestation of that. We 
can see everyone as one divine being coming at us in dif- 
ferent ways, but what we do instead is try to prevent 
people from realizing that this is so by pointing out their 
limitations in the most subtle ways. And in doing so, we 
see if we can faze them or put them off a little to make 
them uncertain and unsteady. It is very much like a game 
we call chicken in which if a person waivers, he loses. 
People play that kind of game with each other all the 
time, but the real reason they do it is not the one they 
think it is. The real reason is that if everybody were per- 
fectly clear that they were a manifestation of the divine 
being, nothing much would happen. So, to keep every- 
body a little bit unclear about its true nature, the system 
irritates itself and creates these little doubts. In this way 


- &3 


CHAPTER FOUR 


we can have our little uncertainties, our sensations of 
blockage and of not being very sure of ourselves, while 
at the same time knowing very well indeed that we are a 
self, and that as a self we are alone and everything is up 
to us. So we have this terrible feeling of responsibility, 
but what I am trying to point out to you is that if you 
intensify that feeling and bring it to its highest pitch, you 
will immediately realize that you are aware of it only by 
virtue of its contrast with another feeling, the feeling of 
there being something else here that you have defined as 
not-you. So the feeling of not-you and the feeling of you, 
are relative. They go together, and you can’t have the 
one without the other, and if you can’t have the one 
without the other, that means there is a secret conspiracy 
between them. They are really the same but are just pre- 
tending to be different, because if there weren’t a differ- 
ence, you wouldn’t know that anything was happening. 
It would be like that song by Bob Dylan that says some- 
thing along the lines of “I’m just a guy like you, I’m just 
like anybody else; it’s no use talking to you, because 
you’re just like me.” If everyone were the same and 
shared the same ideas exactly, there would be nothing to 
talk about. It would all be a perfect bore because every- 
one else would just be yourself echoing back at you. You 
would feel like a madman in a hall of mirrors. 

Now, you may think I am speaking in favor of 
some kind of schizoid universe, but I’m not. The whole 
point is this: it is through difference, and through every 
variety of differentiation, that unity is discovered. For 
instance, this business about vive la petite différence is 
very important. The fact that men and women, for 
example, have a primordial kind of difference, and can 
never really understand each other, is tremendously 
exciting because out of that difference something hap- 
pens. And if something makes a difference, then it is 
there. If it doesn’t make a difference, and it doesn’t mat- 


BEING IN THE Way I 


ter, then it doesn’t exist. You could say it bas no matter, 
because differences are like the two sides of a thing, and 
since you can’t have the one side without the other, they 
really are one, and this is precisely why they become 
inseparable. Therefore, when you feel as a rather painful 
fact an extreme sense of your own existence, and that 
you are alone in the middle of everything else, you may 
recognize that the everything else feeling and the you 
feeling are really the two poles of the magnet, and that 
they are one and the same process. So that the real you is 
what lies, as it were, between those poles and includes 
both of them. 

Now, this is the fundamental principle upon which 
ancient Chinese thought developed. It is the principle of 
the yang and the yin, and this is one of the oldest ideas 
on the planet. The philosophy of Taoism, which I speak 
of when I talk about of the Book of Changes, or the I 
Ching, is based entirely on the idea that the universe is 
the result of an interplay between primordial differences, 
such as up and down, back and front, black and white, 
is and isn’t, male and female, positive and negative. The 
word yang in Chinese refers to the south side of a moun- 
tain, which is the sunny side. The word yin refers to the 
north side of the mountain, which is the shady side. Did 
you ever see a mountain that was south-sided only, with 
no north side? Yang may also refer to the north bank of 
a river, which gets the sun, and yin to the south bank of 
the river, which gets the shade. And so, of course, the 
yin-yang symbol is half dark and half light. It looks like 
two fishes interlocked, chasing each other. They actually 
form a more complicated symbol, however: a helix. The 
spiral nebulae have a form like a helix. It is also the posi- 
tion of man and woman making love, in which, funda- 
mentally, each is trying to get inside the other. They are 
trying to get into the middle of each other, but there is 
always a difference somehow, and they can never quite 


CHAPTER FOUR 


get to the other’s center. They are two parts of a whole, 
just as, if I want to see the back of my head, I can turn it 
round and round, but I can never quite catch up with it. 
But that is what makes everything work. It is said in the 
Vedanta Sutra that the Lord, the supreme knower of all 
things, who is the knower in all of us, doesn’t know 
himself (or herself) in the same way the fire doesn’t burn 
itself and a knife doesn’t cut itself. So, to God, nothing 
could be more mysterious than God. 

You know how sometimes you surprise yourself? 
For example, when you feel your own pulse, you sud- 
denly feel this life going on in you, like belly rumbles, 
which you are not causing. Or consider hiccups. Are 
they something that you are doing, or are they merely 
something that is happening to you in the same way rain 
happens to you? This is a very debatable question. 
Consider breathing. Are -you breathing, or is breathing 
breathing you? You can feel it either way. You can 
decide to breathe, and feel that you are breathing, just as 
you can decide to walk. On the other hand, when you 
forget about breathing altogether, it still goes on, and so 
it then seems to be something that is happening to you. 
Which is it? Do you grow your hair, or does your hair 
just grow? What enables you to make a decision? When 
you decide, do you first decide to decide, or do you just 
decide? Now, how do you do that? Nobody knows. 

Chuang-tzu tells the story of one philosopher ask- 
ing another, “How can one get the Tao, which is the 
power of nature, so as to have it for one’s own?” The 
other philosopher answers, “Your life is not your own. 
It is the delegated adaptability of Tao. Your offspring 
are not your own. They are the outputs of Tao. You 
move, you know not how. You are at rest, you know 
not why. These are the operations of Tao. So how could 
you have it for your own?” 


BEING IN THE Way I 


If you feel your body, your skin, your solidity, and 
if you regard your marvelous eyes .. . they are the power 
that generates sight and color out of all the stimuli of the 
external world. Think of your ears, those beautiful shells 
that you wear on the sides of your head. You don’t feel 
responsible for them, you don’t know how they are 
made, but they are you. They are you, and indeed that’s 
what you are. Their extraordinary patterns, their beauti- 
ful, gorgeous, wonderful arabesques of tubes and bones 
and cartilage, and their myriads of interconnecting elec- 
tronics linking them with your nervous system—that is 
you, and all of the rest of you is just as wonderful. 
~ But most people don’t know this. Instead they say 
that their body is just some kind of very clever machine, 
which the Lord God made in His infinite wisdom, and 
which they have been put into. But this is a very limited 
view, because the extraordinary thing is that this body 
really is you. This extraordinary, marvelous goings-on is 
you. But if you want, you can feel that it is just happen- 
ing to you. If you do want to feel it that way though, 
then you have to go all the way. You have to feel that 
your decisions just happen to you too. And the thing 
that you call yourself, to which things happen, you don’t 
know how you do that either, and so it is just something 
else that just happens. Your ego and your consciousness 
just happen too; they are happenings happening to hap- 
pen, and that is a very interesting path to follow. 

But you can also go the other way. You can say, 
“Now, look here. I really am my eyes, even though I 
don’t understand how they work or how they hap- 
pened.” But then, as you will see, the very Lord God 
Himself doesn’t understand how He happens. Because if 
He did, what would be the point? There would be no 
mystery, and there would be no possibility of a surprise. 

That is why there has to be both yang and yin, and 


CHAPTER FOUR 


I often joke about this. Yang is bright, and he under- 
stands everything. Yin is dark, and she’ll be damned if 
shell be understood. But although we enjoy the contrast 
between male and female, they are also two phases of 
the same being. Your yang side is your conscious atten- 
tion, and all the bright things you know, and all the 
information you have, and all your know-how. Your yin 
side is the other side of the yang. It is your unconscious 
process, and it enables the yang to function. The yang 
side doesn’t know why or how it functions, because the 
conscious, bright, intelligent, yang side of you depends 
for its functioning on something it doesn’t understand at 
all. And if the yin side weren’t there, yang wouldn’t be 
there either, in just the same way that nothing would be 
here unless something else were here too. Yin and yang 
move together. 

Now, if you accept the idea that you are your eyes 
and your heart and your ears, even though you don’t 
control them with your conscious ego and you don’t 
know how they happened or how they work, then, by a 
little extension of the imagination, you can very well see 
that in the same way you are one with all the other 
things that are going on around you. The sun shining, 
the stars twinkling, the wind blowing, and the great 
ocean restlessly pounding against the cliffs, they are you 
too. You don’t control them because there has to be 
something about you that you don’t control, or else you 
wouldn’t be you. 

Now, you will see that all of this is a very unso- 
phisticated elementary lesson in relativity, but relativity 
is the underlying foundation of the philosophy of the 
Tao. Lao-tzu takes it up in the second chapter of the Tao 
Te Ching when he says, “When all the world under- 
stands beauty to be beautiful, there is already ugliness. 
When all the world understands goodness to be good, 


BEING IN THE Way I 


there is already evil.” Thus, “to be” and “not to be” 
arise mutually, and so always arrive together. High and 
low give rise to each other. Long and short are posi- 
tioned mutually. Lao-tzu then goes through a long list of 
opposites to show that they invariably create each other. 
It is like that wonderful little parable about the Chinese 
character for man, which looks more or less like an 
upturned V. Lafcadio Hearn told a version of the para- 
ble in which a Japanese girl was explaining to her little 
sister the meaning of the character for man. She took 
two sticks of wood and balanced them together on the 
ground so that they formed the upturned character, and 
she said, “This is the character for man because neither 
stick will stand up unless it has the other to help it.” 

The profound meaning underneath this story is 
that there is no self without the existence of an other. 
And, to return to my original point, every creature in the 
world feels it is a self, that is to say, human. And it does 
so because in this situation the thing it feels as itself, 
with its separate identity, is supported by the equal and 
opposite sensation of otherness. Center, periphery, here, 
there, now, then, is, isn’t. These are the yang and the 
yin, the two poles, the opposites that hold each other up. 
Therefore, the Zen poem says, “When misfortune 
comes, treat it as a blessing; when fortune comes, treat it 
as a disaster.” 


BEING IN THE Way II 


CHAPTER FIVE 


nce upon a time there was a Chinese 
farmer who lost a horse; it ran away. All 
his neighbors came around that evening 
and said, “That’s too bad.” And he said, 
“Maybe.” The next day, the horse came back and 
brought seven wild horses with it, and all the neighbors 
came around and said, “Isn’t that great?” And he 
replied, “Maybe.” The next day his son was attempting 
to tame one of these horses and was thrown from it and 
broke his leg, and then all the neighbors came around 
and said, “Well, that’s just too bad, isn’t it?” And the 
farmer said, “Maybe.” The next day the conscription 
officers came around looking for people for the army, 


CHAPTER FIVE 


and they rejected his son because he had a broken leg. 
All the neighbors came around in the evening and said, 
“Isn’t that wonderful?” And he just said, “Maybe.” 

This story reflects the sense of a fundamental 
Taoistic attitude, which is that the whole process of 
nature is an integrated network of immense complexity. 
It is impossible to tell whether anything that happens in 
it is good or bad because you never know what the ulti- 
mate consequences of the misfortune will be, and you 
never know what the ultimate consequences of good for- 
tune will be. 

I know a woman who was quite happy until she 
inherited two million dollars, and then she became 
absolutely miserable because she was afraid that every- 
body, especially the government, was going to take it 
away from her. On the other hand, we have probably all 
known cases where some sort of ridiculous inconve- 
nience or accident preserved us from a worse fate, or else 
allowed us to meet someone, to fall in love or form a 
friendship. You never know what chain or pattern of 
connection exists between events. 

It is for this reason that Taoists have been critical 
of two things: the first is words and the second is inter- 
fering with things. By contrast, the Confucians, who 
were always literary people, had a practice called the 
rectification of names. Now, I have to introduce this 
idea by making a brief remark about Confucians in gen- 
eral, because they have their positive and their negative 
sides. Their negative side is their rather exclusive interest 
in literary matters. In the history of Chinese civilization, 
no significant scientific advances came as a result of 
Confucian studies. They were scholastics, and a scholas- 
tic in those times was one who went by the book, who 
believed what the ancient text or the ancient scriptures 
said, and who studied them and became proficient in 


BEING IN THE Way II 


them like a rabbi or a Christian theologian. But mystics 
have never been very interested in theology. Mystics are 
interested in direct experience, and therefore—although 
you may laugh at them and say they are not scientific—- 
they are empirical in their approach. And the Taoists, 
being mystics, were the only great group of ancient 
Chinese people who seriously studied nature. They were 
interested in its principles from the beginning, and their 
books are full of analogies between the Taoist way of 
life and the behavior of natural forces seen in water, 
wind, or plants and rocks. 

In many passages Lao-tzu likens the Tao to water: 
it does not resist, and yet nothing is stronger. It always 
takes the line of least resistance, which men admire, yet 
it always seeks the lowest level, which men abhor. In 
Taoism, many things are said about water and about 
plants and about the processes of growth. Many things 
are also said about wind, and about how the wind plays 
music with all the openings in nature, by blowing 
through them and bringing out their particular hum. So, 
strangely enough, it was from the Taoists that Chinese 
people developed as much science as they did. However, 
they had never developed anything like Western technol- 
ogy, and there were many reasons for this. Some of them 
were purely geographical, but one of the main reasons 
the Chinese did not develop an advanced technology had 
to do with a certain attitude toward names and nature. 

Insofar as names were concerned, the Taoist 
always laughed at the idea of the rectification of names. 
They said, “Now look, when you compile a dictionary, 
you must define your words with other words. But with 
what other words will you be able to define the words 
you used in the first place?” 

I remember when I was a small boy I wanted to 
write a book that would preserve forever the fundamen- 


CHAPTER FIVE 


tals of human knowledge. And so the first thing I wrote 
down in it was the alphabet. And then I scratched my 
head as to how I would write down how to pronounce 
each of those letters. Finally, I tried to spell out in letters 
how to pronounce them, not realizing, of course, that I’d 
caught myself in a vicious circle. In order to understand 
words, you simply must have something else to relate 
them to, and this is a very mysterious matter. 

One realizes how many things one learns as a 
child, especially from other people, that are never explic- 
itly stated. For example, how do you know whether 
somebody who says something to you is serious or kid- 
ding? A great deal of confusion is caused by that uncer- 
tainty, even among adults. The processes that are 
required for understanding the simplest sentence have 
been examined and analyzed and studied, and yet we 
still don’t know how the brain of a child accomplishes 
this extraordinary task. Of course, when one analyzes 
this task, it seems enormously complicated, but you 
must realize that analysis is a way of making things 
extremely complicated even though they may not be 
complicated in the first place. 

Now, a great deal of academic effort goes into the 
task of proving things that everyone already knows. 
However, the idea is to say precisely what the thing is 
that everybody knows. How can we delimit it and pin it 
down exactly? This is also the pursuit of law, and has 
become a part of the legal system. That is why, in legal 
language, when one only wants to say the simplest thing, 
one says “I devise, bequeath,” and so on, instead of “I 
give,” because one wants to be sure there can be 
absolutely no doubt about what is being said. But as a 
matter of fact, the more definite you become when 
describing something with words, the more doubt you 
create. And so the Taoists adopted a profoundly humor- 


BEING IN THE Wy II 


ous attitude toward the Confucian’s interest in spelling 
everything out. The Taoists said, basically, that things 
can never really be spelled out. 

Have you ever played a game called vish? The 


b) 


name stands for “vicious circle,” and each player has a 
copy of the same dictionary. Many words are put in a 
hat, and the referee draws one of them—for instance, 
escalator—and reads it out loud, and then each player 
looks up its definition in the dictionary, and from that 
definition each player selects one key word and looks it 
up. And they keep doing this until one finally comes to a 
definiton that has the word escalator in it. The first per- 
son to successfully complete the circle calls out “Vish!” 
and is the winner. Now, this shows you how dictionaries 
are completely circular, unless they have little pictures, 
which give an entirely different way of understanding 
words. Otherwise a dictionary is an entirely circular 
process. It’s simply a self-defining affair. When I pick up 
a Finnish dictionary, which has nothing in it but the 
Finnish language, it doesn’t tell me a thing because I 
haven’t got the key. So, the key to language is not alto- 
gether communicable by means of language. It is for this 
reason, then, that the Taoists were skeptical of the abili- 
ty of words to describe processes in the physical world. 
Now, the Chinese language is a rather peculiar 
language because it neither declines its nouns nor conju- 
gates its verbs. There are certain ways, sometimes, of 
showing whether a verb indicates the future or the past, 
but in general, literally translated Chinese reads like a 
telegram. And so the opening of the chapter on te in the 
Lao-tzu book, that is to say, the chapter on power or 
virtue, says in literal English, “Superior virtue not con- 
scious. Thus it has virtue. Inferior virtue not let go of 
virtue, thus this not virtue.” This style speaks it so suc- 
cinctly, but we have to go bubbling around to say this in 


CHAPTER FIVE 


English and end up with: “The superior form of virtue is 
not conscious of itself as virtue, and thus truly is virtue. 
But the inferior form of virtue so insists on being virtu- 
ous that it is not virtue.” Well, that is a very complicated 
way of stating things. The literal Chinese says it so pith- 
ily, and in doing so preserves the broadest range of 
meaning. 

On the other hand, both we and the Japanese have 
a better language for describing technological processes. 
You know how it is when you get a set of instructions 
for putting something together. It tells you to do this 
first, then that, and then do the other thing. Well, if you 
should get a Chinese product sometime, with instruc- 
tions for assembly translated from the Chinese, and you 
don’t already know how to put the thing together, 
you’re out of luck. But the compensatory delight of the 
Chinese language is that. you can say several things at 
once and mean them all. 

Along with the Taoist realization that language is 
a net that will never capture the world, there is also a 
Taoist reluctance to interfere with the processes of 
nature. What you think may be a good thing to do may 
be good only in the short run. It may turn out to be dis- 
astrous in the long run. To give a very simple example of 
this, which is very close to the hearts of all Chinese and 
Asian people, consider the problem of population. What 
on earth are we going to do about it? In times past the 
huge populations of India and China were pruned by 
perennial outbreaks of cholera and other diseases and 
famines that wiped out millions of people. But now, 
with the methods of modern medicine and agriculture, 
we are beginning to stamp out these plagues. However, a 
new plague is turning up in the form of human beings, 
there are too many human beings: but you can’t go 
around shooting people in cold blood. It was somehow 


BEING IN THE Way II 


better if the cholera did it, because that was impersonal 
and it bore no one any malice. When human beings have 
to decide to get rid of each other, though, that’s real 
trouble. Therefore, a Taoist would be inclined not to 
interfere with the course of events because, on the 
whole, they are too complex to be dealt with through 
verbal interpretations. All that we call scientific knowl- 
edge is a verbal interpretation of what is going on. It 
selects certain things and calls them good, and it selects 
certain other things and calls them bad, but the Taoist 
feels that he doesn’t know, in verbal terms, whether a 
given event is good or bad. He may feel badly about it, 
but he may also feel that that is simply the proper and 
appropriate way to feel under such a circumstance, and 
that the circumstance, and the feeling, will pass. As Lao- 
tzu said, “The fierce gale does not last the whole morn- 
ing, nor does pelting rain go on all day.” He then goes 
on to say, “If heaven and earth cannot keep these things 
up for long, how much less can mankind.” 

This, then, is a basic attitude in Taoist philosophy, 
and it goes by the name of wu wei. Wu means “not,” 
and wei means “doing,” “interfering,” “business,” 
“poking into things.” So wu wei means “don’t inter- 
fere,” “don’t strive.” Really, the best meaning of wu wei 
is “don’t force it.” As when, for example, you’re open- 
ing a lock and the key doesn’t turn. If you force it you 
will just bend the key. So what you have to do is jiggle, 
pull back and forth, and jiggle again, until you find the 
place where the key turns. That is the meaning of wu 
wei. It doesn’t mean total passivity. On one hand it 
means “don’t interfere,” but on the other there is no 
way of not interfering. Even when you merely look at 
something, you interfere with it, because your very exis- 
tence is an interference with the environment, from a 
certain point of view. So there you are. Everything you 


CHAPTER FIVE 


do alters the balance. Even if you sit perfectly still, you 
are still breathing, and that alters the nature of things 
that are going on around you. You are exuding heat, 
and that changes something. And when you eat, you 
really start changing things. So you can’t avoid interfer- 
ing, and yet the maxim is “don’t interfere.” But what 
that really means is “don’t force it.” 

So then, what do you do? Well, you interfere as 
wisely as possible. That is to say, you interfere along the 
lines in which things are already developing. This is like 
sailing a boat. It is much smarter to sail than to row, 
because sailing requires less of your energy. You simply 
use the wind by putting up a sheet. But then, supposing 
the wind isn’t going where you want to go? In that case, 
you learn to tack. You keep the wind in your sails all the 
time, and you use the wind to go against the wind. From 
this comes the idea of judo. Judo is Japanese for “the 


99 66 


gentle Tao,” “the gentle way.” In judo, the basic princi- 
ple is that you are not an attacker. Underneath judo is a 
deeper philosophy called aikido, “the way of aiki.” And 
the idea of aikido is that you can never be attacked, 
because when somebody attacks you, you are not there. 
Or, you are, but in the form of a vacuum, so that the 
attacker gets sucked in so fast by his own force that he 
falls over. In judo one always uses the strength of one’s 
opponent to bring about his downfall. At a certain point 
you may add your own strength. When you are throw- 
ing someone in judo, there is a point when his own 
strength has taken him beyond the peak. When some- 
thing is falling over, it reaches a certain point where it is 
on the way down. It is at this moment that you can add 
your strength to your opponent’s momentum. But he has 
to be beyond the falling point for maximum effect, 
because from there you are working with gravity. 

Judo is a Japanese development of the Taoist phi- 
losophy, and it is relatively modern. But it comes out of 


BEING IN THE Way II 


understandings that emerged from Chinese ways of 
doing things, and in its present form it is a basic demon- 
stration of the principle of wu wei. Wu wei is not an 
attitude of total passivity, as is sometimes inferred from 
too literal a translation: “not do”; it is more correctly 
“not force” or an attitude of “don’t force it.” In every 
situation you need to find out which way the wind is 
blowing and trim your sails to the wind. That is the 
meaning of wu wei. But how do you know which way 
the wind is blowing? A scientist might say, “Well, we 
have to make a very careful analysis of the situation and 
find out just what is going on.” This strategy leads to 
something that is extremely interesting. Scientists are 
going about this analysis very seriously, and it has led to 
the very important science of ecology. In ecology we 
study the whole complex of relationships that lie 
between any organism and its environment, and they are 
quite fantastic. When you study, for example, the ecolo- 
gy between man and the world of microbes, you are con- 
fronted with a most surreal affair, and you may try to 
decide which microbes are the good guys and which are 
the bad. You want to know how to get rid of the bad 
guys without getting rid of the good guys, and then you 
realize you need some of the bad guys because otherwise 
the good guys fall apart. Some of our medicines are very 
much, on the level of our body, like what DDT is on the 
level of agriculture. They are too indiscriminate, and 
they kill too many of the good guys along with the bad 
guys. After a time you become very doubtful as to the 
precise definition of good and bad, because every group, 
every species, must have an enemy. That is an important 
part of the mutual eating society we call life. If you don’t 
have an enemy, then you start multiplying too much. 
Because nothing “prunes” you, you start eating up all 
your supplies of food because there are too many of you, 
and you start getting in your own way. You are so 


CHAPTER FIVE 


successful you never have to fight, and you develop flab- 
by muscles, and so, gradually, the successful group fails. 
A group that manages to obliterate all its enemies will 
fall apart; that is the way the world works. So, the ques- 
tion has become, can we maintain the human race with- 
out bloodshed? Can we somehow introduce a new kind 
of gamesmanship as a substitute for war? 

One of the problems of present-day international 
politics is that the United States, with its vast prosperity 
and enormous facilities for living the lazy life, must have 
an external enemy to keep fit. And so, even though the 
Cold War was in a way total nonsense because an atom- 
ic war between Russia and the United States would sim- 
ply have ended the human race, the populace still had to 
be kept bamboozled. We have to keep fighting wars in 
places like Vietnam in order to keep everybody excited, 
and in order to create enemies and keep the soldiers in 
practice. It is a horrible business, but that is the way 
things have always been run. And the question is, can we 
run the human race in a new way, without bloodshed 
and murder and torture? 

The same principle applies in business, almost 
exactly. If you wipe out your competitor, then you have 
no reason to produce anything but a lousy product, and 
then someone else with a good product can come along 
and wipe you out despite your success. So, there is 
always something self-defeating in any attempt to suc- 
ceed. Nothing fails like success. It is for this reason, 
then, that the Taoists always have an attitude of caution. 
“Cautious,” as Lao-tzu says, “as one who crosses a river 
in spring.” That means to be cautious either because of 
the spring floods or because the ice is still there and you 
are not quite sure how strong it is. Therefore the Taoist 
tries to develop a sensibility to the situation as it is. He 
tries to feel intuitively the kind of action that is required 


BEING IN THE Way II 


under each different circumstance. He does this intuitively 
because he feels that he can never discover it analytically, 
with his conscious attention alone. 

To talk in modern Western terms about how this 
is done, we must realize of course that we are equipped 
inside our heads with an absolutely fantastic thing called 
the brain. With its millions and millions of neurons, it is, 
as it were, the most amazing computer ever devised. 
Basic to the Taoist attitude to life is the idea that you 
have within yourself the most amazing capacity for 
analysis that exists in the known world, and the point is 
to try to get it to work for you. And instead of trying 
with the conscious attention alone (which can think of 
only about three things at a time), you need to use intu- 
ition too. Very few people can do four things at once 
without using a pencil. You can do four if you are a 
trained musician, playing four different lines of a fugue, 
and an organist can keep six in mind, because an organ- 
ist plays with the feet, too. But it requires a high amount 
of training to be able to do this with conscious attention 
alone, and even if you could keep as many as six vari- 
ables in mind at once, the world around us has infinitely 
many variables going on simultaneously. You can try to 
reason about everything with your conscious, verbal 
thinking. For instance, you can make a contract in busi- 
ness and try to figure out all the variables. But there are 
always variables you couldn’t possibly foresee. For 
instance, your partner might slip on a banana skin and 
break his neck, and even if you took into account that 
possibility, there are still so many other possibilities that 
you simply cannot think of them all. So then the ques- 
tion arises, is it within the power of the human brain, 
because of its immense complexity, to comprehend reali- 
ty unconsciously in a way that surface consciousness 
cannot? The Taoist would say that it certainly is. If you 


CHAPTER FIVE 


learn to use your brain by allowing it to go to work on 
your problems without interference from the surface 
consciousness, it will deliver you a decision. And this is 
why, when you get to the real study of Taoist and Zen 
Buddhist practice, you come to the point where you 
learn to act without making decisions—or rather, to use 
a less precise and more exact word, without choosing. 

Krishnamurti spoke a great deal about being 
choicelessly aware. He said, “Freedom is precisely the 
state of not having to choose.” Now, that sounds quite 
paradoxical, because we are always talking about free- 
dom of choice. But choice in this sense of the word is not 
a form of freedom. What is choice in Krishnamurti’s 
sense of the word? It is the act of hesitation that comes 
before making a decision. It is a mental wobbling, much 
like when some people take up a pen to write but don’t 
just start writing; they jiggle the pen around indecisively 
for a while and then start. When a person comes into a 
room and hesitates and wonders who to talk to, in that 
moment he is choosing. Whereas when a person comes 
into a room and goes up to someone without waiting to 
choose, we say he is decisive. But that is a funny thing to 
say, because it really means that he hadn’t stopped to 
decide. 

Zen Buddhism, which is a Buddhist extension of 
Taoism, arose out of the marriage of Buddhism and 
Taoism in the fifth century A.D. and over the following 
centuries. In Zen they have a way of tcaining you so that 
you always act without choosing. For example, if a Zen 
master’s roof were leaking and he said to a couple of 


b) 


monks attending him, “The roof is leaking,” one monk 
might disappear and come back instantly with a sieve 
and put it under the drips. The other, after some time, 
might come back with a bucket. Now, the master might 


well praise the monk who had come back quickly with 


BEING IN THE Wy II 


the sieve. That action wasn’t exactly appropriate for 
catching rain, but the point is that it was action in the 
spirit of Zen: action without choosing. 

You will notice this type of behavior with certain 
people. They never hesitate. If something needs to be 
done, they always seem to simply grab something and do 
it. That is action in a kind of Zen capacity, and so the 
teacher of Zen constantly throws his students curves by 
putting them in dilemmas in which they have to act 
immediately. Now, of course, one of the things that you 
mustn’t do in such a situation is rush, because rushing is 
also a form of hesitation. When a person rushes to get a 
train, he starts to fall over his own feet. Rushing really 
slows him down, because it is like trying to drive at high 
speed through the water with a blunt-nosed boat. 

What the Zen student is trying to achieve is a kind 
of smooth, unhesitating, flowing action in response to 
the challenge. And this must be done with what is called 
wu nien in Chinese, or mu nen in Japanese. Mu nen is 
composed of the character meaning “now” and the char- 


9 


acter meaning “mind-heart,” and so it has the meaning 
of a thought. However, for us it is well translated by the 
psychological term blocking. You might say of people 
when they hesitate, when they dither, when they stop to 
choose, that they are blocking. So the attitude of mu 
nen, or wu nien, is the attitude of the unblocked mind 
that doesn’t hesitate ever, just as the river doesn’t hesi- 
tate when it flows, and just as when you clap your hands 
the sound comes out without hesitation. When the moon 
rises, the water doesn’t wait to reflect it; it reflects it 
instantly. 

So that instant reflection, or that kind of reso- 
nance, is what is looked for in Zen in the response of an 
individual to his environment, and this response is 
achieved to the degree that the individual knows himself 


CHAPTER FIVE 


to be one with his environment. His capacity for 
response increases to the degree that he feels he is simply 
part of it, and not someone with a barrier around him 
through which messages must pass. When there’s a bar- 
rier, then decisions have to be made up and sent out 
through it. So then, you could say that a kind of 
extremely subtle sensory awareness has to be developed 
between the individual and his environment. 

Of course, this sort of talk has been very unpopu- 
lar, because scientifically minded people, and especially 
academic scientists who teach in universities, are exceed- 
ingly suspicious of intuitive reactions. They say, 
“Nonsense, you can get into all sorts of trouble that 
way.” However, the thing that they neglect to realize is 
that everybody uses intuition. Even the most meticulous- 
ly careful, analytical, rigorous, and sound scientist must 
use intuitive judgment after a certain point. Why? 
Because you can accumulate data forever without ever 
deciding anything. So, one might ask, when you do 
decide, why do you decide? Usually it’s because your 
time is up and somebody’s pressing you for a decision, 
or else you are just bored to death with bringing in more 
and more data. You never know how much data you 
will need to make a decision, and therefore you may go 
on collecting data until you’re blue in the face. And so, 
in the last analysis, your decision will be based on a 
hunch. In the end, much is actually decided by the flip- 
ping of coins, and the pity of that method of making 
decisions is that it only gives you two choices: heads or 
tails, yes or no. 

The Chinese developed a more subtle way of flip- 
ping coins. They have a method that is like flipping a 
sixty-four-sided coin, and instead of just heads or tails, 
there are sixty-four possible choices to be used for com- 
ing to a decision. This method is called the I Ching, or 


BEING IN THE Way II 


the Book of Changes. It is based on two symbols: one 
for yang and one for yin. Yang is a straight, undivided 
line, and yin is a line that is broken in the middle. 

In the system of the I Ching, each of the sixty-four 
possible choices is represented by one of the sixty-four 
hexagrams of the I Ching. A hexagram is a figure com- 
posed of six lines, which are determined to be yang or 
yin by flipping three coins six times, or by the dividing 
of yarrow sticks. Accordingly, these individual lines can 
be arranged into eight different three-line trigrams, and 
these eight trigrams can be combined into a total of 
sixty-four six-line hexagrams. And so the sixty-four 
ways are the sixty-four hexagrams of the I Ching. 
Therefore, when you have to make a grave decision, you 
do so by dividing sticks or tossing coins through six rep- 
etitions, and that gives you one of these sixty-four fig- 
ures. Each figure has its own commentary, but if you are 
very wise and have studied the Book of Changes for a 
long time, you do not need to refer to the commentary. 
You can tell what any hexagram means just by looking 
at it, because each of the two trigrams, an upper and a 
lower that make up one hexagram, has its own quality. 
For instance, a hexagram may be composed of one tri- 
gram. with the quality “water” over a second trigram 
with the quality “heaven,” and a person very skilled in 
the interpretation of the I Ching will understand the 
meaning of “water over heaven.” But if you are not so 
skilled, you use the book with its commentaries, and for 
each hexagram the book has an oracle. It tells you in 
curiously vague and at the same time in curiously precise 
terms the meaning of that hexagram. And then, in the 
light of your own situation, you must make up your 
mind as to what it is saying. In the light of the problem 
that you have raised, the question that you’ve asked, the 
decision that you must make, you will find invariably 


CHAPTER FIVE 


that one of these sixty-four choices will have some pecu- 
liarly appropriate thing to say to you. 

Consulting the I Ching is just like having a 
conversation with a very wise old gentleman. Even 
today, in Asia, this book is still used widely for making 
business and political decisions, although perhaps people 
who are Westernized would be less apt to admit that 
they use it. So anybody who does politics or business 
with Asia should be completely versed in this book to 
know what sort of thinking, what sort of approach, 
might possibly arise. 

If you could find out what hexagram had fallen 
when a certain politician had made a decision, it would 
be immensely enlightening as to his future course of 
action. Hitler was always consulting astrology, and so 
our strategists should have been students of astrology. 
They would have had access to Hitler’s horoscope, and 
so they would have known what he was thinking. 
Astrology is more suited to this kind of spying than the 
I Ching is because we would have known that Hitler 
was looking at his own horoscope, but we wouldn’t 
have known what hexagram Mao Tse-tung had thrown 
when he decided to do something or other. 

The point I was making is that our scientists are 
very suspicious of the intuitive judgment, but neverthe- 
less they all use it in the end. The suspicion that science 
has of intuitive judgment has filtered down to the 
laypeople, and now even they mistrust their own intu- 
ition, that is to say, the marvelous analytical powers of 
their own brains. And so we are always in doubt as to 
whether we are behaving the right way, doing the right 
thing, and so on and so forth, and so we lack a certain 
kind of self-confidence. And as you know, if you lack 
self-confidence, you will make mistakes simply through 
sheer fumbling. But if you have self-confidence, you may 
get away with doing the entirely wrong thing. 


BEING IN THE WéAy II 


As a young man growing up near London, IJ real- 
ized that the British have an enormous degree of self- 
confidence. They know they are right, they don’t even 
question it, and you can’t shake them. They are so sure 
they are right, they don’t even feel the need to defend 
themselves, and therefore they can allow all kinds of 
political opposition, total free speech, and all sorts of 
things that make Americans very nervous, because 
Americans don’t have the same degree of aplomb. They 
are not quite as sure of themselves. In Britain, when you 
are an aristocrat and your family has been brought up 
for generations in the right schools, there is never any 
doubt whatsoever about who you are, and so you don’t 
even mention the fact that you are an aristocrat. That is 
why the aristocrats know how to treat servants. They 
never have to emphasize their own superiority to any- 
body because they know they are superior and they 
don’t even question it. It is extraordinary, the kind of 
nerve they have built up. 

Now, in Zen practice, you have to regard yourself 
as a cloud, because, of course, clouds never make mis- 
takes. Have you ever seen a cloud that was misshapen? 
Have you ever seen a badly designed wave? No. They 
are always right. They always do the right thing, and as 
a matter of fact, so do we. We are natural beings, just 
like clouds and waves; however, we play complicated 
games that cause us to doubt ourselves. But if you will 
treat yourself as a cloud for a while, or a wave, you will 
realize that you can’t make a mistake, whatever you do. 
Even if you do something that seems to be totally disas- 
trous, somehow or other it will all come out in the wash. 
When you realize this, you will develop another kind of 
confidence, and through that confidence you will be able 
to trust your own intuition. The thing you have to be 
careful about though—and many people who do not 
understand Zen properly fall into trouble here—is that 


CHAPTER FIVE 


when you take the attitude that you can’t possibly make 
a mistake, you can overdo it. 

A lot of people say, “Well, in Zen, anything goes, 
because you are naturally with it anyway. You are a 
buddha no matter what you do. And so, I am going to 
prove it, by breaking all the rules.” You may put on the 
weirdest and most ragged clothes, and start stealing 
things and doing all kinds of questionable things. But 
that is overdoing it, and it shows that you haven’t 
learned, because you are overcompensating. You are just 
reacting to having been told before to do this, do that, 
and do the other thing, and to be self-conscious and ner- 
vous. So you have just gone to the other extreme. 
However, this is the middle way, and trusting intuition 
has nothing to do with deciding to do something or not 
deciding to do it. Whatever you decide, or even if you 
decide not to decide, you are still like a cloud, and like 
water. And through that realization, without overcom- 
pensating in any direction, you will come to the point 
where you begin to be on good terms with your own 
being, and are able to trust your own brain. At that level 
you become suprapersonal, and you stand or sit as a uni- 
fied body. 

Now, according to certain cosmological theories, 
the universe began with a primordial explosion. That 
cosmic explosion is still happening, and today we are the 
little curlicues far out on the edge of it, and we are all 
connected. We are still expanding as part of the original 
explosion, and that explosion, in a certain sense, is in 
you, and you are still manifesting it. Consider your hand 
picking up a stone. The stone is very ancient, but how 
old is it? Scientists will say it comes from the Pleistocene 
age and is probably about one million years old. But 
hold on for a minute. What do they mean by one million 
years old? Where did it come from? What was it before 


BEING IN THE WaAy II 


it was a stone? It was something or other. It goes back, 
back, back in time, and therefore everything you touch, 
including yourself, is incredibly ancient. Everything goes 
back to the very beginning of time, and so, if your mind 
awakens, you will suddenly see that all your friends are 
really incredibly ancient. I don’t mean ancient in the 
sense of “old and haggard” but ancient like angels, eter- 
nal beings who have always been here, right from the 
beginning. 


LANDSCAPE, SOUNDSCAPE 


CHAPTER SIX 


once spoke with a woman, a perfectly ordinary 
nice little old lady, who told me that she had once 
been in an accident in an elevator and had broken 
her leg. She was stuck there for half an hour before 
anybody could get to her, and she said that during that 
time she realized that in this whole universe there is not 
one single grain of sand that is out of place. This is a 
curious vision, and it occasionally comes to people sud- 
denly when they see that they have been looking at 
things in absolutely the wrong way. And it is strange, 
but usually they don’t dare talk to other people about it, 
because they’re afraid they will be misunderstood. But as 
you see, sometimes the most frightful things that can 


CHAPTER SIX 


possibly happen lead to this feeling that everything is in 
its proper place. At first this seems to be a very strange 
and very odd idea, but when you rid yourself of the idea 
of the governor and the governed, the boss and the 
employee, the king and the subject, you discover there 
aren’t any victims. Every creature that suffers in this 
world is—perhaps unbeknownst to itself—causing itself 
to suffer, and no one else is responsible. There are no 
victims, because the whole universe is a unity. It is, of 
itself, so. Everything is, of itself, so, and there is no one 
to blame. 

When a child becomes a juvenile delinquent, the 
social workers and the police come around and say, 


b) 


“Look here, you’re behaving terribly,” and the juvenile, 
if he has learned a little psychoanalysis, will answer, 
“Tt’s all my parents’ fault. They brought me up in a trau- 
matic way. They were divorced, my father was an alco- 
holic, and my mother was a prostitute. So what did you 
expect of me?” And the public servants will say, 
“Perhaps we should go after the parents instead.” But 
the parents, because they too have learned a little Freud, 
will say, “It wasn’t our fault. It was our parents’ fault. 
They were neurotic too.” 

And so you see, you can pass the buck back and 
back, just as Adam did in the story of Genesis in the 
Garden of Eden, when he passed the buck to Eve. The 
Lord God saw him after he’d eaten the fruit, and Adam 
said, “This woman that thou gavest me, she tempted me 
and I did eat.” And God looked at the woman and said, 
“Well, what about it?” And she said, “The serpent 
tempted me.” And God looked at the serpent and the 
serpent didn’t say anything. No, the serpent didn’t pass 
the buck, he didn’t make any excuses, because he knew. 

In this way, you see, you can pass the buck back 
all the time and accept no responsibility for your life. 
You could say, “I’m only alive because you, my father, 


LANDSCAPE, SOUNDSCAPE 


messed around with my mother, and you went too far, 
and she became pregnant. It isn’t my fault.” Now, this is 
a terribly irresponsible attitude. You must recognize that 
you were your father’s own desire, that that was you, 
that glint in his eye, and that you yourself go back and 
back and back and back. 

Suppose I make a splash of ink on a paper. From 
the center, where it hits, it sprays out like an explosion. 
So way back in the beginning of time, during the big 
bang, there was a colossal explosion. And as the explo- 
sion expands, the spray becomes finer and finer and 
finer. But you can still see that it is all part of the same 
thing, reaching out as you would spread your fingers. 
We are all little extensions, reaching out and connecting 
right back to the beginning of time. Our bodies are the 
most ancient things there are because we were right 
there from the beginning. And although it took millions 
of years to get here, we were in it right from the start, as 
that original impulse that blew the whole thing up. 

Everything happens of itself, and it is a very inter- 
esting experiment to let sound just come to your ears. 
Try this: close your eyes and allow yourself gently to 
become aware of the whole world of sound around you 
and in you. Don’t try to identify the sounds or put 
names on them. Just let them happen. Don’t feel that 
you must not make any sounds yourself, like belly rum- 
bles, hiccups, coughing and so on. They are all perfectly 
part of the theme. Just, for the moment, let all the 
sounds happen. Even when people talk, don’t make any 
sense of what they are saying. It’s just sound. You 
should listen like this before you go to sleep at night, 
and realize that you live in a magical, musical continu- 
um, all the time. 

But as you soon discover, ordinarily we keep try- 
ing to correct what we are listening to. We pay attention 
to this; we say to ourselves, “Ignore that.” We say to the 


CHAPTER SIX 


children, “Shut up, I can’t hear myself thinking.” But if 
you really know how to listen, you can concentrate on 
anything you want to in the middle of complete pande- 
monium. 

In the same way that you can conduct experiments 
in listening, you can also conduct experiments in using 
your eyes, in tasting, in feeling things. For example, you 
can pick up rocks and feel them, without thinking words 
about them. And all of this is just letting yourself func- 
tion, it is an act of faith in your own being. Letting your 
brain give you answers, but at the same time allowing 
the body to feel, is to be a democracy instead of a tyran- 
ny, or, shall we say, at least a republic. 

So, when you allow the body to do what it will, 
then you are saying, “I’m letting it do what I want.” But 
wait a minute, now, wait a minute. Who are you? Are 
you separate from the republic of your body? Just as the 
Tao itself is not something other than the universe, is not 
a boss over it, neither are you something other than this 
decision—which is not just the body, either, but includes 
all sorts of relationships with the universe. You don’t 
stand apart from your body; you don’t have it, you are 
it. And you are all of these relationships, and not just an 
inspector watching everything that goes by on the street. 
You may think you are, and indeed, we all have a sensa- 
tion of being the inspector who watches everything hap- 
pen. This is so partly because of memory, which seems 
to give us the impression that one is a standing mirror 
that reflects everything that goes by. On one hand mem- 
ory gives us this impression, but on the other hand we 
get this impression because we keep trying to fight and 
resist change. We are resisting it all the time. 

If you were actually aware of all your muscular 
reactions, you would find that you are going around 
most of the day fighting something. If you get a person 
to lie on the ground and then say to them, “Now you 


LANDSCAPE, SOUNDSCAPE 


are completely supported by the floor. You won’t fall 
through it. Therefore, relax,” it is very difficult for 
people to relax like that, because they are afraid that if 
they don’t hold themselves together, they will turn into 
some kind of goo that will spread out across the floor 
and drip through the cracks. So everybody is trying to 
use their skin and their muscles to hold themselves 
together, but it will all take care of itself. They won’t fall 
apart. But they don’t really believe that. So there is a 
constant resistance going on inside most people. You can 
be aware of it as a sense of strain between the eyes. That 
is its center, and it is this constant sensation of resistance 
to life that you actually feel when you think about your- 
self. “I” is that feeling of resistance. 

If you let go, however, you will discover that there 
is no necessity whatsoever for an inspector who watches 
everything that happens. You are what you experience. 
Your experience and you are the same. Your thoughts 
are you, your feelings are you. So there is no necessity 
whatsoever to try and to stand aside from them and say 
“You, go away!” In other words, if you can trust your- 
self to the flow of whatever’s going on, you won’t need 
to resist it. And you will find that going with the flow 
works very well, just as your eyes work well when you 
don’t try to force them to and your clothes are comfort- 
able when you are unaware of them. 

Now, this nonresistance isn’t the same as numb- 
ness. It is quite different. You experience your body in 
terms of what you ordinarily think of as “everything 
else.” We are taught to think we are looking at it “out 
there.” But, what is the color of your head from the 
point of view of your own eyes? You don’t have a sensa- 
tion of it at all. It is as if from your own point of view, 
you had no head. And really, how it looks inside is 
everything you see “out there.” Everything we see is 
really inside us because our optical nerves are behind the 


CHAPTER SIX 


eyes. All the shapes and colors around us are actually 
mental states. Therefore, what we are looking at when 
we look “out there” is the inside of our own heads. 
Which means that, because the inside of your head is 
you, you can’t be said to be looking out at it, because 
the inside of your head is you. All this is how you feel, 
and this is true for each person. It is not more especially 
true for me than it is for you. It is mutual, and so we are 
like the dewdrops on the spider’s web reflecting one 
another. 

It is this attitude of letting your mind work by 
itself, of letting your eyes see for themselves, that is the 
preliminary movement toward naturalness in the way 
that Taoists understand that word. Now, let’s go on 
from that point to see how they express that naturalness. 

The Taoists have traditionally used two images. 
One is of the uncarved block and the other is of 
unbleached silk. These two images lie at the root of all 
the great art forms of the Far East that are associated 
with Taoism and Zen Buddhism. Later I am going to 
explore the Japanese tea ceremony because that is the 
best possible demonstration of this particular mood. It 
demonstrates what you might call the art of the con- 
trolled accident, because it combines discipline with 
spontaneity. The image of the uncarved block is also 
expressed in a Japanese art called bonseki, which means 
the “cultivation of stones.” You might call it the art of 
growing stones. The Japanese national anthem says, 
“May our Emperor reign a thousand years, reign ten 
thousand, thousand years, until little stones grow into 
mighty rocks, thick-velveted with ancient moss.” 

The idea behind bonseki, first of all, is that stones 
are alive. Next is the idea that the beauty of stones is to 
be found in their natural shapes. The Japanese love their 
stone gardens and display a genius for the selection of 


LANDSCAPE, SOUNDSCAPE 


marvelous stones. They like the kind of stones that are 
found in a mountain stream, that have been worked on 
by the water until they look almost like clouds. They 
will take one such stone and put it into a mule cart and 
bring it down from the mountains. Instead of just dump- 
ing it in the garden, though, and patching some moss 
onto it, they will take it away to a corner where it is 
damp, where the moss will grow on it naturally. In 
Japan, moss grows quite quickly, and when the moss has 
grown on the stone, they will move it into the exact 
place they wanted it to be in the garden. And then they 
will arrange sand and pebbles around it in such a way 
that it will look as if it had always been there. 

And even though the stones have been placed by a 
gardener, remember that there is nothing that is unnat- 
ural, nothing at all. The idea that there is something arti- 
ficial is itself a completely artificial idea. In a way, a 
skyscraper is really as natural as a bird’s nest, but the 
problem is, how does one demonstrate naturalness? The 
challenge is to make a skillful approximation about the 
natural. But if it were just natural, it wouldn’t call atten- 
tion to what it is doing. It wouldn’t point that out. And 
so the idea of the artist then, when he makes a bowl or 
selects a rock, is that the bowl should get the bowl, and 
the rock should get the rock. The rock should look so 
much like that rock you were always looking for. 

The other side of the idea, of unbleached silk, is an 
appreciation of the roughness of something soft. You 
know how nice it is when you have unbleached silk. The 
colors are soft and the threads uneven, with a sort of 
texture that gives us a wonderful feeling. It is primitive 
but marvelous. When the great masters of Taoist and 
Zen Buddhist art uncluttered their minds and got them 
working properly, they discovered that some of the sim- 
plest things of everyday life—simple utensils that we use 


CHAPTER SIX 


in the kitchen, the cheapest rice bowls that might be 
used by a peasant—were extraordinarily beautiful. These 
simple things were unsophisticated, natural in the same 
way that a three-year-old child who starts dancing is 
natural. There is no self-consciousness, no playing to the 
gallery, nothing—the child is just dancing. That is natu- 
ralness. 

Now, the question is, how can an adult, who is all 
fouled up, recapture that natural spontaneity? This is 
what the greatest artists sweat blood trying to do. They 
try to make their work look as if it had happened by 
itself, as if it had just grown there. 

Of course there are exceptions to this aesthetic 
principle. Beethoven, in some of his sonatas, arranged 
the fingering to be as unnatural and difficult as possible, 
but for artistic reasons, so as to achieve the feeling that 
the playing of the music required immense effort. But 
that is the exception that proves the rule. Ordinarily, the 
expert musician seems to be expending no effort at all. 
The music just happens through his fingers. But if he 
wants to portray effort for some particular artistic rea- 
son, this trickery is introduced. 

For the most part, the artist works and works all 
his life long to become again as a child, to regain origi- 
nal innocence and naturalness. But what happens then is 
that, through doing that work, the artist becomes the 
master of a tremendously sophisticated technique. He 
learns exactly how to control his hand, his brush, his 
paints, his chisels, whatever it is that he is using. Of 
course, pure technique isn’t enough. However well you 
know how to say something, it doesn’t necessarily fol- 
low that you will have anything to say. You can be a 
master of the English language and yet have only boring 
ideas. Therefore, somehow, you have to put your tech- 
nique at the disposal of what we call inspiration, and 


LANDSCAPE, SOUNDSCAPE 


that means at the disposal of the holy spirit, or the flow 
of life. 

The artist who, in the Chinese way, practices for 
years and years with his brush, finds in the end that he 
cannot by any stratagem of his own, or by any technique 
or cleverness, create a worthwhile painting. Therefore, 
he has to give up. Well, this “giving up” is precisely 
what lies behind all that we recognize as the naturalistic 
art of the Far East. 

Of course, there are many different kinds of Far 
Eastern art. For example, the finest pottery of the Sung 
dynasty—which takes us back to 1000 A.D.—is com- 
pletely unlike what most people think of as Chinese 
porcelain. One thinks of white eggshell-like pottery with 
very delicate designs of birds and butterflies and fine 
ladies. But the finest Sung pottery is heavy, jade green, 
soft looking, very self-effacing in a way, but with a 
certain roughness. Or consider Japanese raku ware. It 
definitely looks handmade. It looks as if it hadn’t been 
put on a wheel. The glaze is allowed to drool, and the 
clay at the bottom of the bowl has been left exposed. 
But, you see, that coloration reminds the artist of 
autumn, and wants us to see that the bowl is made of 
clay, because a good potter does not force clay to obey 
his preconceived ideas. He evokes the spirit in the clay to 
do some magic. So then, because the clay did that, these 
artists love the clay. They don’t want to make it look 
like something else, like ivory, for instance; they want it 
to look like clay. 

And so also with wood. Wood is loved by such 
artists. They love the grain in wood, and therefore they 
deplore paint. Lacquer is all right, provided it is used 
sparingly. But by and large, wood is beautiful, and its 
grain is left exposed. In the Katsura Imperial Villa in 
Kyoto there are verandahs of wood with the most gor- 


CHAPTER SIX 


geous grain you ever saw in your life. They are simply 
enchanting, and it is like some kind of vision, and you 
think you are going to go out of your mind, looking at 
this grain. It is just gorgeous. 

In the same way, in the typical Japanese house, by 
the edge of the alcove called the tokonoma, there is 
almost invariably a wooden pillar made from an 
unplaned tree trunk or branch. You can still see the 
knots and the curves in it. Sometimes the Japanese get 
some rather exaggerated trunks, I think, that are absurdly 
nubbly. But in the same way that we have learned to like 
driftwood, they have learned to appreciate those 
unplaned trunks and branches. And in keeping with the 
Taoist spirit, one should appreciate wood as wood and 
not try to make it look like plastic or marble or metal or 
anything else. 

The same is true with paper. The Chinese don’t 
like our paper. They say it has no character. They like 
paper with little threads and a texture to it. They feel 
that is really what makes paper paper. The paper gets 
the paper, and paper like that captures the essence of its 
feeling. They feel that our paper is more like some kind 
of plastic—a nonsubstance—and that we are in danger 
of being engulfed by plastic because we have no love for 
the uncarved block and the unbleached silk, which are 
fundamental, substantial, and natural. 

Once upon a time there were in Japan two very 
great sword makers. I should remember their names, but 
I am afraid I don’t, so lets call them Mr. Matsushima 
and Mr. Yamaguchi. Fanciers of swords could never 
make up their minds about which of these two was the 
better sword maker, but certainly they were the unques- 
tioned masters of the art. One day a group of samurai 
thought to put them to the test. They thought that prob- 
ably Mr. Matsushima was tops, but on the other hand, 


LANDSCAPE, SOUNDSCAPE 


Mr. Yamaguchi came so close. So they took a sword 
made by each master and brought them both to a 
stream. First they took Mr. Yamaguchi’s sword and 
dipped it into the water, with the edge facing upstream. 
They set a piece of paper floating downstream toward it, 
and as it came up to the edge of the sword, it simply 
divided itself in half, and when the pieces had passed 
behind the blade, they simply rejoined and floated on 
down the stream. Now, that is a hard act to follow. But 
they took Mr. Matsushima’s sword and dipped it in the 
stream and likewise set a piece of paper floating down 
toward it. And what do you suppose happened? Just as 
the piece of paper approached the edge of the sword, it 
moved to one side, avoiding the edge of the blade entirely, 
and when it had passed the blade, it moved back on 
course and continued on. 

Obviously, Mr. Matsushima was the better of the 
two swordsmiths. And why? For the same reason that 
the highest accomplishment in fencing is called the No 
Sword School. The highest accomplishment is to be so 
good at it that you never have to use a sword. And there 
are all kinds of marvelous tales about great samurai war- 
riors trained in Zen and swordsmanship who never had 
to use a sword. 

You may have seen a movie called Samurai which 
comes in three parts. It takes you three evenings to see it. 
It is the story of the life of Miyamoto Musashi, who was 
one of the greatest swordsmen in all of Japanese history. 
It doesn’t tell the story of his entire life; it only takes you 
to the point where he duels with another champion, 
who, out of vanity, had insisted on challenging him. 
Musashi fights him at first using nothing but an oar that 
has had its blade chopped off. He maneuvers his chal- 
lenger into a position on a beach where the rising sun 
dazzles his opponent, and when his opponent makes a 


CHAPTER SIX 


terrific swipe at him, he jumps over the sword and draws 
his own and kills the challenger instantly. But then he is 
very unhappy that he has had to kill such a swordsman. 
At that point he finally takes the advice of the Zen mas- 
ter Takuan, who has all along been trying to dissuade 
him from a military career. So sometime later he was on 
his way to Kyoto. That meant that he had to cross Lake 
Bewa in a small ferryboat that was rowed by a ferryman. 
And when he was on board, another samurai, a very vul- 
gar fellow who had had too much sake to drink, came 
aboard and saw Musashi. “What school of swordsman- 
ship do you belong to?” the drunken samurai asked. 
Musashi answered, “The No Sword School.” By this 
time the boat had left land. “The No Sword School,” 
snorted the other samurai; “I’d like to see your No 
Sword School,” and he drew his sword. But Musashi 
said, “Wait a minute. This is a crowded boat. If we start 
a duel, people will get hurt, and they are just innocent 
bystanders. Let’s go to that island over there, and then 
we can fight it out.” So the drunken swordsman said to 
the ferryman, “Take us over to the island.” And the fer- 
ryman did. The drunken swordsman was so eager to get 
out and fight that he jumped onto the sand, and 
Musashi immediately took the ferryman’s oar and 
pushed the boat back out into the water and left the 
drunken samurai behind. “You see,” he called back as 
the ferry drifted away, “that is my No Sword School.” 

If I were to say “Hi,” you would say “Hi” back. If 
I were to say “How are you?” you would say “Fine.” 
There is your original self. But if, in the middle of a nor- 
mal conversation, I should say, “Why is my hand like 
Buddha’s hand?” how do you handle that one? Once, 
when a master had asked such a question in such a situa- 
tion and his disciple had failed to answer, that master 
had said, “Your answers were quite natural and easy 


LANDSCAPE, SOUNDSCAPE 


until now. Why do you feel yourself obstructed when I 
ask why my hand is like Buddha’s hand?” 

The disciple was too used to linear thinking to 
respond naturally. He was used to following just one 
track. And we are all like that. We are uncomfortable if 
somebody changes the subject of a conversation without 
first warning us with a ritualistic transition. We are like- 
wise uncomfortable when we are in the presence of crazy 
people, who might also change the subject altogether too 
abruptly, or with drunks, who may not observe the 
amenities of etiquette in their conversation. We are all 
hung up on these linear tracks, which is to say, we all 
have one-track minds. 

The master asking a sudden question about his 
hand wanted a natural, spontaneous answer. When the 
hands are clapped, the sound issues without hesitation. 
When flint is struck with steel, the spark comes out at 
once. That’s the kind of response the master had wanted. 

One must be spontaneous. At the same time, one 
must not be in a hurry to provide an answer, because 
hurrying like that is itself a blocking of the flow of ener- 
gy. And blocking, in this sense of the word, is exactly 
what the Buddhist’s mean by attachment. When they 
say, “Have no worldly attachment,” they don’t mean 
that you are to give up enjoying your dinner. It means 
you are to give up blocking, you are to get beyond the 
state in which your flow of energy is interrupted and so 
proceeds jerkily as if the wheel were made too tight for 
the axle. We could quite correctly translate attachment 
with the American slang equivalent, hang-up. It is a 
hang-up, therefore, to attempt to arrive at the solution 
to a problem that demands immediate action by means 
of reasoning or calculation, which takes us along a linear 
path, when in reality the problem itself lies in a nonlinear 
dimension. It can never be solved in a linear fashion 


103 


CHAPTER SIX 


because the solution cannot be forced. Neither can we 
force that curious property that we call beauty, or, for 
that matter, what we call virtue in human behavior. We 
know very well when we are in the presence of forced 
virtue. 

Once upon a time, the great tea master Rikyu went 
to a tea ceremony. And the host was very proud of a 
new tea caddy that he had bought, which was made of 
pottery. And Rikyu didn’t notice it, or so the host 
thought, which showed that, because he was looking for 
it to be noticed, he wasn’t quite in tune with the philoso- 
phy of tea. Now, I had a friend, a Japanese artist named 
Sabro Hasegawa, who one day did a calligraphy for me. 
He took an ordinary, small, Western housepainter’s 
brush about an inch wide, and he did the Chinese char- 
acters for one, two, three. That is, one horizontal stroke, 
two strokes, three strokes. And there was something just 
fantastic about it. The brush was in places partly dry, so 
that it produced hairlines of ink instead of solid black. 
Now, it so happened that a few days later we were due 
to receive a visit from D. T. Suzuki, the great Zen schol- 
ar. And I said, “I am going to hang that picture in my 
office.” And because a fine work of art must fit its sur- 
roundings so as not to stand out like a sore thumb, 
Sabro said, “I hope he won’t notice it.” 

In this same way, Rikyu didn’t notice the tea caddy, 
and this not noticing so bothered its owner that after the 
tea ceremony was over, he smashed it. However, one of 
his students knew that it was very valuable, so he 
collected all its pieces and had it restored, using an old 
technique in which molten gold is used as cement. When 
it was finished, you could see the original piece as well 
as the spidery lines of the gold that was used to restore 
it. Some time later, a son of the host brought out this 
mended tea caddy when Rikyu was having tea. And 


104 


LANDSCAPE, SOUNDSCAPE 


Rikyu said, “You know, this is most remarkable. When I 
saw it before it was good, but now it is perfect.” The 
breaking and restoration of the tea caddy is what one. 
would call a controlled accident, and all great art is a 
controlled accident. That is to say, it has in it a compo- 
nent of control, but it also has a component of the acci- 
dental and the natural. And it is the getting together of 
those two that is the marvelous thing about art. 

It is the same in human relationships. Take the 
relationship of love. I may be in love and my girlfriend 
may be a flawlessly beautiful and wonderful person, but 
if I can control her completely or become immersed in 
her perfection, I might as well fall in love with a man- 
nequin. However, if she has a little mole on her cheek, 
or some kind of unpredictability of character, then the 
accidental has been introduced into the domain of the 
orderly, and I can enjoy her humanity more easily. 

Likewise, when you go into a person’s house and 
everything is spotless, you feel, by God, you can’t make 
soup because it will get the kitchen messy. It is just terri- 
ble. That home is lacking in a quality that in Arabic is 


> 


called baraka. Now, baraka means “grace,” approxi- 
mately. But baraka is also the quality you mean when 
you say of someone, “He fits like an old shoe.” It’s the 
quality of a favorite saucepan that is old and dirty but is 
also marvelous. Or an old pipe that over the years has 
become very suited to you. It has baraka, or grace. So, 
the challenge for every artist is how to get grace to 
strike, and how to let an accident happen. 

Once there was a sculpture contest at the Art 
Institute of Chicago, and every entrant was given a cubic 
foot of plaster of paris to do something with. And the 
competition was won by a woman who started out by 
looking at the piece of plaster of paris and saying, “This 
thing is so perfect, it doesn’t know what it wants to be.” 


“105 


CHAPTER SIX 


And so she grabbed it in both hands and flung it onto 
the floor, and pieces were chipped off and it cracked and 
so on. Then she looked at it again and said, “Now I 
know what it wants to be.” And so, by following the 
cracks that she had introduced into it, she made some- 
thing beautiful. That kind of following the grain is also 
what you do when you take a Rorschach test. You look 
at the blotching ink stain—which is the Tao, the primor- 
dial, wiggly universe—and then you see something in it. 
You see an image in it, and what you see is a far more 
beautiful image than you could ever draw by what we 
call eidetic vision. So in this way you assist the ink blot 
or the piece of wood or stone, or whatever it is in which 
you see that image, to reveal its nature. 

Now, experiment for yourselves. When you wake 
up first thing in the morning, look at the patterns in 
drapery, or shadows on a wall, and go into that state 
where you are receptive to seeing images. You will begin 
to see all kinds of faces and trees and landscapes. 
Leonardo da Vinci did this. He used to go out and look 
at a brick wall that had weathered and was covered with 
splotches of color and all kinds of scratches and so on. 
Then he would watch it until he saw a vast scene; and he 
described seeing a whole battle going on, and this 
became the inspiration for a great mural. 

In the same way there was a Chinese Zen monk 
who had long hair, which was very unusual. He used to 
drink an enormous amount of wine, and when he was 
really intoxicated, he’d dip his hair into ink and slosh it 
over a piece of paper. In the morning, when the ink had 
dried, he would come back and look at what had hap- 
pened. As he viewed the strokes, he would put himself 
into a receptive state of mind, and he would begin to see 
a landscape with detail after detail fitting into the 
scheme. And then all he had to do was add little touches 


106 


LANDSCAPE, SOUNDSCAPE 


with the brush, to bring it out for everyone else to see. 
When we go to the cave of Lascaux, and to the other 
ancient parts of France, and go down and see the prehis- 
toric paintings of animals, it looks very much as if the 
artists who painted on the cave walls at times followed 
natural formations in the stone, which had evoked their 
imagery of wild cattle that are to us inconceivably realis- 
tic for people that primitive. But we shall always find 
that kind of success when artists have not tried to con- 
struct the image by themselves but have simply helped 
those images to emerge. 

We create the whole world in that way. We are 
not aware of this normally, because we are so accus- 
tomed to seeing it in the way we see as real and normal. 
But we can also train ourselves to see things in ways in 
which they haven’t been seen before, and this is what 
many artists do. For example, in the Western art of 
seven hundred years ago, there were no landscape 
painters. Everyone was a portrait painter, or else they 
painted scenes of the doings of human beings, angels and 
gods and so forth. Whenever there was landscape in a 
painting, it was merely as an incidental background. In 
the course of time artists became fascinated by these 
background landscapes, and they withdrew the figures 
and focused on the background. But the first people who 
saw landscape paintings looked at them and said, 
“That’s not art.” Why? Because hitherto they had seen 
landscapes as insignificant background. It took artists to 
draw people to the beauty of landscape. 

Now, what we are becoming interested in today, 
and are only just beginning to think about, is sound- 
scape. When we record something, or go to a concert, 
we have the impression that the focus of our attention is 
the only thing there. So in radio studios, they cover the 
walls with soundproof tile in order to keep out the 


107 


CHAPTER SIX 


sound of traffic. The important thing you are supposed 
to notice is the speech, but the odd thing is, you listen to 
it back in your home with the windows open and all the 
street noises coming in, and so really there is no reason 
those background noises shouldn’t be there in the first 
place. 

Let’s think of those background noises. Think of 
that soundscape. Think of the hum that is going on 
behind all the things that we are doing. You can realize 
that it is very beautiful and learn to see the texture in 
those background noises, just as we learned to appreci- 
ate the beauty in landscape. 

There was a school of musical composers, repre- 
sented by John Cage, who treated us to background 
noise and to silent concerts in which the concert consist- 
ed of the sound of turning pages and noises occurring 
spontaneously in the auditorium. Now, you may say 
that that is not music. But who knows? The world is 
composed of many things. It is a humscape, a landscape, 
a skyscape. Over thousands of years, the socially impor- 
tant people have decided what parts of it are to be 
noticed. They told their children what to notice, and we 
still do this today. When a child is playing with mud or 
food and making little patterns, we feel the child is doing 
something unimportant, so we discourage it and tell the 
child to learn to use a pencil. When the child points to 
something and says, “What is that?” we say “A table!” 
but the child replies, “No, that,” and we say “It is 
wood.” But the child was pointing at an irregular pat- 
tern on the table, a small change in color that we have 
no name for and so we say, “Oh, don’t be silly; that 
doesn’t matter.” So in this way we are all taught the offi- 
cial interpretation of the cosmic Rorschach blot. 

This interpretation is based on certain criteria, 
such as the idea that you must survive. It is your duty to 


108 


LANDSCAPE, SOUNDSCAPE 


live, but that duty puts you into a quandary. It says that 
you are required to do the spontaneous, and this is a 
double bind, because it says your duty is to be sponta- 
neous because all life is spontaneous. So, everybody is 
conflicted by this. 

The world that we see is a creation of eidetic 
imagery. We select the human concerns as the significant 
areas. In a way, this is our answer to the cosmic 
Rorschach test. So, in that manner we have performed 


ce 9 


maya, the world illusion. But maya also means “art, 
and it also means “magic.” Therefore, the magical evo- 
cation of the world of things from the formless world— 
which means from the world of pure Tao that simply 


wiggles—that is the real creation of the world. 


109 


