foreword by Mark Watts 


PLAY TO LIVE 


PLAY TO LIVE 


Selected Seminars 
by Alan W. Watts 


Edited by 
Mark Watts 


and books 


South Bend, Indiana 


PLAY TO LIVE 
Copyright © 1982 by Mark Watts 


All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced 
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or 
mechanical, including photocopying, recording or by any 
information storage and retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publisher. 


and books 
702 South Michigan, South Bend, Indiana 46618 


Library of Congress Catalog Number: 82-072606 

International Standard Book Number: 0-89708-098-X 
6789 

Printed in the United States of America 


Typography by Ampersand Associates, Inc. 
Chicago, Illinois 


Additional copies available: 
the distributors 
702 South Michigan 
South Bend, IN 46618 


Dedicated to George Ingles 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE 
(Page 9) 


CHAPTER ONE 
Veil Of Thoughts I (Page 11) 


CHAPTER TWO 
Veil of Thoughts II (Page 29) 


CHAPTER THREE 
Veil Of Thoughts III, Divine Madness (Page 47) 


CHAPTER FOUR 
Being In The Way (Page 63) 


CHAPTER FIVE 
Death, Birth, and the Unborn (Page 77) 


AFTERWORD 
The Practice of Meditation (Page 99) 


PREFACE 


My father once pointed out that his spoken word 
was an entirely different mode of communication than 
his written works; thus he preferred that his talks be 
heard, and his books read. However, in the nearly 
ten years since his passing, I have listened to several 
hundred hours of his recorded talks, and have found 
among them certain instances wherein a particular 
lecture or seminar session was not only notable and 
an original performance, but a process of realization 
as well. As this work originated in the spontaneous 
delivery of lectures to live audiences, for which Alan 
never prepared ahead of time, it reveals a moment-to- 
moment appreciation of the insights which Alan himself 
found in the course of his talks. It is for this reason 
that I have made the decision to share these examples, 
and in doing so have met with much encouragement. 

It has been quite a challenge to adapt Alan's spoken 
style to the printed page, a task with which I have had 
the ceaseless help of my close friend, Rebecca Shropshire, 


PREFACE 


in transcribing, editing, and the researching of many 
literary references. After two years, I feel that this task 
has been accomplished quite successfully, and that the 
result is a book of contemporary significance and great 
impact. 

Those among you who have read the works of 
Alan Watts before may perceive a difference in the 
expression of this book, as transcribed from spoken 
lectures, and that of Alan's other works. If, in reading, 
the disparity causes you to falter, may I suggest that 
you try reading these works aloud — perhaps among 
friends — to enliven within you the fascination, humor, 
and audacity of Alan’s eloquent style of speaking. 


Mark Watts 


Mill Valley, California 
May, 1982 


1 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS I 


S omeone once suggested that thought is a means of 
concealing truth. Despite the fact that it is an 
extraordinarily useful faculty, there are an astounding 
number of examples showing how mankind can be 
bamboozled by thought. Take for instance, the use of 
gold as money. The confusion of money in any form 
whatsoever with wealth is one of the major problems 
from which civilization is suffering. 

In our world today, when there is no technical 
reason whatsoever why there should be any poverty 
at all, the real reason poverty still exists is that people 
keep asking the question, “Where's the money going to 
come from?” They do not realize that money does not 
come from anywhere and never did; except, of course, 
if you thought it was gold. If you increased the supply 
of gold, and used that to finance all the world’s commerce, 
prosperity would depend not upon finding new processes 
for growing food in vast quantities, or getting nutrition 
out of the oceans, or even water from the sun’s energy. 


ee 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS I 


Instead, it would depend upon discovering a new gold 
mine, and you can see what a nonsensical state of 
affairs that is! Gold is a very useful metal, especially for 
filling teeth, making jewelry, and maybe even covering 
the dome of the capital in Washington. However, the 
moment it is used for money and locked in vaults in 
the form of ingots it becomes completely useless, a false 
security that people cling to like an idol. It becomes 
like a belief in some kind of big daddy-o god with 
whiskers who lives above the clouds. And all this kind 
of belief diverts our attention from reality. 

In ever so many different dimensions of life we are 
living in a state of total confusion between symbol and 
reality. We go through all sorts of rituals, but the symbols 
get in the way of practical life. Way back in human 
development when we first began to use symbols to 
represent the events of the physical world, we found 
symbolism such an ingenious device that we became 
completely fascinated with it. You may remember the 
Great Depression; one day everyone was doing business, 
things were going along pretty well, and the next day 
there were breadlines. It was as if somebody came to 
work and they said to him, “Sorry chum, but you can’t 
build today. No building can go on, we don’t have 
enough inches’. And the worker said, “What do you 
mean, ‘We haven't got enough inches’. We've got wood, 
haven't we? We've got metal, we've even got tape 
measures.” And they said, “Yeah, but you don’t under- 
stand the business world. We just haven't got enough 


a 


PLAY TO LIVE 


inches, just plain inches. We've used too many of them.” 
As absurd as this may seem, this is exactly what 
happened when we had the Depression, because money 
is something of the same order of reality as inches, 
grams, meters, pounds, or lines of latitude or longitude. 
It is an abstraction. It is a method of bookkeeping to 
obviate the cumbersome procedure of barter. But our 
entire culture, indeed, our entire civilization, is completely 
hung up on the notion that money has an independent 
reality of its own. This is a very striking and concrete 
example because it is a very serious state of affairs. 
Most of our political squabbles are entirely the result 
of being bamboozled by this thinking. It is noted that, 
as time goes on, the matters about which we fight are 
increasingly abstract, and the wars fought about abstract 
problems get worse and worse. 

It would have been an extremely sane enterprise, 
looking at it froma sort of unsentimental point of view, 
to send the American forces to Vietnam to capture all 
the beautiful girls that live there and bring them back. 
That would, of course, be considered unworthy and 
base and all that sort of thing, but it would have had 
the advantage of leaving the country intact. We would 
not have wanted to kill the people because we would 
have wanted to capture them, and would have waged 
a more merciful war than we had waged in the name of 
abstract principle. 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS | 


Today we are thinking about vast abstractions; 
ideologies called Communism, Capitalism, or what have 
you, while we are paying less and less attention to the 
world of physical reality, to the world of earth and 
trees and waters, and people. In the name of all sorts of 
abstractions we are busy destroying our natural en- 
vironment. Wildlife, for example, is having a terrible 
problem continuing to exist along side human beings. 

Another example of this fantastic confusion is 
that Congress voted a law imposing stern penalties upon 
anyone who should presume to burn the American 
Flag. They put this law through with a great deal of 
patriotic oratory and the quoting of poetry about Old 
Glory and so on, while entirely ignoring the fact that 
these same Congressmen, by acts of commission or 
omission, are burning up that for which the flag stands. 
They are allowing the utter pollution of our waters and 
of our atmosphere, the devastation of our forests, and 
the increasing power of the bulldozer to bring about 
the ghastly fulfillment of the biblical prophecy that 
“every valley shall be exalted, every mountain laidlow”. 
You see, they do not notice the difference between the 
flag and the country, the map and the territory. If you 
compare a physical globe and a political globe, you 
will see the physical one as a pretty thing with all kinds 
of green and brown wiggly patterns on it, but the political 
globe, although it still has the wiggly outlines of the land, 
they are all crossed over by colored patches, many of 
which have completely straight edges. Much of the 


PLAY TO LIVE 


boundary between the United States and Canada, once 

you get west of the Great Lakes, is simply a straight 

line. Yet this has little to do with anything and is actually 

a violation of the surface of the territory. If you look at 

the fair city of San Francisco, it is a lovely place. How- 
ever, they planted on the hills of San Francisco a city 

pattern that was much more appropriate for the plains 

of Kansas; a grid iron. As a result, you get streets 

going straight up and down that are extremely dan- 
gerous. They should have followed the contours of 

the hills. This is a perfect example of confusing the map 

with the territory, of man’s abstraction imposed upon 

physical reality. 

When we use the words ‘physical reality’, as distinct 
from abstraction, what are we talking about? Philoso- 
phically, there is going to be a fight about this. If I were 
to say that the final reality that we are living in is the 
physical world, alot of people would assume that I am 
a materialist and that I am unspiritual because I think 
too much of the identification of the man with the 
body. If you were to open any book on yoga or Hindu 
philosophy, it will have within it a declaration used to 
begin a meditation practice which says, “I am not the 
body, 1am not my feelings, 1 am not my thoughts. I am 
the witness who watches all this, and is not really any 
of it.” 

If I were to say, then, that the physical world is the 
basic reality, | would seem to be contradicting what is 
said in these Hindu texts. However, it all depends on just 


a | 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS I 


what you mean by the ‘physical world’. What is it? 
First of all, it must be pointed out that the idea of the 
material world is in its own way a symbol. By analogy 
with the art of ceramics and pottery, alot of people 
think that the physical world is various forms of matter. 
But no one has ever been able to put their finger on any- 
thing material; that is to say, if by the word ‘material’ you 
mean some kind of basic stuff out of which the world is 
made. They have been able to discover various forms, 
various patterns, but no matter. You cannot even think 
how you would describe matter in some term other 
than form. Whenever a physicist talks about the nature 
of the world, he describes a form as a process which 
can be put into the shape of a mathematical equation. 
Ifyousay, “A + B = B + A”, everybody knows exactly 
what you mean, and it is a perfectly clear statement. 
Nobody needs to ask what do you mean by A or what 
do you mean by B. If you say, “1 + 2 = 3”, that is 
perfectly clear. You do not need to know one what, 
two what, or three what. 

All of our descriptions of the physical world have 
the nature of these formulae or numbers. They are 
simply mathematical patterns because what we are 
talking about is pattern. Yet, it is pattern of sucha high 
degree of complexity that it is very difficult to deal 
with by thinking. In science, we are working with 
different ends of the spectrum of reality. We can deal 
with problems in which there are very few variables, 
or we can deal with problems in which there are almost 


PLAY TO LIVE 


infinitely many variables. Although, in between, we 
are pretty helpless. The average person cannot think 
through a problem involving more than three variables 
without a pencil in his hand. This is why, for example, 
it is difficult to leam complex music. Think of an organist 
who has two or three keyboards to work with his 
hands, and each hand is doing a different rhythm. With 
his feet on the pedals, he could be doing a different 
rhythm with each foot. Now, this is a difficult thing for 
people to learn to do, as rubbing your stomach in a 
circle and patting your head at the same time takes a 
little skill. 

Most problems with which we deal in everyday 
life involve far more than three variables, and we are 
really incapable of thinking about them. Actually, 
the way we think about most of our problems is by 
simply going through the motions of thinking. We 
do not really think about them; we do most of our 
decision-making by hunch. We can collect data about 
a decision we have to make, but the data collected has 
the same sort of relation to the actual process involved 
in this decision as a skeleton has to a living body. 
It is just the bones. 

There are all sorts of entirely unpredictable pos- 
sibilities involved in every decision, and you do not 
really think about them at all. The truth of the matter 
is that we are as successful as we are in conducting our 
everyday practical lives — which is surprising, the degree 
to which we are successful — because our brains do 


—19— 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS I 


the thinking for us in an entirely unconscious way. The 
human brain is by far more complex than any computer. 
The brain is, in fact, the most complex known object in 
the universe. Our neurologists do not really understand 
it; they have a very primitive conception of the brain, 
and they admit it. If we do not understand our own 
brain, that simply shows that our brains are a great 
deal more intelligent than we are — ‘we’ meaning the 
thing that we have identified ourselves with. 

Instead of sensibly identifying ourselves with our 
brains, we have chosen to identify ourselves with a 
very small operation of the brain which is the faculty 
of conscious attention, a sort of radar that scans the 
environment for unusual features. Somehow we think 
we are that, but we are nothing of the kind. That is just 
a little trick we do. Actually, our brain is analyzing all 
sensory input all the time; analyzing all the things we 
do not notice, do not think about, do not even have 
names for. It is this marvelous, complex ‘goingson’ 
which is responsible for our being able to adapt our- 
selves intelligently to the rest of the physical world, 
and the brain is an operation of the physical world, and 
so, now we get back to this question of the physical 
world. It is a concept, simply an idea. If I were to 
differentiate between the physical and spiritual, I would 
not put the spiritual in the same class as the abstract. 
Most people do; they think that 1 + 2 = 3 is a propo- 
sition of a more spiritual nature than, for example, a 


a0 


PLAY TO LIVE 


tomato. I think a tomato is a lot more spiritual than 
1 + 2 = 3 and this is where we really get to the point. 

In Zen Buddhism when people ask, “What is the 
fundamental principle of Buddhism?”, you could very 
well answer, “a tomato”, because when you examine 
the physical world you see it is really not very solid. 
A tomato does not last very long; nor, for that matter, 
do the things that we consider most exemplary of 
physical reality, even mountains. The poet says: The 
hills are shadows and they flow from form to form, 
and nothing stands. 

The physical world is diaphanous. It is like music. 
When you play music it simply disappears, nothing is 
left, and for that very reason it is one of the highest and 
most spiritual of the arts. It is the most transient, also. 
In a way, you might say that transiency is a mark spir- 
ituality. Alot of people think the opposite; that the 
spiritual things are the everlasting things. The more a 
thing tends to be permanent, the more it tends to be 
lifeless. Nothing is as permanent as a diamond, and 
yet, this imagery and the idea of the most mineral 
objects being the most permanent, is associated with 
being the most spiritual. Jesus Christ is called ‘The 
Rock of Ages’. Even the Buddhists have used the diamond 
as an image of the fundamental reality of the universe, 
but the reason for using the diamond is not that it is 
hard, but that it is completely transparent. Therefore, 
it affords a symbol of the void, which everything 
fundamentally is. Void does not mean that there is 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS I 


nothing there, but that you cannot get any idea which 
will sufficiently define physical reality. Every idea will 
be wrong, and in that sense, it will be void. 

So then, in examining the physical world, we cannot 
even find any stuff out of which it is made. We can 
only recognize each other and say: “Well, I realize that 
I have met you before and that now I see you again”, 
but the thing you really recognize is a consistent pat- 
tern. Let us suppose I have a rope which begins by 
being a manila rope, then it goes on to become a cotton 
rope, then it goes on with nylon, and then with silk. 
Now, if I tie a knot in the rope and I move the knot 
down along the rope, is it, as it moves along, the same 
knot or a different knot? We would say it is the same 
because we recognize the pattern of the knot; but at 
one point it is manila, at one point it is cotton, at 
another point it is nylon and at yet another it is silk. 
This is just like us. You are recognized by the fact 
that one day you face the same way as you did on 
the day before, and people recognize your facing. 
They say, “That is John Doe, or Mary Smith”, but 
actually, the contents of your face, the water, the 
carbons, the chemicals, whatever they may be, are 
changing all the time. You are like a whirlpool in a 
stream. The stream is consistently whirlpooling, and 
we recognize the whirlpool, but the water is always 
moving on. We are just like that, and everything is 
just like that. There is nothing in the physical world 
that is what you may call ‘substantial’. It is pattern; 


PLAY TO LIVE 


that is why it is so spiritual. To be non-spiritual is not 
to see that. In other words, it is to impose upon the 
physical world the idea of ‘thingness’, of substantiality. 

The Hindus use this idea to describe one who is 
involved in the concept of matter, one who identifies 
with the body, believing that the body is something 
constant, something tangible. The body, however, is 
really very intangible. You cannot pin it down, it is 
falling apart, and we are all aging, getting older. If you 
cling to the body you will be frustrated. The whole 
point is that the material world, the world of nature, 
is marvelous so long as you don't try to lean on it; so 
long as you don’t cling to it. If you do not cling to it 
you can have a wonderful time. 

Now, let us take up another very controversial 
issue: Many ‘spiritual’ people are, generally speaking, 
against lovemaking. Ramakrishna used to speak about 
the evils of women and of gold. I have already demon. 
strated the evils of gold, but what about the evils of 
women? From my point of view, women can be a 
source of evil if you attempt to possess them. Men 
can, too, for that matter. | mean, if you can say of 
another person, “I love you so much I want to own 
you and really tie you down and call you...”, well, 
it’s like the poem by Ogden Nash wherein someone 
claimed that he loved his wife so much that he climbed 
a mountain and named it after her. He named it “Mt 
Mrs. Oswald McGuiness”. In other words, if you try 
to possess, and you make your sexual passion possessive, 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS I 


then, in that way, you are trying to cling to the physical 
world. You see, others are much more interesting if 
you do not cling to them, if you let them be them- 
selves and be free. In my opinion, you can have a very 
spiritual sex life if you aren't possessive. But on the 
other hand, if you are possessive, then you're in 
trouble. The average swami will not agree with that 
because he confuses the body that you touch as some- 
thing evil. He is hung up with it. His attitude reminds 
me of the story of two Zen monks who were crossing 
a river. The ford was very deep because of a flood, 
and there was a girl who was trying to get across. One 
of the monks immediately picked her up, threw her 
over his shoulder, carried her across and put her down 
on the other side. Then the monks went on their way 
and the girl went another. Along the way, the other 
monk had been in a kind of embarrassed silence which 
he finally broke to say: 


“Do you realize that you broke monastic rule by 
touching and picking up a woman like that?” 


And the first monk said: 


“Oh, but I left her on the other side of the river 
and you are still carrying her.” 


You can also find an example of this in passages 
where St. Paul rather irritably speaks of the opposition 
of the spirit and the flesh. For the Christian, you see, 
the word was made flesh in Christ, and there will be 


294 23 


PLAY TO LIVE 


the resurrection of the body in the final consummation 
of the universe. So you cannot, really, as an orthodox 
Christian, take an antagonistic attitude to the flesh. 
Why, then, does St. Paul assume an antagonistic at- 
titude? Well, you can only save the situation and 
make the New Testament consistent with itself by 
saying that he meant by the ‘flesh’ a certain kind of 
spiritual view of flesh as a concept. You might also 
talk about the ‘sins of the flesh’, but they have entirely 
to do with certain hang-ups that we have about our 
bodies. This, again, is what I would call leaning on 
the world by exploiting it. As a Buddhist, one takes 
the third precept, and it is usually translated: ‘I under- 
take the precept to refrain from adultery”, but it 
doesn’t say anything of the kind. Literally translated 
it says: “I undertake the precept not to exploit the 
passions.” In other words, you may be bored and 
feeling sort of empty and at a loose end, so you think, 
“Well, I don’t know, let’s go and commit adultery, it 
might liven things up.” This would be what they call 
in Zen, “Raising waves when no wind is blowing.” It is 
quite a different matter if in a perfectly natural and 
spontaneous way you fall in love with someone. You 
are not going out of your way to get into trouble; it 
is appropriate and natural at the time. In the same way, 
instead of saying, “Let’s commit adultery,” many 
people when bored say, “Let's. go eat something.” 
They become fatter and fatter trying to fill the spiri- 
tual vacuum in their psyche with food, which doesn’t do 


=295 == 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS I 


the job because it is not the function of food to fill the 
spiritual vacuum. In this way, one exploits the appe- 
tites, or passions. Likewise, the fifth precept, which 
lists the various intoxicating substances, does not say 
that you are not to take them; it says that you are not 
to get intoxicated by them. A Buddhist may drink but 
not get drunk. 

One might say that we are confused through and 
through about what we mean by the material world. 
What I am doing here is, first of all, giving a number of 
illustrations which show how confused we are. So let 
me repeat this to get it clear. In the first place, we 
confuse abstract symbols, that is to say, numbers, words, 
and formulae, with the physical events, just as we confuse 
money with consumable wealth. In the second place, 
we confuse physical events, the whole class and category 
of physical events, with matter. Matter is an idea, it isa 
concept. It is the concept of stuff, of something solid 
and permanent that you can catch hold of; but you just 
cannot catch hold of the physical world! The phys- 
ical world is the most evasive and illusive process 
that there is. It will not be pinned down, and there- 
fore it fulfills all the requirements of spirit 

What I am saying is that the non-abstract phys- 
ical world, which Korzybski called “unspeakable”, is 
the spiritual world. The spiritual world is not some- 
thing gaseous, abstract, or formless, in that sense of 
shapeless. It is formless in another sense. The form- 
less world is the wiggly world. There really is no set 


PLAY TO LIVE 


way that the physical world is! Earlier I stated that 
someone once said that thoughts were made to conceal 
the truth. This is the fact, because there is no such 
thing as the truth that can be stated. In other words, 
ask the question: What is the true position of the stars 
in the Big Dipper? Well, it depends where you are 
looking at them from. There is no absolute position. 
In the same way, a good accountant will tell you that 
any balance sheet is simply a matter of opinion. There 
is no such thing as a true state of affairs. We are all 
hooked on the idea that there is an external objective 
world that is a certain way, and that it really is that 
way. History, for example, is a matter of opinion. His- 
tory is an art, not a science. It is something constructed 
and accepted as a more or less satisfactory explana- 
tion of events which, as a matter of fact, do not have 
any explanation at all. Most of what happens in history 
is completely irrational, but people always feel that 
they have got to find a meaning. Let’s say you get 
sick. You have lived a very good life and you have 
been helpful to other people and have done all sorts of 
nice things, and so you might say to the clergyman, 
“Why did this have to happen to me?” You are look- 
ing for.an explanation when there isn’t one. It just 
happened _that..way. Still, people feel very insecure 
if they cannot find an explanation. Why? Because they 
have not been able to straighten things out; the world 
is just not that way. 


97 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS I 


What is really going on is alot of wiggles. The 
way it is is always in relation to the way you are. No 
matter how hard I hit a skinless drum it will make no 
noise because the noise is the relationship between a 
fist and a skin. In the same way, light is the relationship 
between electrical energy and eyeballs. It is you who 
evokes the world, and you evoke the world in accordance 
with what kind of a ‘you’ you are — what kind of an 
organism. One organism evokes one world, another 
organism evokes another world, and sO Teality is a 
the truth as some way the world is in a fixed sense, 
you come to another idea of the truth altogether; the 
idea of truth that is God when we speak of God as the 
reality that exceeds all thoughts, that surpasses all 
definition, that is infinite, unbounded, eternal, and 
immeasureable in terms of time. We are not talking 
about a gaseous vertebrate, or a huge void without 
any wiggles in it. We are talking about the truth that 
cannot be stated, the truth that cannot be pinned down. 


2 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS I 


H as it ever struck you that the entire intellectual 
venture of civilization has been a ghastly mistake? 
Could it be that we are now on a collision course, and 
that all the vaunted benefits of intelligence (ie. techno- 
logy are simply going to draw the human race to an 
extremely swift conclusion? Of course, that might not 
be a bad thing, I have sometimes speculated on the idea 
that all stars are created out of planets, and that these 
planets develop high civilizations which eventually 
understand the secrets of nuclear energy and naturally 
blow themselves up. As they blow up, these stars fling 
out lumps of rock, which eventually spin around them 
and become planets all over again. Perhaps this is the 
actual method of genesis of the universe. This would 
accord with the Hindu cosmology, where time, and the 
events in time, are invariably looked upon as a process 
of progressive deterioration in which things get worse 
and worse as time goes on until the whole thing can't 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS II 


stand itself anymore and it blows itself up. Then, 
after a period of rest and recuperation, it begins all 
over again. 

Why do we somehow have a distaste for a theory 
of time which runs in this direction? Can you even 
imagine a state of affairs where things are always 
getting better? Can anything keep going up and up 
forever? Of course, it is always relative. You can keep 
building something higher and higher, but soon you 
would forget where you began, and then you would 
see that, actually, we are always in the same place; 
always hoping, always thinking that the next time will 
be it. This is, of course, an eternal illusion. 

There was a Russian philosopher who accused 
the Communists of converting all human beings into 
caryatids. As you may know, a caryatid is a pillar 
shaped in the human form which supports a roof. 
Considering the Communists and their various five- 
year plans, and progressive notions wherein people are 
always preparing for tomorrow, the Russian philoso- 
pher said to them: “You are turning all men into 
caryatids to support a stage upon which others will 
dance.” His idea was that, first you have one row of 
caryatids supporting a floor, very soon your children 
are the next row of caryatids supporting another floor, 
and so on it goes on and on, getting higher and higher, 
but where did it all begin? Perhaps it would be much 
better to think of the future as simply deteriorating. 
I can explain this quite simply. Human beings are largely 


PLAY TO LIVE 


engaged in wasting enormous amounts of psychic energy 
in attempting to do things that are quite impossible 
to do. As the old proverb says: You cannot lift your- 
self up by your own bootstraps. Recently, I have come 
across many references in general reading and listening 
where people say that we just got to lift ourselves up 
by our bootstraps; but you can’t! You can struggle 
and tug and pull until you are blue in the face, nothing 
will happen except that you exhaust yourself. 

All sensible people, therefore, begin in life with 
two fundamental presuppositions: You are not going 
to improve the world, and you are not going to improve 
yourself. You are just what you are, and once you have 
accepted that you have an enormous amount of energy 
available to do things that can be done. Everyone looking 
at you from an external point of view will say: “My 
god, how much so-and-so has improved!” Hundreds of 
my friends are at work on enterprises to improve 
themselves by one religion or another, one therapy 
or another, this system or that system; and I am des- 
perately trying to free people from this. I suppose that 
makes me a messiah of some kind, but the thing is, 
it cannot be done. One very simple reason is that the 
part of you which is supposed to improve you is exactly 
the same as the part of you which needs to be improved. 
There is not any real distinction between bad “me” 
and good “I”, or between the higher self which is spiri- 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS II 


tual and the lower self which is animal. It is all of one 
piece. You are this organism, this integrated, fascinating 
energy pattern. 

Archimedes said, “Give me a fulcrum and I will 
move the Earth”; but there isn’t one. It is like betting on 
the future of the human race — | might wish to lay a 
bet that the human race would destroy itself by the 
year 2,000, but there is nowhere to place the bet. On 
the contrary, ] am involved in the world and must try 
to see that it does not blow itself to pieces. I once had a 
terrible argument with Margaret Mead. She was holding 
forth one evening on the absolute horror of the atomic 
bomb, and how everybody should spring into action 
and abolish it, but she was getting so furious about it 
that I said to her: “You scare me because | think you 
are the kind of person who will push the button in 
order to get rid of the other people who were going to 
push it first’. So she told me that I had no love for 
my future generations, that I had no responsibility 
for my children, and that I was a phoney swami who 
believed in retreating from facts. But I maintained my 
position. As Robert Oppenheimer said a short while 
before he died, “It is perfectly obvious that the whole 
world is going to hell. The only possible chance that 
it might not is that we do not attempt to prevent it 
from doing so.” You see, many of the troubles going 
on in the world right now are being supervised by 
people with very good intentions whose attempts are 
to keep things in order, to clean things up, to forbid 


23h 


PLAY TO LIVE 


this, and to prevent that. The-more_we try to put 
everything to rights, the more we make fantastic messes. 
Maybe that is the way it has got to be. Maybe I should 
not say anything at all about the folly of trying to 
put things to right but simply, on the principle of 
Blake, let the fool persist in his folly so that he will 
become wise. 

This, then, may be said to be an argument against 
all kinds of do-gooding. Perhaps you should not take 
me too seriously, but I am pitching a case for the fact 
that civilization may have been a mistake; that it would 
be much better to leave everything alone, and that the 
wild animals are wiser than we in that they, putting it 
in our crude and not very exact language, follow their 
own instincts. If a moth mistakes a flame for the signal 
on which it gets a mating call and flies into the flame, 
so what! A moth does not worry, it does not go buzzing 
around in a state of anxiety wondering whether this 
sex call is the real thing or just a flame. Nor does it 
think consciously about the future, and therefore, it is 
not troubled. The species of moths goes on and on, 
and so far as we know, they have been around for 
an incredibly long time. Maybe even longer than we 
have. Bees, ants, and creatures of this kind have long 
since escaped from history. They live a settled existence 
— one which you might consider rather boring simply 
because it does not have constant change in the way 
we do. They live the same rhythm again and again and 
again, but because they do not bother to remember it 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS II 


consciously it never gets boring. Because they do not 
bother to predict, they are never in a state of anxiety; 
yet they survive. We who predict, “We who look be- 
fore and after’, as Emerson says, and we who are 
always concerned as to whether this generation is going 
to be better or worse than the one that came before, 
we are tormented. Because of this tremendous pre- 
occupation with time, we do not realize how beautiful 
we are, in spite of ourselves. 

The conscious radar is a trouble-shooter, it is always 
on the lookout for variation in the environment which 
may bring about disaster. Our conscious attention is 
from one day to the next entirely preoccupied with 
time and with planning, with what has been and with 
what will be. Since trouble-shooting is its function, we 
then get the feeling that man is born to trouble. We 
ignore, in this preoccupation with conscious attention, 
how marvelously we get on; how, for most of the time, 
our physical organs are in a fantastically harmonious 
relationship, and how our body relates by all sorts of 
unconscious responses to the physical environment. If 
you became aware of all the adjustment processes that 
are being managed spontaneously and subconsciously 
by your organism you would find yourself in the middle 
of great music. This, of course, occasionally happens. 

The mystical experience is nothing other than 
becoming aware of your true physical relationship to 
the universe. You are amazed, thunderstruck by the 
feeling that, underneath everything that goes on in this 


PLAY TO LIVE 


world, and the fundamental thing is a state of unbeliev- 
able bliss. Why not? Why else would there be anything 
happening? If the “game isn’t worth the candle”, if the 
universe is basically nothing but a tormented struggle, 
why have one? Hasn’t it ever struck you that it would 
be much simpler not to have any existence? It would re- 
quire no effort, there would be no problems, so why 
is there anything going on? Let me say not why but 
how is there anything going on? ff it is all fundamentally 
a drag, what reason could there be for its being? Every- 
thing would have committed suicide long ago and be at 
rest. “Aboo, Ben Adhem, may his tribe decrease by 
cautious birth control and be at peace”. 

We might work on this possibility, then, that 
civilization has been a mistake, that we have taken 
completely the wrong track and should have left things 
to nature. Of course, this is the same problem that is 
brought up in the book of Genesis. Actually, the Fall of 
Man in Genesis is his venture into technology. In the 
Bible, the Hebrew words for the knowledge of good 
and evil are connected with technics, with what is 
technically expeditious and what is not. Actually, the 
words are connected with metallurgy. When you eat of 
the fruit of the tree of knowledge, and you become 
as God, you think you are going to control your own 
life. God says, “Okay, baby, you want to be God, 
you try it! But the trouble with you is you've got a 
one-tracked mind, and therefore you cannot be God. 


=37 = 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS II 


To be God, you have to have an infinitely many- 
tracked mind.” — which is, of course, what our brain 
has. The brain is infinitely many-tracked, but con- 
scious attention is not, it is one-tracked. As we say, 
you can only think of one thing at a time, and you 
cannot take charge of the universe with that kind of 
consciousness because there is too much of it, too many 
variables. This is why, for example, people consult the 
I Ching, the Book of Changes. If you are tossing a coin 
to make decisions, (and everybody does fundamen- 
tally make their decisions by tossing a coin), is it 
not better to have a 64-sided coin than a two-sided 
coin? The I Ching gives you 64 possibilities of approach 
to any given decision instead of just two, yes or no. It is 
based on yes or no, however, because it is based on the 
yang and the yin. In the same way, digital computers 
use a number system which consists only of the figures 
zero and one out of which you can construct any number. 
This system was invented by Leibnitz, who also saw it in 
the Book of Changes, an amazing book that is somehow 
always with us. It is, then, a way of helping your own 
multi-variabled brain arrive at decisions in cooperation 
with your own mind, much like a Roschach blot. The 
I Ching uses very laconic remarks into which everyone 
reads just exactly what they want to read. You might 
even come to the conclusion that it helps in making a 
decision because you do not have to accept responsibility 
for it. You might say, “It told me”. Much in the same 
way, when you go to a guru, you might say, “My guru 


PLAY TO LIVE 


is very wise, and he has instructed me to do this”, but it 
was you who decided on this guru. How did you know 
he was a good one? After all, you gave him his authority 
because you picked him out. It always comes back to 
you, but we like to pretend. that it doesn’t. —~ 

The point is that one’s conscious attention is not 
oneself; oneself is everything underneath. One’s conscious 
attention has about the same relation to oneself as the 
bookkeeping does to a business. If you are selling 
groceries, there is very little resemblance between your 
books and the goods that move over your shelves and 
counters. The bookkeeping is merely a record of it, as 
is our reflective consciousness. 

Suppose we follow the argument, then, that we 
have made a mistake in bringing about civilization, 
and that now we are not going to survive. There are 
various things that can be said about this. Just as I have 
speculated that all stars used to be planets, one could 
ask, “Is it such a good thing to survive?” You may 
remember the passage in T.S. Eliot’s Wasteland which 
says: “This is the way the world ends, not with a bang 
but a whimper.” Yet, some people would rather end 
with a bang than a whimper. Some people prefer a 
kind of potlatch situation where they have a huge fire 
that goes out in a hurry, while others prefer to burn 
their fire very gradually, conserving fuel, and just keep- 
ing enough heat going so that they last a long time. 
Which do you prefer? Do you want to be a tortoise 
that lives for hundreds of years but drags itself around 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS II 


very slowly, or would you rather be a little humming 
bird that dances and lives at a terrific pace? You cannot 
say one is right and the other is wrong. Just so, there 
may be nothing wrong with the idea of a world or a 
civilization that lives at a terrific, increasing pace of 
change, and thenexplodes. That may be perfectly okay. 

My point is, if we could reconcile ourselves to the 
notion that this is perfectly okay, then we would be 
less inclined to push that button. If you cannot stand 
anxiety, if you simply cannot be content for issues to 
be undecided, then you are liable to push the button 
because you would say, “Let’s get it over with.” 

Let us say, then, that maybe civilization really was 
not a mistake, that it was just as natural as anything 
else. We are a being that exists under conditions of 
illusion, that imagines it is controlling its own destiny. 
which thinks that it is capable of improving itself 
and by virtue of this illusion, destroys itself rapidly 
in an interesting way. Let us suppose this is what we 
are, but we still come back to the point that we are 
spending an enormous amount of energy in doing 
things that cannot be done, like tugging on our own 
bootstraps. If you find this frustrating, if you really 
do not like it, you don’t have to do it; you can stop. 

An interesting paradox is that when you stop trying 
to do what cannot be done, you become happier and 
more energetic. People always wondered about the 
Calvinists because the Calvinists believed that from 
the beginning of time God had pre-ordained who was 


—40— 


PLAY TO LIVE 


to be saved and who was to be damned, and that one 
simply does not have a choice. This is pre-destination, 
and the logical assumption would be, therefore, that 
these people would just sit, and wait, and say, “There is 
nothing we can do about it.” However, the Calvanists 
were very different than that. They were very energetic 
people (perhaps too energetic) who gave us the Protestant 
ethic. They were vigorously moral, but because they 
believed in pre-destination they had all the psychic 
energy available for living that the Catholics were 
dissipating wondering whether they were saved or not. 
Calvinists did not waste their energy trembling in 
a state of fear wondering, “have I made the right 
decision?” 

In this day and age we say in psychiatry, or in 
most schools of psychotherapy, that it is important for 
you to accept yourself rather than to be in conflict. 
“Get with yourself”, they say. Still, no one dares to take 
this thing too far. There is always a little bit of reservation 
that goes with it. I have never heard a preacher give a 
sermon on the passage which begins: “Be not anxious 
for the morrow.” Occasionally they refer to it, but they 
say, “Well, that’s all very well for Jesus.” The actual 
putting into practice of this, few will agree with. More 
often they say it is not practical; but it is practical. It is 
much more practical than what we are doing, if by the 
word practical you mean that it has survival value. 

All of this is a kind of two-sided process. The first 
step is not being anxious for the morrow, and the second 


a em 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS II 


is not dreaming for one moment that you can change 
anything or improve anything. Which of you by being 
anxious can add one cubit to his stature? Like the belief 
in predestination, this has an unexpected consequence; 
namely, the making of energy available so that you can 
take care of the morrow for the simple reason that you 
are no longer worrying about it today. Thus it comes 
about that people who do not live for the morrow have 
a reason to make plans. Those who live for the morrow 
have no reason to make plans for anything. They never 
catch up with tomorrow because they do not live in the 
present. Instead, they plan for a future which never 
arrives, and this is very stupid. 

I would like to make clear that all this is said 
in quite another spirit than the spirit of sermonizing. 
I am not talking at all about something you should do. 
All that I am doing is explaining a situation. You can 
do anything you like about it. You actually cannot lift 
yourself up by your bootstraps, however hard you 
might try. I am merely pointing out that it cannot be 
done. I am not saying that you shouldn’t try, because 
it may be your lifestyle to constantly be attempting to 
do things that cannot be done. | do this, in a way, just 
as all poets do it. A poet is always trying to describe 
what cannot be said. He gets close, he even gives the 
illusion that he has made it. This is a great art; to say 
what cannot be said. I am trying to express the mystical 
experience, and it just cannot be done. Instead, ] am 


42 — 


PLAY TO LIVE 


weaving a tapestry of intricate nonsense patterns which 
seem as if they were about to make sense, but everything 
I am telling you is really a very elaborate deception. 

I was once talking with Fritz Perls at the Esalen 
Institute, and he said to me, ‘‘The trouble with you is 
you're all words. Why don’t you practice what you 
preach?” So I said to him, “I don’t preach. And further- 
more, don’t put words down because the patterns that 
people make with words are just like the patterns of 
ferns or of the marks on sea shells. They are a dance, 
and they are just as much a legitimate form of life as 
flowers.” And he said, “You're impossible.” 

But all of this is very important, and it is why, in 
certain methods of meditation and religious rituals, we 
use words in a way that is not ordinarily in accord 
with the use of words. Words are normally used to 
convey information, but, in many religious rituals, words 
are used musically for the sake of sound. In this way, 
one can liberate oneself from enthrallment with words. 
If you take any ordinary word like “body” and say it 
once, it seems to be quite sensible, but say it four or 


five times: “body, body, body, body, ..... ”, then you 
think, ‘what a funny noise”. Or say: “apple-dumpling, 
apple-dumpling, apple-dumpling..... It’s kind of a 
nice sound. 


This is one of the great methods of meditation, 
called mantra yoga, which uses sound for liberating 
consciousness. You can take all sorts of nonsense, chant 
it, and concentrate on the sounds quite apart from 


a ke 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS II 


anything they may mean. For this reason, the Catholic 

Church made a great mistake in deciding to celebrate 

Mass in the vernacular. Now everyone knows what it 

means and that it really was not so hot after all. Before, 
it was completely incomprehensible and had a sense of 
mystery to it, and if you knew how to use these words 
as a sadhana, a method of meditation, you could do 
very well with them. When monks are trained to recite 

the Divine Office, the teacher explains to the novice, 
“Don’t think about the meaning of the words. Just say 

the words with your mouth, and keep your conscious- 
ness on the presence of God.” By using words in this 
way you overcome the slavery to words. I have written 

a book of nonsense diddies to be used in this way. You 

get the rhythm going, as an incantation, and it becomes 

a way of getting beyond the bondage of thought. You 
cannot think without words, but if you preoccupy 
your consciousness with meaningless words, they can 
stop your thought process. Then, you simply dig the 

sound. Do you know what it is to dig the sound of 
anything? Anyone who has had a psychedelic ex- 
perience knows exactly what this means. I can only say 
that you go down into it, and into it, and into it, until 

suddenly you realize that the vibration you are listening 

to, or singing, is what there is. This is the energy of the 

cosmos. This is what is going on. 

Everything is a kind of pulsation of energy which 
in Zen Buddhism is called ‘suchness’ or ‘thatness’ — 
tathata. That is what we are all doing. Only, we look 


PLAY TO LIVE 


around, and here we all are — people. We have got 
faces on, and we talk, and we are supposed to be making 
sense, but actually we are just going, ‘“Da-da-da, 
da-da-da, da-da-da-da-da”, in a very complicated way. 
We are playing this life game, and if we not get with it, 
it passes us by. And that is alright. If you miss the bus 
that is your privelege. But it really is a great deal more 
fun to go with the dance, and to know that is what 
you are doing, instead of agonizing about the whole 
thing. Life is something that simply keeps happening. 
I know that we are all very unique, but if you con- 
centrate and look too closely, you get myopic about 
the uniqueness of each individual and say, “What a 
shame, that is never going to happen again’. On the 
other hand, if you came to Earth from Mars, every- 
one would look the same, and you wouldn't even be 
able to tell the difference between men and women. 
You would say, “Well, this is definitely something that 
keeps happening.” It all depends on what level of 
magnification you are looking at, and where you are 
putting your values. 


—45— 


2 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS Il 
Divine Madness 


would like to indulge in the discussion of a particu- 

larly virulent and dangerous form of divine madness 
called “falling in love”; which is, from a practical point 
of view, one of the most insane things you can do, or 
that can happen to you. In the eyes of a given woman 
or a given man, an opposite, who though to the eyes of 
everyone else is a perfectly plain and ordinary person, 
can appear to be a god or goddess incarnate; to be such 
an enchantment that one can say, in the words of an 
old song that probably dates me, “Every little breeze 
seems to whisper Louise.” This can be seen as a strangely 
disruptive and subversive experience in the conduct of 
human affairs because you never know when it will 
strike, or for what reason. Once you get into it, it is 
something like contracting a very chronic disease, and 
we sometimes try to resolve it by making it the basis 
for a marriage, which is an extraordinarily dangerous 
thing to do. 


—49— 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS III 


Western civilization has a curious tradition of the 
family which seems to be the most ridiculous composition 
of disparate ideas imaginable. When we go back to its 
origins in the Hebrew and Christian traditions, we find 
that the idea of marriage and the experience of falling 
in love are really rather separate things. In early agrarian 
cultures, no one ever chose their marriage partner. There 
are, of course, exceptions to this, and in the history of 
ancient Greece you occasionally find a woman who is 
called a parthenos, which has been mis-translated to 
“virgin”. The correct meaning of parthenos is a woman 
who chooses her own husband, and it therefore, has 
nothing strictly to do with a virgin, although, a woman 
who chooses her own husband might conceivably 
be a virgin. 

By and large, however, a marriage was an alliance 
of families. It was contracted not simply for the purpose 
of raising children, but also to create a social unit 
smaller than a village. The elders had an enormous 
voice in who their children were going to marry; and 
they would dicker amongst themselves and use go- 
betweens in considering not only whether this girl 
was suitable for their son, or visa versa, but also what 
kind of dowry she would bring, and whether it would 
be advantageous to the families to form such an alliance. 
Of course, until quite recent times, these things were 
always important in the marital affairs of royal families. 
As it is notorious, almost all royal families kept con- 
cubines and had outside arrangements when and if the 


—50— 


PLAY TO LIVE 


king or queen should happen to fall in love, and this 
simply prevented monogamy from becoming monotony. 
That is why, to this day, marriage is a civil or religious 
ceremony, the basis of which is a legal contract where 
one signs on the dotted line. There are all kinds of laws 
that relate to contracts, and this contract is a particu- 
larly difficult one to get out of. 

The rationale for this is quite obvious: society 
requires a secure environment for children, but also 
simply because it prefers to encourage the general 
stability of things. When people break up a marriage it 
is sort of unnerving for everyone. You see a couple and 
you think for a very long time that they are the happiest 
and most well-adjusted couple you have ever met. The 
next thing you know they have split up. You begin to 
see people breaking up all around and you think, “Now 
what goes on here? Are all my friends crazy? (Interest- 
ingly enough, we call it ‘breaking up’, as though 
something precious had been smashed; but depend- 
ing in how you evaluate it, it might be something 
different altogether). 

Into the feudal conception of marriage there came 
what was called ‘The Cult of Courtly Love’, which was 
largely a result of the poetic movement centered in 
Southern France during the Middle Ages — although 
its exact origin is something which scholars dispute. 
According to one theory, the knight or courtly lover, 
who was also a poet, would select a lady to be his 
heart’s desire — preferably a married lady — and he 


51 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS III 


would yearn for her, sing songs under her window, 
and send her messages with little tokens of his devo- 
tion. But, according to this one theory, he could never 
go to bed with her. Not only would that have been 
adultery, but it would have spoiled the state of being 
in love. The state of being in love was to always 
be in an unfulfilled and unhappy state. (This is the 
theory of Dennis deRougemont in his book, Love in 
the Western World, or Passion is Society. It has two 
different titles). 

This second theory is probably more realistic: It 
holds that the greatest ladies of the noble families were 
awfully bored because their husbands were always out 
hunting, making war, wenching, and so on. The ladies 
felt they had to have lovers too, and one can see why a 
great deal of poetry arose out of all this. My friend, 
Yanko Varda, always said that laws about sexual relation. 
ships should never be liberalized. He felt that there 
should always be strict disapproval of adultery and 
fornication because if it isn’t difficult to attain, it isn’t 
as much fun. In my book, Beyod Theology, | have 
worked out a whole theory of the Christian repression 
of sex, stating that the secret intent was to make people 
more interested in sex. If there were complete liber- 
ality and promiscuity in every direction, it would all 
become so easy that it might, indeed, be in danger of 
becoming a bore. Then people would seek other 
dissipations of perhaps a less healthy kind. 


PLAY TO LIVE 


So then, as a result of the gradual fusion of these 
two approaches to the realtionship of the sexes — the 
family alliance and the perpetual romance — we arrive 
at the idea of the romantic marriage in which the two 
trends are mis-allied, to say the very least. Herein, a 
person is supposed to fall in love with someone of their 
own choice (and naturally it has to be that way if you 
are going to fall in love), and then one must enter into 
that relationship with a legal contract in which you 
stand before a magistrate or a priest and so solemnly 
curse and swear that you will be faithful to each other 
until death do you part — which sometimes leads 
to murder. 

It seems to me perfectly obvious that if two 
young people who are extremely anxious to get into 
each other’s embraces have only one way of doing so, 
which under the circumstances is to enter into this 
contract, they will naturally be ready to promise 
anything to fulfill this desire. While there are indeed 
many legally married couples who have very happy 
alliances that goes on all of their lives, we do not hear 
about them because good news is never news. Only the 
unhappy couples make the newspapers, and there are 
an enormous number of them. 

So far as I know there is no way of making a 
marriage work. Every attempt to make a marriage work, 
secretly, within the breast of each partner, builds up 
hostility. I know about this as I am speaking from a 
certain amount of bitter experience. You can work very 


—53— 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS III 


hard to keep a marriage together, and as you do so 
you may fail to recognize that you are being untrue to 
your own emotions. You might think, “Well, I must 
control my own emotions for the sake of the children, 
and for the sake of society.” So you work on it, and 
work on it, and one of the ways of working on it is to 
try to convince yourself that you are in love. You may 
go through the pretense of love and you may hypnotize 
yourself with loving language towards your partner. 
You might go out of your way to make little lists to 
remember attentions you must pay, to keep a diary in 
which you note your wedding anniversary because you 
are very liable to forget it. Nevertheless, the more you 
work at it, the more you are building up promises and 
expectations for something which you are probably 
not going to come through with at the level of deep 
feeling. Everyone is well aware of this, and you know it 
in the back of your mind, and so you increasingly 
build yourself into a wall-to-wall trap. The mutual 
hostility grows worse and worse, such that one psycho- 
logist was recently known to ask a patient, “With whom 
are you in love against?” 

Indeed, the most awkward form of falling in love 
occurs between people who are already married to 
someone else. This is invariably a cataclysmic and 
disruptive experience in our present social order. Today 
there are many people still living out Victorian novels 
in which the great thing is when two people who are 
madly in love with each other say, “Well, it is best for 


—54— 


PLAY TO LIVE 


us not to see each other anymore”, and so this fan- 
tastically mad experience of love is denied, swept under 
the rug, and strangled. What should one do? 

As I have often said, I am not a preacher, and 
I therefore do not know what one should do. But I 
would like to reflect a bit more on this particular form 
of madness, and to raise again a very disturbing ques- 
tion: Is it only when you are in love with another 
person that you see them as they really are? In the 
ordinary way, when you are not in love with a person, 
could it be that you see only a fragmented version of 
that being? When you are in love with someone, you 
do indeed see them as a divine being. Now, suppose 
that is what they truly are and that your eyes have 
by your beloved been opened, in which case your 
beloved is serving to you as a kind of guru. This is 
the reason why there is a form of sexual yoga which is 
based upon the idea that man and woman are to each 
other as a mutual guru and student. Through a tre- 
mendous outpouring of psychic energy in total devotion 
and worship for this other person, who is respectively 
god or goddess, you realize, by total fusion and contact, 
the divine center in them. At once it bounces back to 
you and you discover your own. 

I do not regard falling in love as just a sexual 
infatuation because it is always more than that. When 
you fall in love it is a much more serious involvement. 
You simply cannot forget this person. You feel miserable 
when not in their presence and you are always yearning 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS III 


and saying, ‘‘Let’s see more of each other. Let’s get 
together. We are completely entangled”. Here we 
have introduced what I will call a spiritual element. 
The Hindus were sensible enough to realize that sexual 
intercourse was a means of awakening and enlighten- 
ment, and therefore, it was surrounded with a sort of 
religious ritual and meditative art. Sexual yoga is 
designed to allow the feelings of mutual love, which 
are the extent of grand passion, to be an extremely 
fitting fulfillment and expression. 

Ordinarily, most sexual intercourse is a matter of 
wham-bam-and-thank-you-mam. It does not go on for 
very long, and so the passions discharge very quickly. 
Sexual yoga is what might be called contemplative sex, 
as distinct from active sex. Statues have been found on 
the walls of Hindu temples and in Tibetan shrines that 
have a figure, usually in the accourtrements of a 
bodhisattva or buddha, sitting in the lotus posture with 
a feminine counterpart wrapped around him. They are 
in complete contact, not so much kissing as touching 
noses or looking straight into each other's eyes, but 
they are in sexual union. In this sort of posture, (and it 
takes a light girl), it is rather difficult to wiggle, so they 
stay quite still. While in this posture, the feeling of the 
intensity of love builds up a tremendous electrical energy 
such that they are actually aware of an exchange of 
forces that can be described as a sensation of the ‘one’ 
physically melting into the ‘other’. This union may 
last for a very long time, and in this way it touches 


PLAY TO LIVE 


dimensions of personal relationship and interchange that 
we do not ordinarily have with anyone. The point of it 
is that by having such deep union with a woman, a man 
completes his nature, as does a woman with a man. 

Every man has a feminine element and every 
woman has a masculine element. An integrated person 
is one in whom both are developed. For this reason, 
when you read about the physical characteristics of a 
buddha or a bodhisattva, you will find that you are 
reading a physical description of an androgynous 
being. It is never mentioned in textbooks, but a buddha 
is supposed to have a retractable penis like a cat. This 
symbolizes that his genital organ is simultaneously 
male and female. Now this is something which con- 
tains a very important message for our Western culture 
because here we have a cult machismo; the cult of the 
all-male man. Naturally, as a counterpart of that we 
have the all-woman woman, typified by the frilly-fluffy 
kind, or the overly dramatic type who is frantically 
jealous and makes love with her nails in your back. 
Between the all male-male and the all woman-woman, 
there is simply no possibility for relationship. They 
have nothing in common. 

In the average suburban American home when 
there is a cocktail party, or any social juxtaposition of 
thesexes, you very quickly see that all the wives gather 
at one end of the patio and all the husbands gather at 
the other end to talk their respective forms of shop. 
This is particularly because the American male, espe- 


—57— 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS III 


cially the blue collar male and a certain type of business 
male, is very much afraid of sharing any feminine 
characteristics; whether they be external movements 
and clothing or internal feelings, they are reluctant to 
show tenderness. It is possible that they are afraid of 
developing their femininity because that might lead 
them to homosexuality. Many men are so terrified of 
this that they cultivate an exterior of tough masculinity. 
They often become the sort of people who readily vol- 
unteer to be sergeants in the Marine Corps, police officers, 
bouncers, test pilots, and various Hemmingway types. 
We have an enormous number of them, and sometimes 
young men who are the children of these types realize 
their fathers are pretty mixed up. Suddenly they start 
growing their hair long or going around in outlandish 
costumes full of color, and everybody in the old culture 
is scared to death that all their sons are becoming queers. 

So then, to return to the main stream of this 
problem: falling in love is a thing that strikes like 
lightening and is, therefore, extremely analagous to the 
mystical vision. We do not really know how people 
obtain the mystical vision, and there is not as yet a very 
clear rationale as to why it happens. However, we do 
know that it happens to many people who never did 
anything to look for it. Many people, especially in 
adolescence, have suddenly had the mystical vision 
without any warning, and with no previous interest in 
this kind of thing. On the other hand, many people 
who have practiced yoga or zen disciplines for years 


PLAY TO LIVE 


and years have never seen it. In both classes, of course, 
there are exceptions. There are those who have had 
this experience spontaneously, and there are those 
who through the practice of yoga or zen have attained it. 
As yet, we are not clear as to why it comes about, or 
if there is any method of attaining it. The best approach 
seems to be to give up the whole idea of getting it be- 
cause it is quite unpredictable, and like falling in love, 
it is capricious, and therefore crazy. 

If you should be so fortunate as to encounter either 
of these experiences, it seems to me to be a total denial 
of life to refuse it. What we have to admit in our 
society, so that we can contain this kind of madness, 
is a far more realistic marriage arrangement that can 
contain the possibility of falling in love. If you go into it 
as a love affair which may simply be hot pants, to then 
set up a family in which each person expects of the 
other to always be in love with them, then, if in that 
context you fall in love with someone else, it is out of 
necessity disruptive of the marriage and of the family. 
If marriage were based more on the old idea of the 
reasonable contract between two people who wish to 
bring up children, who are expected to at least be good 
friends, and who can allow each other to have their own 
freedom; then, when love strikes it can be tolerated 
within this arrangement; provided you are not to be 
so unreasonable as to go on and think, “Well, since 
I have fallen in love with someone else, I must marry 
them” — that would be totally ridiculous. 


—59— 


VEIL OF THOUGHTS III 


We can structure the necessary, stable, social 
institution of a family without it being constantly 
threatened of floundering on the rocks of love. When 
people marry and they take any vows at all to each 
other, they say they will always be true to each other, 
usually in the sense of meaning, “I will always love 
you’. If instead they meant, “I will always be truthful 
to you and J will not pretend that my feelings towards 
you are other than what they are”, then marriage could 
be an arrangement that would set people free. You 
would say: “I marry you because | think you are a 
reasonable person to live with, and therefore, I want 
you to be you. I don’t want you to be someone else. 
I don’t want you to be a rubber stamp of me — think 
how boring that would be.” 

Marriage should be an alliance of two people who 
cooperate with each other in certain ways. If it should 
so occur that they are of immense sexual attraction 
to each other, so much the better, but this should not 
be the primary factor in entering into marriage. Admit- 
tedly, you must be to a certain extent attracted to each 
other, otherwise there would be no progeny. This seems 
to me to be a sensible and reasonable view, and because 
it is sensible and reasonable, it can accomodate what is 
not sensible and reasonable, which is falling in love. 
We should regard marriage, especially if it is to be 
called ‘holy matrimony’, as a mutual setting free of two 
people to live together in freedom, and therefore, in 
responsibility. The present situation, although it is 


PLAY TO LIVE 


pretending to be responsible, is extremely irresponsible 
because it is allowing dishonesty with respect to the 
way you feel toward another person. 

Interestingly, we say ‘falling’ into love, and not 
‘rising’ into love. Love is an act of surrender to another 
person; it is total abandonment. In love you give yourself 
over, you let go, and you say, “I give myself to you. 
Take me, do anything you like with me.” To many 
people this seems quite mad because it means letting 
things get out of control, and all sensible people keep 
things in control. So, is it sensible to find security through 
vigilance, police and guards? Watch it! Who is going to 
watch the guards? Actually, the course of wisdom, what 
is really sensible, is to let go, to commit oneself, to give 
oneself up; and this is considered quite mad. It is thus 
that we are driven to the strange conclusion than in 
madness lies sanity. 


= 


4. 


BEING IN THE WAY 


he development of self-consciousness and the abil- 

ity to reflect on one’s own knowledge is the great 
human predicament — it is simultaneously a blessing 
and a curse. To be happy and to know you are happy is 
the cup of life overflowing, but there is of course the 
reverse to this which is to be miserable and to know 
you are miserable. I am often reminded of the limerick: 


There was a young man who said: 

“Though it seems that I know that I know, 
What I would like to see, is the I that knows me, 
When I know, that I know, that I know.” 


One can see how a person, by becoming too aware 
of himself, can get in the way of his own existence. The 
Taoists have a way of dealing with this problem. They 
practice what is called ‘fasting the heart’, which is 
connected with the idea of being empty. In Chinese, 
this word for heart does not mean heart in the physi- 


a 


BEING IN THE WAY 


ological sense, it means heart-mind. A person who has 
mushin, no mind or heart, is a very high order of person. 
It means that their psychic center does not get in its own 
way. It operates as if it were not there. 

The Taoist philosopher, Chuang-tzu wrote: 


When the geese fly over the water, 

And are reflected in the water, 

The geese do not intend to cast their reflection, 
And the water has no mind to retain their image. 


This is the fundamental Taoist idea of being absent as a 
condition of being present. For as Chuang-tzu noted: 


When your belt is comfortable you do not feel it, 
When your shoes are comfortable it is as if you 
were not wearing any. 


This same principle is presented in Lao-tzu’s Tao 
Te Ching, which was written for several purposes, but 
is primarily a book of wisdom for governors. You may 
take it as a guide to mystical law, but principally it was 
an introduction to the art of ruling. Suppose the President 
of the United States were as unknown to you as the 
local sanitary inspector, or the man who looks after the 
drains and sewage disposal. This is not a glamorous 
figure, but for that very reason he probably does his 
job more efficiently than the President. Perhaps if the 
President were someone quite anonymous, one whom 
we did not have to think about, he would be a very 
good ruler. In just the same way, for example, unless 


PLAY TO LIVE 


you are sick you do not have to attend to the govern- 
ment of your own body. It happens automatically. It 
goes on day after day and the better it is, the less you 
have to think about it, and the less you think about it 
the better it is. 

The second word in the title of the Tao Te Ching, 
te, is ordinarily translated as virtue; as in the healing 
virtues of a plant. It means the excellence of things in 
the sense that a tree excels at being a tree, and nobody 
really knows how it does it. There is no way of imitating 
a tree. The only way is to be one. So, in the same way, 
when a human being shows extraordinary skill at some- 
thing, they excel in it naturally. 

Te is a way of talking about a human being who 
has learned to live in harmony with the Tao. It is like a 
situation in which we are floating in a river and the 
river keeps carrying us along. Some of the people in 
the river are swimming against it, but they are still 
being carried along. Others have learned that the art of 
the thing is to swim with it, and they are carried along 
too. The only difference is that those swimming with 
the river know they are being carried along, but the 
people who are swimming against it think they are 
swimming in the opposite direction. Really they are not. 
You can swim against the river and pretend not to be 
flowing with it, but you still are. A person who is 
no longer making the pretense, however, who knows 
that he must go with the river, suddenly acquires, 
behind everything that he does, the force of the river. 


ae e 


BEING IN THE WAY 


The whole river is behind him and he can subtly direct 
his course as a ship can use its rudder, or more skill- 
fully still, as a sailboat uses the wind. When a sailboat 
tacks and goes in a direction contrary to the wind, it is 
still using the wind to blow it along. The art of sailing 
is Taoism in perfection. It is a highly skillful art. The 
man who rows a boat uses effort, but the man wh the man who 
has the intelligence to put. up a sail uses the magic 
of nature. 

I remember once | was looking in the open air and 
one of those glorious little thistle-down things came 
floating by. I reached up and brought it down and it 
looked as if it were struggling to get away, as if | 
caught an insect by one leg. At first I thought, “Well, 
it’s not really doing that, it’s just the wind blowing it.” 
But then I thought again, “Really? Only the wind blow- 
ing it? Surely it is the structure of this thing which in 
cooperation with the existence of wind enables it to 
move like an animal; but using the wind’s effort, not 
its own.” 

In this way, the meaning of te is that kind of intelli- 
gence which, without your using very much effort, gets 
everything to cooperate with you. One example is never 
forcing other people to agree with you, but giving them 
the notion that the idea you wanted them to have was 
their own. This is preeminently a feminine art, but any- 
one who really wants a lover learns to cultivate it. The 
secret is never to pursue the other person because then 
you will appear too aggressive and they will think you 


PLAY TO LIVE 


are obviously someone who has had difficulty in finding 
lovers before, and therefore, you must have some 
undesirably awful thing about you. If you are slightly 
difficult to get, however, they somehow get the idea 
that you are a highly prized object and so they pursue. 
It is the same way when you want to teach a baby 
to swim. One thing you can do is to put the baby in 
the water with you and start swimming backwards, 
creating a vacuum. This pulls the baby along. In both 
cases, the principle is the same, and if you have patience, 
you can always do this. 

In this state of being in accord with Tao, the 
effortless flow of nature, there is a certain feeling of 
weightlessness which is similar to the weightlessness 
that people feel when they get into outer space, or 
when they go deep into the ocean. In these instances 
there is the sensation that you are not carrying your 
body around, like the Taoist sage, Lieh-tzu, who had 
a reputation for being able to ride on the wind. As 
Chuang-tzu says, 


It is easy to stand still, the difficulty 
is to walk without touching the ground. 


Likewise, when Suzuki was asked what it is like 
to have satori he said: 


It is just like ordinary everyday experience 
except about two inches off the ground. 


—69— 


BEING IN THE WAY 


What is this weightlessness? In one_sense it means 
that you are not moving around in constant opposition 
to yourself. Most people are in constant opposition to 
themselves because they think that they must be in 
control. When the human being developed the power 
to be aware of himself, to know that he knows, and man 


had the sensation of being in charge, he got anxious. 


This was the Fall of Man. This was when he first 
started asking himself, “Have I done all that should 
be done?”, “Have I taken enough factors into con- 
sideration?”, “Am I aware enough of myself?” As Lao- 
tzu says, vanen the great Tao was lost, oe came 
nobody talks about how you ‘ought to on _unless 
things have gone radically wrong. There can be no 
conception of faithful ministers of State unless there 
are alot of lousy politicians around. There is constantly 
in the tradition of Taoism the idea that all moral 
preaching is confusion. There was an alleged conver- 
sation between Confucius and Lao-tzu in which Lao- 
tzu asked Confucius to explain what is charity and 
duty to one’s neighbor. Confucius gave him a little 
sermon on giving up one’s interest and working for 
others, whereupon Lao-tzu said: 


What stuff! Sir, regard the universe. 
The stars come out invariably every night. 
The sun rises and sets, the birds flock 

and migrate without exception, 


70 


PLAY TO LIVE 


All flowers and trees grow upwards 
without exception. 

You, by your talk of charity and duty to one’s 
neighbor, you are just introducing confusion 
into the empire. 

Your attempt to eliminate self is a positive 
manifestation of selfishness. 

You are like a person beating a drum in search of 
a fugitive. 

All talk about selflessness, about being virtuous, 
or enlightened, or integrated, or self-actualized or non- 
neurotic, attests to the fact that it has not happened, 
and will in fact stand in the way of its happening. 

There is an amusing story about Lieh-tzu hearing 
of a very great master and going to study with him. 
The master lived in a small hut, and Lieh-tzu would sit 
outside the hut, but the master paid no attention to 
him. (This is the way with Taoist masters, they do not 
want students because they feel they have nothing to 
teach.) After a year of sitting outside the hut, Lieh-tzu 
was fed up with waiting so he went away. Soon he got 
very regretful about this and thought he really should 
make a try so he went back to the master, who said, 
“Why this ceaseless coming and going?” So Lieh-tzu 
sat there again and tried to control his mind in such 
a way that he would not think of the differences between 
gain and loss. The point, you see, is to try to live in 
such a way that everything is neither an advantage nor 
a disadvantage. 


a7 = 


BEING IN THE WAY 


There is another story which makes this point 
quite clearly: 


Once upon a time there was a Chinese farmer 
whose horse ran away, and all the neighbors 
came around to commiserate that evening, say- 
ing, "So sorry to hear your horse has run away. 
That's too bad." 

And the farmer said, "Maybe." 

The next day the horse came back bringing 
seven wild horses with it and everybody came 
around that evening and said, “Oh, isn’t that lucky! 
What a wonderful turn of events, you now have 
eight horses!" 

And the farmer said, “Maybe.” 

The next day the farmer's son tried to break 
one of these horses to ride, but was thrown off 
and broke his leg. And all the neighbors came 
around and said, "Oh, dear, that’s too bad." 

And the farmer said, “Maybe.” 

The following day the conscription officers came 
around to draft people into the army and they 
rejected his son because he had a broken leg. 

All the people came around again and said, 
"Isn't that just great!" 

And the farmer said, “Maybe.” 


This story illustrates.the attitude of not thinking 
of things in terms of gain or loss, advantages or dis- 
advantages, because you never really know. We never 


PLAY TO LIVE 


know whether something is fortune or misfortune, 
we only know the momentary changes as they alter 
our sense of hope about things. A Taoist is wise enough 
to understand that there isn’t any fixed good or bad, 
and so his point of view is what is called ‘non-choosing’. 
Lieh-tzu attempted to keep his mind in a state of non- 
choosing, and it is a very difficult thing to overcome 
one’s habits of feeling and thinking in this respect. 
After Lieh-tzu had practiced this for a year, the master 
looked at him, sort of recognized he was there, and 
after another year’s practice he invited him to come 
and sit inside his hut. Then something changed in 
Lieh-tzu and he did not try anymore to control his 
mind. What he did, he put in this way: 


I let my ears hear whatever they wanted to hear. 

I let my eyes see whatever they wanted to see. 

I let my feet move wherever they wanted to go, 
and I let my mind think whatever it wanted to think. 


Then he said it was a very strange sensation because 
all his bodily existence seemed “to melt and become 
transparent and have no weight, and I did not know 
whether I was walking on the wind or the wind was 
walking on me.” That is what is meant by ‘fasting the 
heart’. In the ordinary way we say, “Well, that made 
quite an impression on me”, as if you were a slate or a 
blackboard upon which life makes an impression. 
We say, “Here are all these events, I am the observer, 
I remember them, and they make animpression on me.” 


BEING IN THE WAY 


But in the psychology of Taoism there is no difference 
between ‘you’ as observer and whatever it is that you 
observe. The only thing that is you is the observation 
of life from a certain point of view. We create an oppo- 
sition between the thinker and the thought, the expe- 
riencer and the experience, the knower and the known. 
This is because we think about knowledge in terms of 
certain metaphors such as the stylis on the writing 
sheet, or as the reflection in the mirror. All of these 
kinds of images come into our idea of knowledge. 

The Taoist theory of knowledge is quite different. 
There is not a knower facing the known. It would be 
more like saying that if there is any knower at all it 
contains the known. Your mind is not in your head, 
your head is in your mind. Your mind, understood 
from the point of view of vision, is space. All that we 
call space contains the myriads of shapes and colors. 
It does not reflect them as a mirror, but it is the ab- 
sense which guarantees their presence, and it is their 
presence which guarantees its absence. 

Differences, borders, lines, surfaces, and boundaries 
do not really divide things from each othér at all; they 
join them together. All boundaries are held in common. 
When you understand this, you see that the sense of 
being ‘me’ is exactly the same sensation as being one 
with the whole cosmos. You do not need to go through 
some other weird, different, or odd kind of experience 
to feel in total connection with everything. Once you 
get the clue, you see that the sense of unity is inseparable 


—74— 


PLAY TO LIVE 


from the sense of difference. The secret is that what is 
‘other’ eventually turns out to be you. That is the element 

of surprise in life — to find the thing that is most 

alien to you. If you go out at night and look at the stars 

you will realize that they are millions and millions and 

billions of miles away — vast configurations out in 

space! You can lie back and look at that and say, “Whew! 

Surely I hardly matter. I am just a tiny little peek- 
a-boo on this weird spot of dust called Earth, and all 

that out there was going on billions of years before 

I was born, and will still go on billions of years after 

I die.” Nothing may seem stranger to you than that — 

more different from you. But there comes a point when 

you will say, “Why, that’s me!” And when you know 

that, you know you never die. 


8 


DEATH, BIRTH 
AND THE UNBORN 


n this moment you are not born and you do not die. 

The you that is here now is never going to die, it will 
be an entirely different you who dies, sufficient unto 
the day as the trouble thereof. This idea is similar to 
the Heraclitus philosophy that you never step into the 
same stream twice, because it is a different stream each 
time. Likewise, in the early writings of Chinese Buddhist 
scholars: 


“The sun in its course does not move. 
Every time it seems to move, 
it is a different sun.” 


Today it is a very popular point of view among 
physicists that there is nothing moving around in the 
universe, that there is only motion, there is only pattern 
— no atoms of time and space. The Islamic people 
also have a theory about this; they say that God is 
creating the universe every instant. Just as frames of a 
movie give the illusion of motion, all instantly created 


—79— 


DEATH, BIRTH, AND THE UNBORN 


universes in a series give the illusion that something is 
going along, but nothing is going along at all. The 
notion of there being a wave, a substantial peak of 
water moving along, is also an illusion, for the water 
is merely going up and down. 

The Chinese word wunien, which we translate 
as ‘no thought’, has the meaning of not allowing a 
series of thoughts to link up in such a way that you 
become bound by the chain of continuity. Thus, the 
awareness of change is a matter of establishing con- 
tinuities between moments. One could say there is 
no change, there is only the moment; or one could 
twist this around and say there are no substantial 
moments, the only real thing is flow. Both of these 
extreme points of view will induce the same state of 
consciousness. If on one hand you say there is only 
the here and now, and that is all you have to worry 
about, that will induce a state of consciousness which 
will be exactly the same state as induced by the feeling 
that everything is flow and nothing can hold it — 
so relax. Whether you are in the stream flowing with it, 
or sitting alongside the stream letting it go by, both 
illustrate the same sensation, only the metaphor is 
different. 


PLAY TO LIVE 


Found in the Pali-Buddhist scriptures, in a book 
called Itivuttaka, is a phrase where Buddha says: 


“There is an unborn, unoriginated, uncreated and 
unformed. Were there not, there would be no 
liberation from the world of the born, originated, 
created, and formed." 


This theory of the unborn is embodied in the two 
Chinese characters, fu-shy; the first one ‘not’, and the 
second one, ‘arising’. The idea of an unborn aspect of 
ourselves may seem odd to many people in the West. 
If someone asks, “Where do you think you are going 
when you die?”, and someone answers, “I don’t think 
I am going anywhere”, a Westerner would ordinarily 
interpret this as meaning “I think I shall be totally 
annihilated, just blown out like a light and that will be 
that.” The Zen meaning of this reply is: “I am not going 
anywhere when J die because I have never been born.” 
You cannot die without being born any more than you 
can get divorced without being married. It is all a 
question of where you draw the line in defining who 
and what you are. Do you draw the line at just that 
much of you which you are aware of, just that much 
which your consciousness can catch hold of? Ordi- 
narily, that is what we call our ego. The question is, 
how much of yourself can you catch hold of, and who 
is doing the catching? This aspect of you is unborn in 
the sense that nobody can ever catch hold of it, nobody 
can define it, nobody can give it a name, and nobody 


DEATH, BIRTH, AND THE UNBORN 


can pin it down. Yet, this is the really important aspect 

of you. In the case of the iceberg, only one seventh of it 

is above water. In our case, hardly anything at all 

is above water, just this little flicker of conscious at- 
tention with which we inspect the world, mostly in a 

linear fashion. 

So, that which you do not know of yourself, and 
that which is never controlled by you in the way that 
you think you control things voluntarily, is the major, 
central part of you. This was the original truth in the 
astrological idea that when you drew a map of a person’s 
soul you drew a map of the universe as it was centered 
upon the time and place of the individual nativity. I do 
not happen to believe very much in popular astrology, 
but there is this idea involved in it, which is that the 
soul is not something in the body, rather the body is 
something in the soul. The soul is not some individual 
spook, it is the whole network of relationships ranging 
throughout everything that there is. The “here and now” 
is like a knot ina system of strings making a fishing net, 
but the whole vast network is the soul. Everyone has 
the same soul, but we all experience it from different 
points of view, in different places, at different times. 
This soul that we all share is the totality of the whole 
process going on, and it keeps on going in us. Every 
single individual is a function of the whole energy. 
Whatever it is that is shining the sun is embodied in 
you. It is not something that happens to you. There is 
no seperate ego which is clobbered by this process. The 


PLAY TO LIVE 


feeling of being an ego is this process, and this means 
that your ego is not really an ego at all. It is a put-up 
job. It is a mask with which the whole thing is per- 
forming. You may say, “Well, I would like to get 
control of this thing, I feel sort of pushed around. All 
of this that is happening under the surface of my 
consciousness cannot be known, cannot be predicted, 
and isn’t me.” But this is merely an illusion. You have 
no need to object to being pushed around. There isn’t 
anybody being pushed around except the whole system 
itself. It is pushing itself around, there are no victims. 
There is the idea that there are victims, the experience 
of being a victim, but this is again an illusion. The 
whole thing is an illusion in the sense of the old latin 
work luderi, meaning to play. It is playing at being ina 
mess; and you can only know what playing at being in 
fine shape is if you also know what playing in a mess is. 
We alternate, or vibrate, between these two extremes. 

The point is that you, the you that is really doing 
it, is unborn and unknown. It is never an object of 
knowledge, and it is not something that you can catch 
hold of because you do not need to. Just as the sun 
does not need to shine on itself, a knife to cut itself, 
the eye to see itself, or the teeth to bite themselves, 
so all the way around, this whatever-it-is does not need 
to catch hold of itself and control itself. 

Suppose that in order to pick up a pen with my 
thumb and forefinger I had to move the other fingers 
around and push that thumb and forefinger together so 


DEATH, BIRTH, AND THE UNBORN 


that they could pick up the pen. That would be kind of 
messy, wouldn’t it? The hand doesn’t have to catch 
hold of itself to control itself. The hand doesn’t know 
how it controls itself, it just does it. The centipede can 
organize a hundred legs without having to think about 
it. So, in the same way, the Hindu gods do not know 
how they manage to be omnipotent; their myriads of 
arms are a symbol that the divine power does everything 
without explaining it and without having to know in 
terms of words how it is done. I assume the Christian 
God, who is supposed to be able to explain it all in 
words, is a big talker. “In the Beginning there was 
the Word...” — he would have to sit around for all 
eternity telling all those angels and saints how it was 
done. Words can only describe the singletracked, whereas, 
the universe is not single-tracked. It is everything 
happening everywhere, altogether, all at once. Words 
are too slow to keep track of that, and so we organize 
our bodies without having to think about it. If we had 
to think about it, we couldn't do it. I hear people say, 
I don’t do it, it happens to me.” As though their body 
is an occurance that they find themselves mixed up with. 
That is absolutely backwards thinking. That is crazy. 
Your body is you; and you are a lot more than your 
body because your body is what is continuous with 
everything else that is going on as far as the farthest 
galaxies that can be concieved. It exists in and as a 
function of that whole situation. That is you. 


PLAY TO LIVE 


Deepdown, fundamentally, you are the unborn. 
You never had a beginning and you do not have an 
end. You did not come into being and you never go out 
of being. What we call individual things, individual 
wiggles, individual waves, are pulses in the pattern; 
they come and they go. They are born and they die, 
and they are going all the time. But the whole thing, 
beyond these cycles of birth and death, is always there; 
and that is the unborn. 

There was a Zen master of the seventeenth century 
in Japan named Bankei-Eitaku, who was enormously 
successful in conveying Zen to very simple people. He 
made a great point of the idea of the unborn, and of 
learning to trust the wisdom of the unconscious — that 
vast, limitless aspect of our nature which is totally 
beyond our control. Bankei is a notable person histor- 
ically because he was the roshi of one of the greatest, 
most beautiful, Zen monasteries in Kyoto, Myoshinji. 
And he did a very interesting thing, in that he left 
no disciples or successors. Ordinarily, a Zen teacher 
passes his authority on to someone else, or to several 
people, and gives them his inca, which means seal of 
approval. This confirms that they have realized en- 
lightenment under the master’s guidance and are 
therefore authorized to teach in his school. But Bankei 


DEATH, BIRTH, AND THE UNBORN 


did not leave anyone, and this is considered a very 
fine accomplishment. It is said in a Zen poem of a wise 
man: 


Entering a forest he does not disturb 
a blade of grass, entering the water 
he does not make a ripple. 


This saying goes back to the Buddha’s own saying in 
the Dhammapada, that the path of the wise one is like 
the tracks of birds in the sky, nobody knows they have 
been around. Likewise, when you see a_ perform- 
ance of a very great artist it looks absolutely uncontrived, 
as if it is happening naturally. Whatever discipline 
has gone into it, whatever skill, whatever learning, 
is not apparent. In the same way, when you construct 
a house you build scaffolding. When the time comes 
to finish the house all the scaffolding is taken down 
and vanishes. 

The French philosopher, deChardin, points out 
that in the course of evolution the peduncles disappear. 
Do you know what a peduncle is? When an amoeba 
splits, or when two globules of oil in a solution come 
out of one, first the original ball turns into an oval, 
like a capsule, and it gets thinner and thinner in the 
middle until it breaks apart and you have two tear- 
shaped forms. The little projections on the tear-shapes, 
the points, are peduncles. As the two globules drift 
apart they become oval again and the peduncles vanish. 
It may well be, for example, that all our roads, wires, 


PLAY TO LIVE 


and systems of communications are peduncles; that, 
if our civilization successfully continues, all roads will 
vanish, the wires will completely disappear, and even- 
tually radio and electronics of all kinds will be unnec- 
essary. People will communicate telepathically and we 
will feel ourselves to be one great organism. Who knows? 
The whole thing may be a peduncle which, after teaching 
us something, will simply vanish. 

Newtonian mechanics, the idea that the universe 
can be explained by analogy with billiards, is a peduncle 
idea. Although it was an essential step that took us 
from one place to another, it has dropped away. We 
now have quantum mechanics instead. When you get 
the car, you drop the horse and buggy; when you get 
the plane, you drop the car; and when you become a 
star rover, then you drop the plane. So, to leave no 
trace is to leave no peduncle. This is always considered 
admirable in Zen character. Many masters might pride 
themselves on the number of disciples they have, but 
the really good teacher doesn’t have any students. They 
all go away. They don’t stick around and say, “Yes, 
well, I belong to the society that was created by (so- 
and-so)” and “I am a member of (such-and-such).” A 
really good teacher's students do not identify with that. 
To the extent that any religious teacher leaves behind 
disciples to carry on, they invariably ruin it. The origi- 
nal spirit of Christianity was completely destroyed 
by the disciples of Christ who organized it, boosted it, 
and so on. The smart teacher leaves no disciples. He 


S87 = 


DEATH, BIRTH, AND THE UNBORN 


helps all kinds of people, and to the degree that he 
helps them they are set free; they do no stick around. 
And this is what happened with this man, Bankei. 

Bankei was a contemporary of Hakuin, another 
Zen master. Hakuin was a most remarkable and form- 
idable man, but he left eighty disciples who are all 
on the books as having inherited his seal. Modern Zen 
in Japan is largely descended from Hakuin as his 
methods have prevailed. He used the way of koan 
study which is now used in the Rinzai sect. There is 
nothing wrong with this method, but Bankei’s technique 
was very subtle. 

The following is a talk that Bankei gave about the 
unborn mind: 


The mind begotten by and given to each of us by 
our parents is none other than the Buddha-mind, 
birthless and immaculate, sufficient to manage all 
that life throws up to us. 

Suppose that at this very instant while you face 
me listening, a crow caws and a sparrow twitters 
somewhere behind you. Without any intention on 
your part to distinguish between these sounds, 
you hear each distinctly. Well, we are to be in this 
mind from now on, and our school will be known 
as the Buddha-mind school.... All of you are 
Buddhas because the birthless, which each posses- 
ses, is the beginning and the basis of all. 


PLAY TO LIVE 


Now, if the Buddha-mind is birthless, it is neces- 
sarily immortal. For, how can what has never 
been born perish? You have all encountered the 
phrase, ‘birthless and imperishable’ in the sutras, 
but hitherto you have not had the slightest proof 
of this truth. Indeed, I suppose like most people 
you have memorized this phrase while being 
ignorant of the fact of birthlessness. When I was 
twenty-five I realized that nonbirth is all-sufficient 
to life and since then, for forty years, I have been 
proving it to people just like you. 


Bankei is saying that we all inherit the Buddha- 
mind, birthless and immaculate, which is “sufficient to 
manage all that life throws up to us.” You can sit around 
and worry and prepare as to what you are going to do 
if you get in a very serious jam, but you have, auto- 
matically, an innate capacity to take care of the situation 
as and when it arises. 

Let us suppose you are going to get cancer and 
you start to think about how you might react to that. 
Will you be able to endure it? Will you be able to 
do this, that, and the other? As you prepare a defensive 
attitude to this experience, you naturally get more and 
more worried. You may think, “Well, I don’t want to 
be a coward. I don’t want to appear to my friends to go 
to pieces and start screaming: bloody murder, and 
I don’t want to fall apart because that would be so un- 
diginfied. I hope I can end my days in a noble fashion 


— 89 — 


DEATH, BIRTH, AND THE UNBORN 


and not be a nuisance to people.” One can spend many 
nights awake with such thoughts, trying to get ready 
somehow. Although you may put money in the bank 
and have it there for a future eventuality, which is 
a kind of practical preparation, psychological pre- 
paration is a waste of time. When you are going into 
a very important interview and you think ahead of 
time how you are going to start out — what sort of 
ploy to use, and how you are going to speak to this 
person — it never works. 

Jesus said a very curious thing to his disciples 
about preaching. He told them never to think in advance 
what they were going to say because at the right time 
the Holy Spirit would give it to them. In schools where 
they train clergymen to preach, they always concentrate 
on preparation. “Have three points: beginning, middle, 
and end; and know exactly where you are going.” 
Obviously, they do not believe in the Holy Spirit! It is 
something that is all very well, but “Praise the Lord, 
and pass the ammunition!” 

We have this total lack of being able to let it 
happen. This is not to say that one needs no training 
or discipline in anything, that is all very important, 
but every discipline that you learn, whether artistic or 
scientific, must always be subordinate to your sponta- 
neity. Fundamentally, discipline is always to be at the 
disposal of something you do not know about and 
cannot control. For example, I have studied writing 
and speaking for years, but I never know what I am 


—90— 


PLAY TO LIVE 


going to say next. It either happens or it doesn’t. This is 
because it is being done by something that is not in my 
control at all. That is why Socrates used to say that he 
did not speak his philosophy but that there was a divine 
being that spoke through him. 

All people who are creative in any way what- 
so-ever sometimes get the feeling that there is some 
other agency, that they are simply a secretary through 
which something happens. In the same way, when you 
reach a certain level of proficiency in playing a musica] 
instrument, you start to get the feeling that the instru- 
ment is playing the music. Or, when you obtain a 
certain facility in using a brush, especially in writing 
Chinese characters, it suddenly seems the brush is an 
enchanted being which is carrying you away and using 
you to write characters. In singing, sometimes you can 
feel that the song is singing the singer. It is the strange 
feeling that it is happening by itself rather than that 
you are doing it. This is exactly why the Chinese use 
the phrase, tzu-jan, ‘of itself so’, for nature. Tzu-jan 
is the sensation of the world as something that is 
happening of itself — I am not doing it, and yet this 
thing that I am not doing is really me. 

Why then, do people get so preoccupied with 
whether they are making spiritual or psychological 
progress? They worry as to whether they are really 
getting the point. Actually all this is a kind of acquisitive- 
ness. You can turn it around and say, “I hope I have 
made progress in being nonacquisitive”, and it is just 


DEATH, BIRTH, AND THE UNBORN 


the same thing, only backwards. Lao-tzu says that 
whereas the scholar is a man who gains something 
everyday, a Taoist is a man who loses something 
everyday. A scholar is interested in acquiring and 
accumulating knowledge, a Taoist is interested in getting 
rid of knowledge. Not literally becoming a moron, 
but becoming free from fixed views of the world. This 
often leads to a funny sort of competition. Can I lose 
my mind faster than you? Can I get rid of more concepts 
everyday than you can? All this is simply the mirror 
image of the guy who is playing the one-up-manship 
of acquisition. Always watch out for these games. 
There are the most unbelievably subtle competitions 
going on. Such as: I am more tolerant than you are 
(that is a great game); or, I am more aware than you 
are of how dreadful I am; or, am more aware than you 
are of how many games IJ am playing. You can follow 
this out and suddenly find yourself in a devil of a 
situation because you find that there is no way of not 
playing competitive games. You are in one whatever 
you do. When you understand that, then you do not 
play the most awful of all games which is: “you are 
playing games but I am not.” When you know that 
there is nothing else to do except play competitive 
games, then you suddenly realize that you are not in 


PLAY TO LIVE 


the trap but that you are the trap. As soon as you are 
the trap, there is no trap, because it takes something 
to be trapped for there to be a trap. 

When Bankei says, “Buddha-mind”,, it is his partic- 
ular phrase for the unconcious. This is not the psycho- 
logical unconscious of Freud and Jung, but that total 
aspect of ourselves of which we are ignore-ant, and 
which does not come into the focus of conscious 
attention because it stands behind it. He also says 
that the Buddha-mind in each of you is immaculate. 
Be careful of this word ‘immaculate’. In the West, in 
Christianity, we use words like ‘pure’, ‘immaculate’, 
and ‘spotless’ to mean sexless. When it is said, “Blessed 
are the pure in heart for they shall see God”, most 
people think that a pure-minded person is one who 
does not tell dirty jokes or have lustful thoughts. Pure, 
catharo is Greek, means clear. The meaning here is 
pure like space, which is clear like a mirror or a crystal. 

A mirror will reflect piles of dung and all kinds of 
obscenities, but this doesn’t affect the mirror. Chuang- 
tzu says of the mirror, “It grasps nothing, it refuses 
nothing. It receives but does not keep; therefore, it is 
never stained. It has no color; therefore, it reflects all 
colors.” The Buddha-mind is like a mirror — all you do 
is reflect in it; and all you do is reflected in it. If you 
bother about one reflection, you are certain to go astray. 


DEATH, BIRTH, AND THE UNBORN 


Your thoughts do not lie deep enough. They rise from 
the shallows of you mind. Bankei writes: 


Remember that all you see and hear is reflected in 
the Buddha-mind and influenced by what was 
previously seen and heard. Needless to say, thoughts 
are not entities. If you permit them to rise and 
reflect themselves, or cease altogether, as they are 
prone to do — if you do not worry about them, 
you will never go astray. In this way, let one 
hundred, nay, one thousand thoughts arise, and 
it is as if not one has arisen — You will remain 
undisturbed. 


This is saying, “Get to the point!” the past which you 
are remembering and reacting to and bitching about 
simply is not here. Most arguments between people are 
about things which are not happening. They are about 
things which have happened and might happen, but 
not about things which are happening. It is absolutely 
fascinating, as a psychotheraputic technique, to bring 
someone to the present and say, “Where do you hurt?” 
Especially if it is a psychological ache — “Where is it? 
What is it like? Tell me, in this moment do you have a 
problem?” People start looking around and around, 
and they cannot find the darn thing. 

It is like the famous story of Bodhidharma and 
Hui-k’e, his disciple. Hui-k’e was so determined to get 
the truth of Zen from Bodhidharma that he cut off 
his left arm and presented it to Bodhidharma saying: 


—94— 


PLAY TO LIVE 


“This is a token of my sincerity", and Bodhidharma 
finally said, “Alright, alright, what is troubling 
you?” Hui-k’e said, "Well, I have no peace of mind, 
please pacify my mind”, and Bodhidharma said, 
“Bring out your mind here before me, I will pacify 
it”. Hui-k’e replied, "Well, when I look for it I 
cannot find it”, and Bodhidharma said, “There, 
it is pacified.” 


Fundamentally, this is the way Zen works. Find 
that ego which you are in trouble about, that you are 
afraid of losing when you die. Find it, put your finger 
on it, bring it out. Where is it? What is your problem? 
You look for it and you can’t find it because it is an 
abstraction. It is something that exists in a world of 
words and symbols, and has no physical reality what- 
sO-ever. 

In another passage Bankei says: 


The only thing I tell my people is to stay in the 
Buddha-mind. There are no regulations, no formal 
disciplines. Nevertheless, they have agreed among 
themselves to sit in Zen, that is, practice za-zen, 
for a period of two incense sticks daily. Alright, let 
them. But they should well understand that the 
birthless Budha-mind has absolutely nothing to 
do with sitting with an incense stick burning in 
front of you. 

If one keeps in the Buddhamind without straying, 
there is no further satori to seek. Whether awake 
or asleep, one is living Buddha. 


DEATH, BIRTH, AND THE UNBORN 


Za-zen means only one thing: sitting tranquilly in 

the Buddha-mind. But really, you know, one’s every- 
day life in its entirety should be thought of as 

sitting in Zen. Even during one’s formal sitting, 

one may leave one’s seat to attend to something. 

A natural thing, after all. One cannot sleep all day 

so one rises, one cannot walk all day so one sits in 

Zen. There are no binding rules here. 

Most masters these days use devices to teach and 

these devices they seem to value above all else. 
They cannot get to the truth directly. They are 

little more than blind fools. 

Another bit of stupidity of theirs, is to hold that, 

according to Zen, unless one has a doubt which he 

proceeds to smash, he is good for nothing. Of 
course, all this forces people to have doubts. No, 
they never teach the importance of staying in the 

birthless Buddha-mind. They would make of it a 

lump of doubts; it is a very serious mistake. 


This man Bankei, was really something. What he 


is saying is actually terribly heretical. When he talks 
about the doubt, he is referring one of the techniques in 
Zen which stirs up an intense anxiety in a person, as 
well as a feeling of total spiritual insufficiency. This is a 
trick of the five-day sessions where they meditate most 
of the day and the teacher works up more and more a 
sense of frustration. Bankei makes the point that people 


—96— 


PLAY TO LIVE 


who went to a teacher and deliberately got themselves 
into the state of the great doubt, were doing something 
artificial. In other words, if you want to feel very, very 
free, why don't you put lead in your shoes for a month 
and go around that way. After a month take it out and 
you'll feel great! This is also the way revivalists work. 
They get a bunch of people together and convince 
them that they are absolute, awful sinners. They go at 
it, and go at it, until the people feel so guilty that they 
don’t know where to turn. Then having made them 
sick, they say, “Ah, but I have the medicine! Just put 
yourself completely in Jesus Christ, come forward here, 
and let it all go to Jesus.” And so, he saves them from 
their sins and everybody is immensely relieved. It is 
like a person who goes and sits on someone and then 
gets up — that is all he has done. There is a kind of 
phony spirituality about this, but there is alot of it 
going on in organized church religions, and it also goes 
on in Zen. 

Bankei, however, saw through this spiritual pretense. 
He was trying to say, “Look, there is not any fixed way 
of practicing Zen. Everything is Zen practice, everything 
is meditation. The essential art of the whole thing is to 
realize that you can depend on that vast aspect of 
yourself which you know nothing about. That is the 
Buddha-mind.” The same thing is true of all religions 
and philosophies. Christian Scientists, for example, say 
that if you have faith you will be healed. But then faith 
becomes something that you somehow ought to do. 


—97 — 


DEATH, BIRTH, AND THE UNBORN 


Bankei is not saying that, and this is very important. He 
is saying that you can have all the doubts you want to 
have, and all the mistrust you want to have in your 
deepest self, but do not put faith in it because it does 
not make the slightest difference. You cannot get away 
from it. One way is saying: to get to something, there is 
something special you ought to do, whether it is a kind 
of doing, or giving up; the other is saying: no, there is 
nothing you have to do because you are it. You are this 
thing functioning, this cosmic energy dancing in the 
form of you. Froma particularly personal point of view 
you may be doing as well or as badly as may be, but 
there is nothing you can do to be other than that. It is 
like walking on the ground and the ground is holding 
you up. You are at liberty to suppose that it will collapse 
under your feet at any moment, but the truth is, it still 
goes on holding you up. 


THE PRACTICE 
OF MEDITATION 


| he pracnie of- meditation is net-what s ordinarily 
meant py practice, in the sense of vepetrhmS 
veparaction some fitture performanc..’ It may Seem opd 
pl (loqi i? su bat het inthe res Yoga, 
Dhyana, or Laren, a5 used by Hindus and Buddhist, cs 
a practice withowt v pose ~ th Smecuture time - hecaush 
Ut i$ The a being Complete centered nthe here and 
now. “Jin Skeby, aad these 1s no place i omy to." 

We are living in a cufture entirely h movies by the. 
illusion of time, in which the so-called present momievet7$ 
fet as nothing Pret an infirritesinal hairbue beAveen 
a all-powerfully Causative past and aw absorbs 
n 1. We have no presen Our comsciousney 
is mote fetly repzcupied Wi me 

ectztm, We Jo yeize that there nevér was, S, 
oy will de any other Sepetence thaw man, CVPeNCZ.. 

We are He out“ touch wi TK reality We cose 
the wld 25 falke) about, descr bey , and measured Wr" 
tewol) whi actually 's, We at sik mil 4 fascination. 
for the useful trots Hf names aud numbers, of sympots, 
St conceptions, tu) ders, Meditation 1$ therefore the 


4 ending verpal and Symbolic thinky a 
csr smbahatl wa Ee ii wall ee 
talking when a cmcer-is About to begin . 


—99 — 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


Simply sit Down, chre yrur “yes, and liskn te all 
SOUnAS that may he going ¢n —wmthout- Aye to name 
or identify rhem. Listen aS yor wand LiSttn to muszc, 
If you find that-verbal Thinking wilk net dutp away, 
ym 't HCmpt to it by farce of eal power Jus 
keep yrer tongue relaxed, featin ily'in the /ower 
Aw, and Lise fo your kA a5 if they were bisds 
chattenng outside — mere nore in the Sku//— and thes 
will evencteia lly subside themselves, as & trbyulent- dvd 
muddy poof vill become ‘cilm and clear if left me. 
Abs, become aware of breathing any allow yeur 
lenas to Wark sn Whatever thy Stems enral ‘fo 
idl JA) a while just ‘Sit listening oie) 
breath. Burt, i pele dent call it Mart. imply 
experrene. the -verbal ening . You ma iA cot 
that this us ror “spiritual "meditation but mere 
Attention fo the * hystcal” wis, hut it shoul) be 
undteystead thet the Spiritual and the physical Are 
only ideas, philosophical cmcepnons, And that the 
reali: which mL Ale IbBW AWA Ye I$ NoOT-ANn sea, 
Furthermac , there 1s no "you" aware of-1t: That was 
also just anidta. Can you hesy ences listerang % 
then begin -to let youv breath “fall " out, bully 
and essily, Dén’t br stan yurhorus, but (et the. 
breath come cut‘ the Same way hat yu ler 


yourself Slam into A confortable bMS. mply ler 


— 100 — 


PLAY TO LIVE 


: cane back In a5 a reflex; Isnt 
Ait in. et i dock. Frrget to ae Just 
keep it So 438 You Feed the luxn if. 
thin wee wo This pe dy to 
generate ene without force. Fir example, me 
jhe 4 rmmack§ fin Sanskrit; upaya used ty Quer 
the inking mind and ity Com pulsi € cAactt nina I$ 
Known ag mantra — the charting of. Sods- Pr The 
Sake of soun) rather than meaning. The ‘ 
to “flrat" a Single tone on the (nz, easy outhreath 
at “whatever ph 1S meSt Com le. thndus aud 
Brdohists ve du ths practice: such Syllables es 
om, AH, HUM Ice. Hing}, and Christians might 
} yr AMEN oy ALLELUIA y Mushins ALLAH ‘, aud 
Jews ADONAL : it yeally makes no difference, Since 
What is impovtant- 1 St ly and soled the Sound. 
Like Zen Buddhists , YOK coul) use just the syle. 
Modo6 fee}. D5 Theat; and let your Consciousness 
sink down, Jorn, Jown into the sao) i» as long 
as these ($ nod sense of Strain. 
Above all, dof look’. a result, Some 
marvellous change Consccougness Or -Sartort : the. 
€ essena. i méditatio -practce. 15 Centering 
vpon what IS not m whet should gr mi; Ae, 
TAC point is net—to make the mind blank anv to 


it-go, go, and ao. AS som AS there 's the lest 
stain just nae 


—101— 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


concen trate fiercely , Say, 2 Single port ieee 
atthough oe foo, LCi slight alent 
fierceness. 

Tr how Shatd this be up! My own, nn) 
eee Unovtharsx , sg eeling (S-Tthat- it Car be camtinued 

$ hee 1s no Sensation of fons’ it~ 

ae - may easily octend +0 30 ow 40 mmnutks at 
one. Srtting , wherex: on wil want to vetkrn ts 
the Stx+t fm normal Sec hek Awd distraction. 

In sith meditation, A-is best to a az 
subStantiael cushion on che onY, To Keep ora dag 
evect Put not Stiff; 7p have o hasts me Wh - 


fee ees 3 2 sees an) 


Sit evoss-h han we, cither 
hs oh $ Hare, o- Heeling 
The Che yd jee oe 

Bhar eet Sore i gers 
TheSe pastures Are ties uncom le, but they 
have, th , he adyantayze afKee ‘vou awake | 

In the pate medstacton cc may wate have 
Astonishing visions, amazing | N25, awd fa fascina’ 

ntasres. = Yi may abso feel thet y ou aye becomi 
Clairvoyant or that you ee atk. to leave our be 
an travel at will Pipe all that is distacton. Leave 
it alme and WAtch what happens Now. One. 
does net meditrte’ in order fo aca sou inary 


—102 — 


PLAY TO LIVE 


Powers , for if you 7, to heeone. omnipottat aur 
ommscieut; writ? voudo? Thee wr he ne 
farther sur rises fr you, aud yur whee Life would 
bo bike nl Bs love. to 2, lastic woman. Beware, then, 
of all Those gu rus who romise ‘marvellous vesulea” 
aur other: ore benes, from their discip fines. The 
whole pe bis to nay ie Isp ts no future. 
And» that the real Sense of life (4 an tx, Iovchion ft 
the eternal mow. STOP, Look. and LISTEN! Or 
shu we Say, “Tarn on, une in, aD 4? 

A Stay is jot A man Who oe to the. an 
with open sae faa neesaer “he Buddha 
5aid, —Drap it! he ie iat egy, in has a 
hand: the: Buddha Said 
) the flowers in his 2 nek ie os 

he Said, "Dre that you have nether jn 
the vi ae the lett, (iss the midile!* Ad 
the man was instantly tnlighrened. 

Lt is marvellous to at ee Sense pe agihee! hving 
and moving is depping , wiTh 

vanity. Afteall hae Ls * ng around 
the sun, and, in tum, the Sun 5 failhi aroun) 
Some other star. Fir en 1S y 1S preastl, ahh 

the bin least resiftane.. £n yi mah 


fees anid ‘LSP pine a oum weight: 


—103— 


