EAS] ERE 
WISDOM 


THREE CLASSICS IN ONE VOLUME 


What is Zen? «© What is Tao? 
An Introduction to Meditation 


DAL eter 


JOOKSELLE (SE LLERS 


so) 


FASTERN 
WISDOM 


INCLUDES 


What is Zen? « What is Tao? 
A Introduction to Meditation 


A L A N W A T T S 


An Introduction to Meditation 
has also been published as Still the Mind. 


MJF BOOKS 
NEW YORK 


Published by MJF Books 
Fine Communications 
Two Lincoln Square 

60 West 66th Street 
New York, NY 10023 


Eastern Wisdom 
LCCN 2001091577 
ISBN 1-56731-491-0 


What is Zen? Copyright © 2000 by Mark Watts 

What is Tao? Copyright © 2000 by Mark Watts 

An Introduction to Meditation Copyright © 2000 by Mark Watts 

An Introduction to Meditation has also been published under the title 
Still the Mind. 


Editors: Mark Watts, Marc Allen 
Text Design: Tona Pearce Myers 
Interior Calligraphy: Alan Watts 


In What is Tao?, the poems on pages v, 22, and 52 are from Tao Te Ching, by Lao 
Tzu, a new English version, with foreword and notes by Stephen Mitchell. 
Translation copynght © 1988 by Stephen Mitchell. Reprinted by permission of 
HarperCollins Publishers, Inc. 


This edition published by arrangement with New World Library 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in 
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, 
recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher. 

Manufactured in the United States of America on acid-free paper © 


MJF Books and the MJF colophon are trademarks of Fine Creative Media, Inc. 


BG 100 9 8 765 4 3 2 1 


WHAT IS ZEN? 


ALAN WATTS 


“Each one of you 

is perfect as you are. 

And you all could use 

a little bit of improvement.” 


— Suzuki Roshi, founder 
San Francisco Zen Center 


CONTENTS 


Introduction by Mark Watts ix 
Preface by Alan Watts xiii 


Part I 
A Simple Way, A Difficult Way 19 


Part II 
Zen Reconsidered 31 


Part Ill 
Space 61 


Part IV 
Zen Mind 95 


About the Author 125 


INTRODUCTION 
By Mark Watts 


Zen is a method of rediscovering the experience 
of being alive. It originated in India and China, and 
has come to the West by way of Japan, and although 
it is a form of Mahayana Buddhism, it is not a reli- 
gion in the usual sense of the word. The aim of Zen 
is to bring about a transformation of consciousness, 
and to awaken us from the dream world of our end- 
less thoughts so that we experience life as it is in 
the present moment. 

Zen cannot really be taught, but it can be trans- 
mitted through sessions of contemplation or med- 
itation, called zazen, and through dialogues 
between student and teacher, called sanzen. In the 


1X 


What Is Zen? 


dialogue between the student and Zen master the 
student comes squarely up against the obstacles to 
his or her understanding and, without making the 
answer obvious, the master points a finger toward 
the way. 


Zen has enjoyed an increasing popularity in 
Western literature. D.T. Suzuki’s book Outlines of 
Mahayana Buddhism was first published in the 
English language in 1907, and authors R. H. Blythe, 
Christmas Humphries, and Alan Watts all made 
early contributions to Zen literature in the West. 
Alan Watts wrote his first booklet on Zen in 1933, 
followed by his first book, The Spirit of Zen, in 1936 at 
the age of twenty-one. He moved from London to 
New York in 1938, and after spending nearly ten 
years in the Anglican Church headed west to 
California in 1950, where he began to teach Eastern 
thought at the American Academy of Asian Studies 
in San Francisco. 

There he met Japanese artist Sabro Hasegawa 
and beat poets Gary Snyder and Allen Ginsburg. 
His classroom lectures spilled over into the local 


Xx 


Introduction 


coffeehouses, and in 1953 he began weekly live 
radio talks on Pacifica station KPFA in Berkeley, 
California. Early radio series included “The Great 
Books of Asia” and “Way Beyond the West,” which 
were later rebroadcast on KPFK in Los Angeles. In 
1955 he began work on The Way of Zen with the help 
of a Bollingen grant arranged by Joseph Campbell, 
and following publication in 1957 he went to New 
York on the first of many cross-country speaking 
tours that continued over the next fifteen years. 

The selections for What Is Zen? were drawn from 
his later talks, given after he had studied and prac- 
ticed Zen for many years. Most of the material is 
from recordings made during weekend seminars in 
which Watts reconsidered Zen with a small group 
aboard his waterfront home, the ferryboat SS Vallejo, 
in Sausalito, California. 

Instead of focusing on the historical back- 
ground of Zen, he presented the subject directly, in 
a way he felt would be most accessible to his pri- 
marily Western audience. The result is a unique 
and effective example of the sanzen dialogue in 
practice, and although the words were delivered to 


xi 


What Is Zen? 


a group, the individual’s psychological hurdles are 
addressed with uncanny sensitivity to the “mind 
traps” that typically confound students of Zen. 

In a delightful play of words, Watts’s experi- 
enced presentation gives us a healthy, heaping serv- 
ing of the essential wisdom one discovers with the 
experience of Zen, and points a finger towards the 
way. 


xii 


PREFACE 
By Alan Watts 


Although not long ago the word Zen was 
unknown to most Europeans and Americans, it has 
for many centuries been one of the most potent 
influences in molding the cultures of Japan and 
China. It would be as great a mistake to leave out 
the consideration of Zen in a history of Japan as to 
omit Christianity in a history of England. 

Zen remained relatively unknown to the world, 
however, because until rather recently the expo- 
nents of Zen were hesitant to spread the doctrine 
abroad for fear its essence would be lost. This is 
because Zen is a practice based entirely upon a 


Xill 


What Is Zen? 


certain kind of personal experience, and no com- 
plete idea of its truths can be given in words. 
Finally in the early years of the twentieth century 
various Far Eastern writers — among them the 
noted Dr. D.T. Suzuki — made known the details 
of this remarkable way of life. It then became appar- 
ent to Westerners that Zen is responsible for many 
of the things that fascinate us about the Far East, 
including the martial arts of judo and aikido and 
the exquisite aesthetic flavor that characterizes 
Chinese and Japanese art. 

Many hold Zen to be at one with the root of all 
religions, for it is a way of liberation that centers 
around the things that are basic to all mysticism: 
awakening to the unity or oneness of life, and the 
inward — as opposed to outward — existence of 
God. In this context the word God can be mislead- 
ing because, as will be seen, the idea of a deity in 
the Western religious sense is foreign to Zen. 

The aim of this book is to act as a guide to give 
the contemporary reader some idea of the basic prin- 
ciples of Zen. My intention is to point out the way 
by offering the rudiments of the path to those whose 


Xiv 


Preface 


search for truth has been hindered by the dogmas, 
creeds, and misunderstood rituals that choke the 
road of modern religion. 

In the Western world we have become accus- 
tomed to thinking of spiritual concerns as being 
distinct from everyday life. We think of the spiri- 
tual as being other worldly, and therefore those art 
forms that portray spiritual subjects do so with 
symbols of the divine that transcend everyday 
materiality. 

But in the art of Chinese Zen Buddhism one 
finds a supreme concentration on the most common 
aspects of everyday life. Even when the great sages 
of Buddhism are depicted, they are rendered in a 
secular style, just like very ordinary people, and 
more often than not as wandering idiots and 
tramps. The significance of this extremely human 
portrayal is that it shows us that their attitude 
about the relationship of the soul to the body and of 
mind to matter is entirely different from ours — in 
fact they do not really consider the spiritual life in 
those categories at all. 

We feel that our soul is separate from the body, 


XV 


What Is Zen? 


that spirit is separate from matter, and by exten- 
sion that God is separate from the world. And as we 
have confronted and tried to reconcile ourselves to 
this material world we have come to identify our- 
selves as a kind of detached soul, and therefore we 
have come to feel that there is a problem with mate- 
rial existence. We believe that life is something that 
we must conquer, or something we must somehow 
get out of. But either way we feel distinct from it, 
and think of ourselves not as a part of the natural 
material world, but as separate from it, dominating 
it, and trying to master it. 

The art forms of Chinese Buddhism, however, 
express quite a different point of view, a point of 
view for which the material, everyday, ordinary 
world is not a problem to be solved or a conquest to 
be made. 

It would be a bit of relief for us if we could see 
the world as an extension of ourselves, and our- 
selves aS an extension of the world. In order to 
understand how Zen came upon this view one 
must consider the environment in which Zen first 
arose, which was the native Chinese world of 


Xvi 


Preface 


Taoism. When Buddhism first came to China it was 
most natural for the Chinese to speak about it in 
terms of Taoist philosophy, because they both share 
a view of life as a flowing process in which the 
mind and consciousness of man is inextricably 
involved. It is not as if there is a fixed screen of con- 
sciousness over which our experience flows and 
leaves a record. It is that the field of consciousness 
itself is part of the flowing process, and therefore 
the mind of man is not a separate entity observing 
the process from outside, but is integrally involved 
with it. 

As a result, in this philosophy the fundamental 
conflict between the mind of man and the flow of 
life is seen to be an illusion, something unreal that 
we have imagined. This illusion arises because the 
human memory is a part of this flowing pattern 
that has the ability to represent former states of the 
pattern, and this gives the impression of a certain 
permanence to the behavior of the pattern. We 
must be aware, however, that our impression of 
permanence is a kind of thought process that 
appears to be separate from the pattern upon 


XVil 


What Is Zen? 


which the record is written, but is really part of the 
pattern as well. 

The practice of Zen is to experience the overall 
pattern directly, and to know one’s self as the 
essence of the pattern. 


Xvili 


PART I 


A SIMPLE WAY, 
A DIFFICULT WAY 


A SIMPLE Way, 
A DIFFICULT WAY 


Zen is really extraordinarily simple as long as 
one doesn’t try to be cute about it or beat around 
the bush! Zen is simply the sensation and the clear 
understanding that, to put it in Zen terms, there 
are “ten thousand formations; one suchness.” Or 
you might say, “The ten thousand things that are 
everything are of one suchness.” That is to say that 
there is behind the multiplicity of events and crea- 
tures in this universe simply one energy — and it 
appears as you, and everything is it. The practice of 
Zen is to understand that one energy so as to “feel 


it in your bones.” 


21 


What Is Zen? 


Yet Zen has nothing to say about what that 
energy is, and of course this gives the impression in 
the minds of Westerners that it is a kind of “blind 
energy.” We assume this because the only other 
alternative that we can imagine in terms of our tra- 
ditions is that it must be something like God — 
some sort of cosmic ego, an almost personal intelli- 
gent being. But in the Buddhist view, that would be 
as far off the mark as thinking of it as blind energy. 
The reason they use the word “suchness” is to leave 
the whole question open, and absolutely free from 
definition. It is “such.” It is what it is. 

The nature of this energy is that it is unformu- 
lated, although it is not formless in the sense of 
some sort of “goo” which is just a featureless mess. 
It simply means that at the basis of everything, 
there is something that never could be made an 
object, and discerned, figured out, or explained. In 
the same way, our eyes have no apparent color to 
us as we look at things, and no form of their own. 
If they had a form of their own, that form would 
distort all the forms we see — and in some sense 
their very structure does distort what we see. If 


22 


A Simple Way, A Difficult Way 


the eyes had a color of their own it would affect 
everything we see, and still we would never become 
aware of it. As it is, however, we are not aware of 
the color of the eye, or of the lens, because if it has 
a color to it that color is basic to all sight. And so in 
exactly the same way, you might never become 
aware of the structure and the nature of the basic 
energy of the world because you are it, and in fact, 
everything is it. 

But you might say, “Well, it really doesn’t make 
any difference then.” And that is true, it doesn’t — 
but it does make a difference in the life and feeling 
of a person who realizes that that is so! Although it 
may not make any particular difference to anything 
that happens, it points directly to the crux of the 
matter. If there were no eye, there would be no 
sight, and this tells us something important about 
our role in the world. We see this sight and that 
sight, and the structure of the eye does not make 
any difference from this sight and that, but upon it 
depends the possibility of seeing. And so upon this 
energy depends the very possibility of there being a 


universe at all, and that is rather important. 


23 


What Is Zen? 


It is so important, however, that we usually 
overlook it. It does not enter into our practical con- 
siderations and prognostications, and that is why 
modern logicians in their respective philosophy 
departments will argue that all assertions about 
this energy, including the assertion that it is there 
at all, are meaningless. And that in a way is true, 
because the world itself is — from the point of 
view of strict logic — quite meaningless in the 
sense that it is not a sign or a symbol pointing to 
something else. But while that is all taken for 
granted, it nevertheless makes a great deal of dif- 
ference to how you feel about this world, and there- 
fore, to how you act. If you know that there is just 
this; and that it is you; and that it is beyond time, 
beyond space, beyond definition; and that if you 
clearly come to a realization that this is how things 
are, it gives you a certain “bounce.” You can enter 
into life with abandon, with a freedom from your 
basic fears that you would not ordinarily have. 

You of course can become quite “hooked” on the 
form of life that you are now living. I can consider 


myself as “Alan Watts” to be an immensely important 


24 


A Simple Way, A Difficult Way 


event — and one I wish to preserve and continue as 
long as possible! But the truth of the matter is that I 
know I won't be able to, and that everything falls 
apart in the end. But if you realize this fundamental 
energy, then you know you have the prospect of 
appearing again in innumerable forms, all of which 
in due course will seem just as important as this one 
you have now, and perhaps just as problematic too. 

This is not something to be believed in, how- 
ever, because if you believe that this is so upon 
hearsay, then you have missed the point. You really 
have no need to believe in this, and you don’t need 
to formulate it, or to hang on to it in any way, 
because on the one hand you cannot get away from 
it, and on the other hand you — that is, you in the 
limited sense — will not be there to experience it. 
So there is no need to believe in it, and if you do 
believe in it that simply indicates that you have 
some doubts in the matter! 

That is why Zen has been called the “religion of 
no religion.” You don’t need, as it were, to cling to 
yourself. Faith in yourself is not “holding on” to your- 
self, but letting go. And that is why, when a Zen 


25 


What Is Zen? 


master hears from a student the statement, “Ten 
thousand formations, one suchness,” the Zen 
master says, “Get rid of it.” 

That is also why, in the practice of certain 
forms of Zen meditation, there is at times a rugged 
struggle of the person to get beyond all formula- 
tion whatsoever, and to throw away all hang-ups. 
Therefore the person endures long hours of sitting 
with aching knees in perpetual frustration to try 
to get hold of what all this is about. With tremen- 
dous earnestness they say, “I have to find out what 
the mystery of life is to see who I am and what this 
energy is.” 

And so you go again and again to the Zen 
master, but he knocks down every formulation that 
you bring to him, because you don't need one. The 
ordinary person, however, upon hearing that you 
don’t need one, will forget all about it and go on 
and think about something else, and so they never 
cross the barrier, and never realize the simplicity 
and the joy of it all. 

But when you do see it, it is totally obvious 
that there is just one energy, and that consciousness 


26 


A Simple Way, A Difficult Way 


and unconsciousness, being and not-being, life and 
death are its polarities. It is always undulating in 
this way: Now you see it, now you don’t — now it’s 
here, now it isn’t. Because that “on” and “off” is the 
energy, and we wouldn't know what the energy 
was unless it was vibrating. The only way to 
vibrate is to go “on” and “off,” and so we have life 
and death, and that’s the way it is from our per- 
spective. 

That is what Zen is about. And that is all it is 
about. 

Of course, other things derive from that, but in 
Zen training, the first thing to do is to get the feel- 
ing of its complete obviousness. 


Then what follows from that is the question, 
“How does a person who feels that way live in this 
world? What do you do about other people who 
don't see that that’s so? What do you do about con- 
ducting yourself in this world?” 

This is the difficult part of Zen training. There 
is at first the breakthrough — which involves cer- 
tain difficulties — but thereafter follows the whole 


27 


What Is Zen? 


process of learning compassion and tact and skill. 
As Jesus put it, it is “to be wise as serpents and 
gentle as doves” — and that is really what takes 
most of the time. 

You might then divide the training in Zen into 
two stages that correspond to the two great schools 
of Buddhism: the Hinayana stage and the Mahayana 
stage. The Hinayana stage is to get to nirvana — to 
get to “living in the Great Void.” But then the 
Mahayana stage is to “come back,” as the Bod- 
hisattva comes back from nirvana out of compas- 
sion for all sentient beings to help even the grass to 
become enlightened. And it’s that Mahayana aspect 
of Zen that occupies most of the time of learning to 
be proficient in Zen. 

I offer this by way of introduction just to make 
everything clear from the start, and to begin with- 
out being deceptive about it or befuddling you 
with cryptic Zen stories! Although the stories are 
really quite clear, the point often does not come 
across very easily to Westerners. The fascinating 
principle underlying Zen stories with all their 
seemingly irrelevant remarks is quite simple. It is 


28 


A Simple Way, A Difficult Way 


all explained in the Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, when 
Hui-neng says, 


If somebody asks you a question about matters sacred, 
always answer in terms of matters profane. If they ask 
you about ultimate reality, answer in terms of everyday 
life. If they ask you about everyday life, answer in terms 
of ultimate reality. 


Here’s an example: someone says, “Master, 
please hand me the knife,” and he hands them the 
knife, blade first. “Please give me the other end,” he 
says. And the master replies, “What would you do 
with the other end?” This is answering an everyday 
matter in terms of the metaphysical. 

When the question is, “Master, what is the fun- 
damental principle of Buddhism?” then he replies, 
“There is enough breeze in this fan to keep me 
cool.” That is answering the metaphysical in terms 
of the everyday, and that is, more or less, the prin- 
ciple Zen works on. The mundane and the sacred 
are one and the same. 


29 


PART II 


ZEN 
RECONSIDERED 


» OD 


FB 


ZEN RECONSIDERED 


Why study Zen? The first reason that occurs to 
me is that it is extremely interesting. Since child- 
hood I have been fascinated by the mystery of 
being, and it has always struck me as absolutely 
marvelous that this universe in which we live is 
here at all. And just out of sheer wonder I have 
become interested in all of the various answers that 
people have given as to why all of this is here. 

In this sense my approach to religion is not so 
much that of the moralist as of the scientist. A physi- 
cist may have a well-developed and highly concrete 
experimental approach to nature, but a good physi- 
cist is not necessarily an improved man or woman 


33 


What Is Zen? 


in the sense of being morally superior. Physicists 
know certain things, and their knowledge is power, 
but that does not automatically improve them as 
people. And the power they have may be used for 
good or for evil. 

But indeed, they do have power, and they have 
gained that power through their knowledge. I have 
always thought that in many ways Zen is like 
Western science; Zen has been used for healing 
people’s sicknesses, but it has also been used by the 
samurai for chopping off people’s heads! 

I am interested in Zen for what it reveals about 
the way the universe is, the way nature is, and 
what this world is doing. My interest is part 
and parcel of a greater inquiry, which boils down 
to this: If you read the literature of the great 
religions, time and time again you come across 
descriptions of what is usually referred to as 
“spiritual experience.” You will find that in all the 
various traditions this modality of spiritual expe- 
rience seems to be the same, whether it occurs in 
the Christian West, the Islamic Middle East, the 
Hindu world of Asia, or the Buddhist world. In 


34 


Zen Reconsidered 


each culture, it is quite definitely the same expe- 
rience, and it is characterized by the transcen- 
dence of individuality and by a sensation of being 
one with the total energy of the universe. 

This experience has always fascinated me, and I 
have been interested in the psychological dynamics 
of it: why it happens, what happens, and how it 
comes to be described in different symbols with 
different languages. I wanted to see if I could dis- 
cover the means of bringing this kind of experience 
about, because I have often felt that the traditional 
ways of cultivating it are analogous perhaps to 
medieval medicine. There a concoction is prepared 
consisting of roasted toads, rope from the gallows, 
henbane, mandrake, a boiled red dog, and all 
manner of such things, and a great brew is made! I 
assume that someone in the old folk tradition from 
which these recipes came understood the potencies 
of the brew, and that this thing really did do some 
good. But a modern biochemist would take a look 
at that mixture and say, “Well, it may have done 
some good, but what was the essential ingredient?” 

In the same way, I ask this question when 


35 


What Is Zen? 


people sit in Zen meditation, practice yoga, or 
practice the bhakti way of religious devotion. 
What is the essential ingredient? In fact I ask this 
question of all the various things people do, even 
when they take psychedelic chemicals. No matter 
what methods people choose, it is interesting to 
look at what element these methods share in 
common. If we eliminate the nonsense and the nos- 
talgia that go with people’s attachment to a partic- 
ular cultural approach, what is left? 


It has always struck me as a student of these 
things that Zen has come very close to the essen- 
tials. At least this was my first impression, partly 
because of the way D.T. Suzuki presented Zen. It 
seemed to me to be the “direct way,” the sudden 
way of seeing right through into one’s nature — 
right now, at this moment. There is a good deal of 
talk about that realization in Zen circles, and in 
some ways it is more talk than practice. I remember 
a dinner once with Hasegawa, when somebody 
asked him, “How long does it take to obtain our 
understanding of Zen?” 


36 


Zen Reconsidered 


He said, “It may take you three minutes; it may 
take you thirty years. And,” he said, “I mean that.” 

It is that three minutes that tantalizes people! We 
in the West want instant results, and one of the 
difficulties of instant results is that they are some- 
times of poor quality. I often describe instant coffee 
as a punishment for people who are in too much of 
a hurry to make real coffee! There is something to 
be said against being in a hurry. 

There are two sides to this question, and it 
strikes me in this way: It’s not a matter of time at 
all. The people who think it ought to take a long 
time are of one school of thought, and the people 
who want it quickly are of another, and they are 
both wrong. The transformation of consciousness 
is not a question of how much time you put into it, 
as if it were all added up on some sort of quantita- 
tive scale, and you got rewarded according to the 
amount of effort you put into it. Nor is there a way 
of avoiding the effort just because you happen to be 
lazy, or because you say, “I want it now!” 

The point is, rather, something like this: If you 
try to get it either by an instant method because 


37 


What Is Zen? 


you are lazy or by a long-term method because you 
are rigorous, you'll discover that you can’t get it 
either way. The only thing that your effort — or 
absence of effort — can teach you is that your effort 
doesn’t work. 

The answer is found in the middle way — and 
Buddhism is called the Middle Way — but it is not 
just some sort of compromise. Instead, “middle” 
here means instead “above and beyond extremes.” 

It is put this way in the Bible: “To him that 
hath shall be given.” Or, to put it another way, you 
can only get it when you discover that you don’t 
need it. You can only get it when you don’t want it. 
And so instead you ask, “How do I learn not to 
want it, not to go after it, either by the long-term 
method or by the instant method?” But obviously 
if you ask that, you still are seeking it, and thereby 
not getting it! 

A Zen master says, “If you have a stick, I will give 
you one. If you have not, I will take it away from 
you.” Of course this is the same idea as “to him that 
hath shall be given; and from him that hath not, shall 
be taken away even that which he hath.” So we find 


38 


Zen Reconsidered 


ourselves in a situation where it seems that all our 
normal thinking — all the ways we are accustomed 
to thinking about solving problems — doesn't work. 
All thinking based on acquisition is rendered obso- 
lete. We have, as it were, to get into a new dimension 
altogether to approach this question. 

A young Zen student I know said to me 
recently, “If I were asked what is really essential in 
Zen, it would be sanzen.” Sanzen is the dialogue 
between the master and the student, the person-to- 
person contact. He said rather than zazen, or sitting 
meditation, it is sanzen that is the crux of it. It is in 
the peculiar circumstances of that dialog that we 
can get into the frame of mind I am talking about. 

In effect this dialog acts as a mirror to one’s 
own mind, because the teacher always throws back 
to the student the question he’s asked! He really 
does not answer any questions at all, he merely 
tosses them back at you, so that you yourself will 
ask why you are asking it, and why you are creating 
the problem the question expresses. 

And quickly it becomes apparent that it is up to 
you. “Who, me?” you may ask. Yes, you! “Well,” you 


39 


What Is Zen? 


may say, “I can't solve this problem. I don’t know 
how to do it.” 

But what do you mean by you? Who are you, 
really? Show me the you that cannot answer the 
question. It is in this kind of back-and-forth dia- 
logue that you begin to understand. Through rela- 
tionship with the other person you discover that it 
is you who’s mixed up, and that you are asking the 
wrong questions! In fact, you are trying to solve 
the wrong problem altogether. 


There is a curious thing about gurus — includ- 
ing Zen masters: you notice how people feel that 
gurus have marvelous eyes, and that they look right 
through you. And people think, “Oh dear me, they 
can see to the bottom of my soul. They can read my 
history, my secret thoughts, my awful misdeeds, and 
everything. At one glance they know me through 
and through.” 

Such matters are of very little interest to real 
gurus, however. When they look at you with a 
funny look, they see who you really are, and are 
looking through your eyes to the divine center. 


40 


Zen Reconsidered 


And here one sees Buddha, Brahma, or whatever 
you want to call it, pretending not to be at home! 
It’s no wonder the guru has a funny look — they 
are beholding the incongruity between the divine 
being that looks out through you in your eyes, and 
the expression of puzzlement on your face! And so 
what the guru is going to do in the dialog is to 
“kid” you out of this irresponsibility — this play- 
ing that you are someone other than who you 
really are. And this, you see, is of the essence. 
Don’t mistake me, however: I am not saying in 
order to get there you have to have a guru, and 
have to go and find one somewhere. That, too, is to 
go back into the ordinary dimension, back into 
a state of inner irresponsibility. It is important 
to realize that you give the gurus their authority 
to do what they do. It is you who says, “be my 
teacher” — and in Zen they make it very tough for 
you to get a teacher at all. The Hindus do likewise, 
and they have various ways of explaining that 
gurus have to take on the karma of their students, 
and that is a dangerous thing to do because they 
become responsible for their students. But this is 


41 


What Is Zen? 


really just a ploy to force the students to take 
greater responsibility for their choice in selecting 
a guru. In Zen they make this process very diffi- 
cult in the theory that, if you are going to make a 
fool of yourself by projecting authority onto a 
guru, you might as well make a big fool of yourself. 
There is no compromise about this! 

The point then is this: insofar as you accord 
spiritual authority to someone, you must recognize 
that you do it on your own authority. It was you 
who set this person up as your master. Now you 
may say, “Well, there were a lot of other people who 
have done it too, and they can't all be wrong!” And 
these people form a kind of community, and that 
gives the appearance of authority to this. 

You may want to study with the best Zen 
master, but who is the best master, and how do you 
know? If you go around asking people, you are 
invariably asking the Zen cliché. When you ask 
someone, “Who do you think is the best master?” 
you find that people tend to recommend their own 
teacher, and when a teacher has enough people 
apply, then they receive great collective authority. 


42 


Zen Reconsidered 


So if you accept that, and say, “Pll go study Zen 
here,” do you see what is happening? You have made 
the decision to use this group as a pretext upon 
which to project your own authority without real- 
izing that you have done it! 

You set the whole thing up, and then the task of 
the teacher is to show you just what you did. But it 
all came from you. As the Buddhists say, “All this 
world is in your own mind.” 


In the Tibetan Book of the Dead, when the instruc- 
tions are given as to what happens when someone 
leaves their body after death, it says something like, 
“When the clear light of the void comes, it is fol- 
lowed by the vision of the blissful Bodhisattvas; 
then comes the vision of the wrathful Bodhi- 
sattvas,” and so on. And then it says, “Realize, oh 
nobly born, that all this is but the outpouring of 
your own mind.” 

We don’t accept this very easily, however, 
because we’ve been most assiduously taught that 
we are but “little things” in this world. You must be 
humble, after all, you did not create this world, 


43 


What Is Zen? 


a“ 7,” 


somebody else made it. So watch your “p’s” and 
“q’s,” and do not for one minute have the spiritual 
pride of thinking that you are the cause of it all! 
And you may very well ask, “How could I have 
made all this? I certainly don’t know how it was 


es 


made!” But a Zen poem says, 
If you want to ask where the flowers come from, 
even the God of Spring doesn’t know. 


There is no way of defining the creative energy of 
the universe. Suppose God could come and talk to 
you, and you said, “God, this is a pretty complicated 
universe — in fact, it is amazing! How did you do it?” 
And God would say, “I don’t know, I just did it.” 

Of course God does not know — if God had to 
think out every detail of it, it never would have 
happened. In just the same way, you breathe and 
you live: You don’t know how you do it, but you are 
still doing it! 

We have been taught by social convention, 
though, to restrict the concept of “myself” to “what 
I do voluntarily and consciously.” This is a very 


44 


Zen Reconsidered 


narrow view of the self. Certainly if you say, “I, by 
my ego and my intelligence, created all this,” you 
would be conceited, and you know you are a liar. 
But you is much deeper than that; you includes far 
more than your conscious mind. It is the total you 
that not only is responsible for the infinitely com- 
plex structure of your physical organism, but also 
for the environment in which you find yourself. You 
runs that deep. 

It is you in that sense, the total you, that is the 
root and ground of everything. And yet we arrange 
our image of who we are around a principle of 
human sociability, which is measured by our ability 
to get along together according to our system of 
social convention. And as a result we so often end 
up putting everyone down, including ourselves, 
because nobody’s perfect, and because, as my 
mother used to say to me, “You're not the only 
pebble on the beach!” 

Why don’t we instead try the other technique, 
and put everyone “up” instead of down? It might be 
that everyone would get along far better that way 
than they do by putting everybody down! Of 


45 


What Is Zen? 


course, whatever you do, you have to do it uni- 
formly for everyone. You can't say, “Well, Johnny is 
the Lord God, but Peter isn’t!” 

As a result of our social conventions, we all 
feel ourselves to be strangers in the world. We 
are disconnected from it all, and it is something 
that “happens” to us that we endure passively, 
and that we receive passively. And we never get to 
the point where we realize we are actually doing 
the whole thing! It is up to you. You make your 
troubles, and you put yourself into a trap. You 
confuse yourself, and forget that you did it, and 
then ask how to get out of it! A verse from the 
Mumonkan, a famous book of koans, puts it this 
way: “Asking where Buddha is, is like hiding loot 
in your pocket and declaring yourself innocent!” 

To finally admit it, and to come to the recogni- 
tion that it was you, requires a certain kind of 
nerve. I don’t mean “nerve” in the sense of being 
brash and cheeky. I mean the sort of sense that you 
use when, for the first time, you take a plane off the 
ground, or when you pull a cloth off the table and 
leave all the dishes on the table! That sort of nerve 


46 


Zen Reconsidered 


has nothing to do with pride in the ordinary sense. 
It is being ready to leap in, somehow. You see it, and 
jump in. 

But most of us lack that kind of sense. Instead 
we have what I would call an ambivalent sense of 
responsibility. We say, “Now, look: It is only me 
here — just little me. I have certain responsibili- 
ties, and they are such and so, but that means as 
well that there are a lot of things I am certainly not 
responsible for.” And in our social conventions we 
play games about where we are going to draw the 
line that defines what we are — and what we're not 
— responsible for. 

When someone is in some kind of social or psy- 
chological difficulty, and someone has been irre- 
sponsible in some way, we wonder what caused the 
problem: “Why are they like that?” And instead of 
attributing the problem to the person, our psychol- 
ogists tend to refer it back to other things and 
other people: It was because of their environment, 
or because of family conditioning, or because of 
their father and mother. But there is no end to that, 
because you can take the blame straight back to 


47 


What Is Zen? 


Adam and Eve! And responsibility is evaded, 
because it was limited in the first place. 

We think that the world is limited and 
explained by its past. We tend to think that what 
happened in the past determines what is going to 
happen next, and we do not see that it is exactly 
the other way around! What is always the source of 
the world is the present; the past doesn’t explain a 
thing. The past trails behind the present like the 
wake of a ship, and eventually disappears. 

Now you would say that obviously when you 
see a ship crossing the ocean with the wake trailing 
behind it that the ship is the cause of the wake. But 
if you get into the state of mind that believes in 
causality as we do, you see that the wake is the 
cause of the ship! And that is surely making the tail 
wag the dog! 

The point is this: You will never find the mys- 
tery of the creation of the world in the past. It 
never was created in the past. Because truly there is 
nothing else — and never was anything else — 
except the present! There never will be anything 
else except the present. 


48 


Zen Reconsidered 


Life is always present, and the past is a kind of 
echo, a tracing within the present of what the pres- 
ent did before. We can say, “Oh well, we can guess 
what the present will do next because of what it 
has done in the past.” And this is true: Because of 
what it does habitually, you may guess it will go on 
doing it like that. But still it is not the past that 
controls the present any more than the wake con- 
trols the ship. Now from the record of the past you 
can study the nature of the present and predict 
what sort of things it’s likely to do. But sometimes 
it surprises you when something new happens, as 
every so often it does. 

It is always in the immediate here and now that 
things begin. And so, one of the essentials of Zen 
training is, to quote a certain parrot from Huxley’s 
Island, “Here and now, boys!” Be here. 

And in order to be here, you can't be looking for 
a result! People keep asking me, “Why do you do 
this? What do you want to get out of it?” But these 
questions imply that my motivation is different 
from my action. It is talking about it in terms of 


Newtonian billiards — in Newton’s explanation of 


49 


What Is Zen? 


mechanics and behavior he used an analogy with 
billiards. The balls — the fundamental atoms — 
are banging each other about; a ball will be still 
until something bangs it, and that bang will be its 
motivation, and set it in motion. So when we say, 
“Human beings behave in such-and-such a way 
because of unconscious mental mechanisms,” this 
is really Newtonian psychology, and it is out-of- 
date. Today we need a psychology that is current 
with quantum theory at least, not one that is tied 
to mechanical causality. 

It is difficult for us to understand this, however, 
unless we turn things around, as in the analogy of 
the ship and the wake. If you understand fully that 
it is from the present that everything happens, then 
the only place for you to be, the only place for you 
to live, is here, right now. 

People immediately say, however, “Now wait a 
minute. That’s all very well, but I want to be sure 
that under such-and-such circumstances and in 
such-and-such eventualities I will be able to deal 
with it. It’s all very well to live in the present when 
I am sitting comfortably in a warm room reading 


50 


Zen Reconsidered 


this, or meditating, but what am I going to do if all 
hell breaks loose? What if there’s an earthquake, or 
if I get sick, or my best friends get sick, or some 
catastrophe happens? How will I deal with that? 
Don’t I have to prepare myself to deal with those 
things? Shouldn't I get into some sort of psycholog- 
ical training, so that when disasters come I won't 
be thrown?” 

That, you would ordinarily think, is the way to 
proceed — but it doesn’t work very well. It is much 
better to say, “sufficient unto the day is the trouble 
thereof,” and to trust yourself to react appropri- 
ately when the catastrophe happens. Whatever 
happens, you'll probably have to improvise, and 
failure of nerve is really failure to trust yourself. 
You have a great endowment of brain, muscle, sen- 
sitivity, intelligence — trust it to react to circum- 
stances as they arise. 

Zen deals with this. Studying Zen will change 
the way you react to circumstances as they arise. 
Wait and see how you deal with whatever circum- 
stances come your way, because the you that will 
deal with them will not be simply your conscious 


51 


What Is Zen? 


intelligence or conscious attention. In that moment 
it will be all of you, and that is beyond the control of 
the will, because the will is only a fragment having 
certain limited functions. 

But if you really know how to live from your 
center, you live now, and know that now is the origin 
of everything. This way, you stand a much better 
chance of being able to deal with the unforeseen 
than if you keep worrying about it and considering 
past lessons and future possibilities. 

I know that this sounds impractical to some of 
you, or perhaps revolutionary, or perhaps not even 
possible, but it is simply living in the present. It 
requires a certain kind of poise: If you make exact 
plans to deal with the future and things don't 
happen at all as you expected, you are apt to 
become thoroughly disappointed and disoriented. 
But if your plans are flexible and adaptable, and if 
you're here when things happen, you always stay 
balanced. 

As in movement or martial arts, keep your 
center of gravity between your feet, and don’t cross 
your feet, because the moment you do you are off 


52 


Zen Reconsidered 


balance. Stay always in the center position, and 
stay always here. Then it doesn’t matter which direc- 
tion the attack comes from; it doesn’t matter what 
happens at all. 

If you expect something to come in a certain 
way, you position yourself to get ready for it. If it 
comes another way, by the time you reposition your 
energy, it is too late. So stay in the center, and you 
will be ready to move in any direction. 

This is the real meaning of the practice of zazen, 
or sitting Zen: to sit in the center. As you begin sit- 
ting meditation the first thing to do is to find your 
center, and become comfortable with it, so that you 
are neither leaning forward nor sitting back. When 
one’s body is balanced in this way the forces of high 
and low, the heart and breath, and mind and feeling 
merge at the center. 

To sit in zazen in order to perfect a technique 
for attaining enlightenment, however, is fundamen- 
tally a mistaken approach. Sit just to sit. And why 
not sit? You have to sit sometime, and so you may as 
well really sit, and be altogether here. Otherwise 
the mind wanders away from the matter at hand, 


53 


What Is Zen? 


and away from the present. Even to think through 
the implications of the present is to avoid the pres- 
ent moment completely. 

When you are meditating, it is perfectly fine to 
be aware of anything that’s around: things on the 
floor, the smell of the atmosphere, the little noises 
going on. Be there! But when you hear a dog bark, 
and that starts off a train of thought about dogs in 
general, about your dog, or somebody else’s dog, 
then you have wandered away from being here. Of 
course you finally will come to the point where you 
realize there is no way of wandering away from 
being here, because there is nowhere else to be. 
Even if you think about somewhere else, past or 
future, this is all happening now. 

Through this you will also come to understand 
how to be a scholar and a historian, if you wish to, 
and still live in the present. That was how D.T. 
Suzuki was able to be scholarly and intellectual, 
and yet at the same time not to depart at all from 
the spirit of Zen, which is beyond the intellect. You 
can intellectualize in a Zen way, just as you can 
sweep floors in a Zen way, but of course the key to 


54 


Zen Reconsidered 


the matter is centering — being really here. Because 
this is the point of origin of the world, and it is at 
the same time the destination of the world. 

This is the real meaning of dhyana, which in 
Sanskrit is the kind of concentration or meditation 
that constitutes Zen. Zen is simply the Japanese 
way of pronouncing dhyana, and it is that state of 
centeredness which is here and now. 

When you practice zazen, just sit and enjoy 
yourself being quiet. It is not a duty at all; it is a 
great pleasure! Get up early in the morning when 
the sunlight is just beginning to show. It doesn’t 
matter where you are, just sit. 

Don't have any thoughts, but don’t compulsively 
try to get rid of thoughts. It’s just not important. 
The real thing is what is — what is here, now. After 
all, here you are, and you may as well see it! 

Eventually, a curious feeling will overcome you, 
one that is very hard to describe in words. I just 
said that the origin of the world is now — and 
there is this odd sensation that now comprises 
everything: the most distant past, the most remote 
future, the vastness of space, all states of experi- 


55 


What Is Zen? 


ence, all joy, all sorrow, all heights, all depths. 
Everything is now. There isn’t anywhere else to be 
— there never was, and never will be! 

That is why you never were born, and therefore 
cannot die. You never came, so you won't go. You 
were always here. It’s a very curious feeling, so dif- 
ferent from what we ordinarily think. In entering 
into the now, we find the eternal now. We find infin- 
ity in the split second. 


As they say in Yoga, liberation lies in the interval 
between two thoughts. Between the past thought 
and the future thought lies now — there is no pres- 
ent thought. 

As one of the Zen texts puts it, “One thought 
follows another without interruption. But if you 
allow these thoughts to link up into a chain, you 
put yourself in bondage.” 

Actually, this present moment never comes to 
be and it never ceases to be, it is simply our minds 
that construct the continuity of thoughts we call 
time. In the present moment is nirvana. 


As the great Zen master Dogen explains, in the 


56 


Zen Reconsidered 


course of the seasons, the spring does not “become” 
the summer. And when wood burns, the wood does 
not “become” the ashes. There is the state of wood, 
and then there is the state of ashes. There is the 
state of spring; there is the state of summer. The 
spring does not become the summer; the wood does 
not become ashes; the living body does not become 
the corpse. That only happens in us, in our minds, 
when we link our thoughts together. “Oh, no! I will 
become a corpse!” But you won't. You won't be 
there when there is a corpse! 


If we are going to introduce Westerners to the 
fundamentals of Zen, we need to revise our under- 
standing of the procedures and rationale of medita- 
tion. It should not become a competitive game of 
one-upmanship, or a marathon to see who can take 
it, and who can endure. That puts the whole affair 
right back under the domain of time. 

The important thing to emphasize is presence, 
being completely here, and not feeling guilty if you 
enjoy it. You can do that most easily in any kind of 
activity that does not require much discursive 


57 


What Is Zen? 


thought. Anything that you can do without a great 
deal of thought becomes a perfect form of medita- 
tion, whether it’s shucking peas, digging up a plot 
of ground, putting up a fence, or doing dishes. 

In Buddhism one hears of “the four dignities of 
man.” It is an extraordinary phrase, when you think 
about it, especially when you learn the “four digni- 
ties” are simply walking, standing, sitting, and 
lying. Zazen is simply “sitting Zen.” There is also 
“lying Zen,” which is sleeping Zen — when you 
sleep, sleep. There is “standing Zen,” and there is 
“walking Zen.” Walking is a very good method of 
meditation. You simply stroll around, but be right 
with it! Be here. 

People have difficulties with these simple forms 
of meditation. Thoughts and feelings come up: “Is it 
only this? Is this all there is? Nothing seems to be 
happening. What’s going on? I feel a little frus- 
trated, and I don't particularly feel enlightened. 
There’s just nothing ‘special’ about this at all. Do I 
have to do this longer in order for something to 


happen?” 


58 


Zen Reconsidered 


But nothing special is supposed to happen. It’s 
just this. This is it, right here. 

You may have difficulty in accepting it because 
you still feel the lack of nerve to see that you are all 
of it. You are not an observer who is witnessing the 
present moment as something happening to you. 
The present that you are experiencing is all of 
you. It’s not “you” here looking at “the floor” there. 
The floor is just as much you as the organism look- 
ing at it. You are doing the floor, just like you're 
doing your feet. It is all one world — and you're 
responsible for it. 

So enjoy it! Have a good time! 


59 


PART I 


SPACE 


» On 


re 


t 


Nt 


SPACE 


Zen represents a simplified way of life. The 
style and way in which a Zen temple is furnished is 
completely uncluttered. The rooms of a temple are 
mostly empty. They are just spaces — but they are 
gorgeous spaces. 

Space is the most valuable thing in Japan, and it 
is treated with great reverence. Here in the United 
States, where we have so much space, we do not 
appreciate it. We think that space is equivalent to 
“nothing,” something that simply isn’t there. We 
think of space as a “blank,” but in a more crowded 
situation, people really notice space. 

It is interesting that China too is a country 


63 


What Is Zen? 


where there is also a lot of space, yet I think it was 
the Chinese who above all through the arts first 
taught man to appreciate space. Today we are living 
in a “space age” and, strangely enough, even though 
our culture is a pioneer in space navigation and 
space exploration, we really don’t understand the 
value of space at all. One of the great contributions 
of Zen to the Western world is understanding 
space. 


The most desirable land for residences in Japan 
is in the hills. The hills are full of parks and water 
springs, but the curious thing is that the best land 
and the most gorgeous sites are occupied by Zen 
temples. These temples were originally taken away 
from the brigands, who somehow let the Zen 
monks come in. These monks essentially put one 
over on the brigands and occupied the space. 

In the Kamakura epoch, Zen had an enormous 
influence on the samurai warrior caste. This was a 
time when Japan was torn by internal strife, and 
constant war was waged between the various 
feudal lords as they fought to gain control of the 


64 


Space 


imperial power. They went to study Zen as soldiers 
in order to learn fearlessness — and that was where 
the Zen monks outfoxed the samurai. The samurai 
prided themselves on their manly and warrior-like 
qualities, but they couldn't scare the Zen monks 
because the monks were just not fazed — not 
stopped at all — by the idea of death! 

A classic Zen story about their fearlessness is 
the tale of a young man who applied to a fencing 
master to be his student. The master looked at him 
and said, “Who did you study with before?” 

He said, “I’ve never studied fencing before.” 

The master looked at him in a funny way and 
said, “No, surely, come now, you have studied with 
someone.” 

He said, “No sir, I never have studied.” 

“Well,” the master said, “I’m an experienced 
teacher, and I can tell at once by looking at a person 
whether he has studied fencing or not. And I know 
you have!” 

But the young man shook his head and said, 
“Sir, I assure you, I’ve never studied fencing at all 


with anybody.” 


65 


What Is Zen? 


“Well,” said the master, “there must be some- 
thing peculiar about you — what do you suppose it 
could be?” 

“Well,” the young man said, “when I was a boy, I 
was very worried about dying. So I thought a great 
deal about death. And then I came to the realization 
that there’s nothing in death to be afraid of.” 

“Oh,” said the master, “that explains it.” 


One of the results of the initial part of Zen 
training — the beginning of Zen — is overcoming 
the fear of death. What I described to you earlier as 
the Hinayana stage of Zen study is where you go 
deeply into meditation and withdraw your con- 
sciousness, as it were, back to its source. 

This is the initial stage, and as you go into it, 
you go down into that dimension of your being 
where you are deeper than your individuality. And 
you realize that you belong down here, because this 
is where you truly exist. What you feel as your indi- 
viduality is really something temporal, like the 
leaves of a deciduous tree. In the season of the fall, 


they dry up and drop off. 


66 


Space 


The Japanese in their poetry and aesthetics 
always liken death to the fall and winter season. 
They have a feeling about a human life that is har- 
monious with the seasons of the year. This theme 
goes through Japanese poetry, and therefore old 
people are looked upon as those who are in the 
“winter” of life, or the “fall” of life. And just as the 
maple trees in Japan become absolutely gorgeous in 
the fall, there is an appreciation and a respect for 
this season of life. Old people in Japan look much 
better than our old people because they’re not 
fighting with age, they’re cooperating with it. It is 
an honorable thing to be old. 

For women and for men, age means respect and 
authority. This feeling of the harmoniousness of 
human life with the life cycles of nature makes 
aging and death less problematic for people with 
that sort of psychology. They see old age as the 
proper rhythm of time, not as the deterioration of a 
living being, just as they don’t see the fall and 
winter as a deterioration of time. 

I suppose this may be a difficult correspon- 
dence for us to understand, because we simply 


67 


What Is Zen? 


don’t feel the seasons in the same way. So many of 
us live in a seasonless world. 


I mentioned earlier the idea that the great Zen 
master Dogen put in his book, the Shobogenzo — 
actually, he got the idea from a Chinese student of 
Kumarajiva, who lived about a.p. 400. Dogen noted 
that, contrary to appearance, events in time are 
eternal, and that each event “stays” in its own 
place. The burning wood does not become ash. 
First there is wood and then there is ash. The 
spring does not become the summer. There is 
spring, then there is summer; then there is fall, 
then there is winter. 

And, curious as it may sound, the sun in its 
rotation does not move, and the river doesn’t flood. 
It sounds paradoxical to us. It’s like the saying 
from Heraclitus: You never step into the same river 
twice. 


There is a very close parallel between the think- 
ing of Heraclitus and Taoist philosophy; both 
understand the yang and the yin. Heraclitus is the 


68 


Space 


most original thinker in Western thought. (Phillip 
Wheelwright published an excellent translation 
of what remains of the fragments of Heraclitus’ 
philosophy.) If the West had founded itself on 
Heroclitus rather than Aristotle, we would have 
been a lot better off, because he was a most ingen- 
ious man, and his thought is far closer to Eastern 


thought. 


The Japanese feel that death is a completely nat- 
ural event; it is only, as it were, the dropping of the 
leaves, and yet the root underneath is always there. 
This is difficult for most people to appreciate; the 
root doesn’t seem to enter into our ordinary lives at 
all. “I feel that I’m only ‘on top’ — how do I ‘get 
down?” Well of course the top is the top and it can’t 
get down and be the bottom! 

This is the same question people raise when 
they ask, “How do I get rid of my egocentricity?” 
Well, obviously, you can’t get rid of egocentricity 
with your egocentricity — as the master Bankei 
said, “You can’t wash off blood with blood!” And 
trying to realize your Buddha-nature by some sort of 


69 


What Is Zen? 


egocentric effort is like trying to wash off your ego 
with your ego, and blood with blood. 

In his teaching Bankei emphasized the way in 
which you have this root in you. He said, “When 
you hear a bell ringing, you don’t have to think 
about it — you know at once that it’s a bell. When 
you hear the crow cawing, you don’t by any effort 
or cleverness of your conscious will know that it’s 
a crow — your mind does that for you.” 


Once Bankei was being heckled by a Nichiren 
priest — those Nichirens can be very fanatical. The 
Nichiren priest was standing on the fringe of a 
crowd listening to Bankei, and he called out, “I 
don’t understand a single word you're saying!” 

And Bankei said, “Come closer, and I'll explain 
it to you.” 

So the priest walked into the crowd, and Bankei 
said, “Come on, come closer.” 

And he came closer. “Come closer still!” And he 
came closer. “Please, closer still” — until he was 
right next to Bankei. And Bankei said, “How well 
you understand me!” 


7O 


Space 


Bankei emphasized that we have what he called 
the “unborn mind” in us, the level of mind that 
doesn’t arise, that isn’t born into individuality. We 
all have that original endowment. When somebody 
says “good morning,” we say “good morning,” and 
we don’t “think” to do this — that’s the unborn 
mind. It’s the unborn mind through which your 
eyes are blue or brown; it’s the unborn mind by 
which you see and breathe. 


Breathing is important in the practice of medi- 
tation because it is the faculty in us that is simulta- 
neously voluntary and involuntary. You can feel 
that you are breathing, and equally you can feel 
that it is breathing you. So it is a sort of bridge 
between the voluntary world and the involuntary 
world — a place where they are one. 

Through focusing on our breathing, and by 
understanding this concept, we can acquire the 
sense that our unconscious life is not unconscious 
at all, in the sense that it lacks consciousness: 
instead, it is the root of consciousness, the source 
from which consciousness comes. Just as the leaves 


71 


What Is Zen? 


come every year on the tree, so consciousness per- 
petually comes and goes out of the unconscious 
base, or what we could call the supra-conscious 
base. 

In order to appreciate this, you don’t need to 
believe literally in reincarnation — the idea that 
you have an individual, enduring center or soul that 
is born into existence time after time after time. 
Zen practitioners are divided as to whether they 
think this is so or not. I’ve met masters who believe 
in reincarnation, and I’ve met masters who don't 
believe in it at all. 

When they talk of the continual reappearance of 
individuality and consciousness out of the base, 
what they mean is simply something all of us can 
see: We see human beings in all stages of life coming 
and going. We don’t see any continuity between 
them. 

But that is only because we dont see space. It is 
the interval between people — the space between 
lives — that constitutes the bond between them. 
This is very important — the philosophy of space 
— and we will get into it in more depth, but the 


72 


Space 


point here is that through realizing this, those Zen 
monks had enormous nerve. They could look a 
samurai in the face and say, “Okay, cut my head off! 
What does it prove?” 

The samurai were amazed by this, and regarded 
those monks as sort of magical people. They asked 
the monks to teach them, because they felt if they 
had that kind of fearlessness, they could never be 
defeated by an enemy. 

Zen is like a spring coming out of a mountain. It 
doesn’t flow out in order to quench the thirst of a 
traveler, but if the travelers want to help them- 
selves to it, that’s fine. It’s up to you what you do 
with the water; the spring’s job is just to flow. Zen 
masters will teach anyone who has the tenacity to 
go after it, whoever they are. The samurai became 
grateful students of the Zen monks, and let them 
occupy the best land in town! 


On that land they built buildings that are essen- 
tially great, heavy roofs in the Tang Dynasty Chinese 
style supported by a kind of elegant flimsiness 
underneath. They’re like lanterns — under the roof, 


73 


What Is Zen? 


empty floors are covered with straw mats; there are 
sliding screens, and occasional cushions to sit on, 
and nothing else. You get a feeling of “living” space 
inside. 

Let’s consider that a moment. I said earlier that 
in the West we disregard space. We know space 
here on the planet is full of air, and we know that is 
“something.” Air occupies space and is very impor- 
tant to us, essential to life in fact, but we think of 
air as simply filling a “void.” When astronomers 
start to talk about curved space, or properties of 
space, the average person feels that their common 
sense has been offended. “How could space be 
curved? How could it have any properties? It isn’t 
there. It’s nothing!” 

But the folly of thinking that way becomes 
apparent the moment you realize that solid- 
ness, materiality, or density is inconceivable apart 
from space. Space is the interval between solids, 
and thus in some sense is the relationship between 
them. 

To understand this, consider for a moment 
another kind of space altogether: “musical” space 


74 


Space 


— the interval between notes in a melody. When 
you play a sequence of notes in a melody, there is no 
pause, no silence between one note and another; 
they follow each other immediately. But it is only 
because of the interval — something that is not 
stated, not “sounded” — that you hear a melody. If 
you don’t hear the interval, you don’t hear the 
melody. The space between the notes, the step, the 
interval is an essential element in melody. In exactly 
the same way, it is space — be it interior space or 
interstellar space — that goes hand in hand with 
there being any solids or stars. Space isn’t just “noth- 
ing,” it is the other pole of something. 


Let’s look at it from another point of view. We 
have looked at space astronomically, and musically; 
let’s look at it for a moment aesthetically. In a 
motel room, for example, when you see the typical 
“Western” flower print — for some reason or other 
hotels and motels love flower or bird prints in 
frames over the bed — you see a bunch of flowers 
set directly in the middle of a piece of paper. This 
shows that the person who designed the print has 


75 


What Is Zen? 


no conception of space, because the space in that 
print serves merely as background, and is nothing 
more. It has no function whatsoever; the space is 
not part of the picture. 

When Chinese painters use space, however, you 
see that if they paint a spray of grass or bamboo or 
a pine tree, they never set it directly in the middle 
of the paper. It is set off to one side, so that the 
object painted is, as we say, “balanced” by the 
space, and the space is an essential part of the 
painting. By putting the spray of bamboo to one 
side, you immediately see the part of the painting 
that hasn’t been touched as something — as mist, or 
even water. The painter doesn’t have to do a thing 
to it — somehow it is all in the picture. The 
bamboo is not merely set against the background 
— everything right out to the edge of the piece of 
paper has been included in the piece by doing this. 
The artist sees the polarity of space and solid, and 
uses this polarity in the painting by balancing them 
against each other. 

But you do not feel that balance if the solid area 
— the painted subject, whatever it may be — is put 


76 


Space 


smack in the middle of the space. Instead, you abol- 
ish the importance of the space; it has no “place” in 
the painting. When we think of a solid object simply 
sitting in the middle of a canvas, we ignore space. 


I have had great fun when visiting college com- 
munities by doing experiments in Gestalt psychol- 
ogy that illustrate figure and ground. The Gestalt 
theory of perception is that we tend to notice the 
figure and ignore the background. We tend to notice 
a moving object and ignore what is relatively still. 
We tend to notice areas that are tightly enclosed 
rather than those that are diffused. 

I draw a circle on the blackboard and say to the 
group, “What have I drawn?” They inevitably say, 
“A circle, a ball, a ring,” or something like that. And 
I say then, “Why didn't anybody suggest that I have 
drawn a wall with a hole in it?” It shows us that we 
tend to ignore the background and pay attention to 
the figure. 

Western artists almost inevitably paint the 
entire background, because they don’t realize that 
“empty” space is important. 


7 


What Is Zen? 


Architects, however, will talk about the “prop- 
erties” of a space, because they know that what 
they’re doing is making living spaces for people. 
They are enclosing space, and so space has a certain 
reality to the architect. But to the ordinary person, 
space just isn’t there! We’re not aware of it. 

It’s very interesting that in meditation experi- 
ments you can experience various kinds of space: 
optical space, auditory space, and tactile space. By 
closing your eyes for a while, you can realize what 
a blind man’s conception of space would be. Every 
sense has its own appreciation of space. 

There was a time in our own history when we 
can see, by reading between the lines of ancient 
literature — as late as Dante — that they regarded 
“space” and “mind” as the same thing. And if you 
think about it, you can see it is rather obvious. 
Take the “mind of the eye” — what Buddhists call 
the vijnana — which corresponds to seeing. The 
basis of sight is a sort of screen, and just as you 
have a screen on which to project a slide or a 
movie, there is a kind of ground or area in which 
everything that is seen must be. You have what we 


78 


Space 


call a “field of vision,” which is an oval, with fuzzy 
edges. You “see” an oval area, this field of vision. 
There has to be that open field for there to be any 
vision at all and, though we ignore it, it is the 
background. 


There was once an Englishman and an Indian 
sitting in a garden together, and the Hindu was 
trying to explain basic Indian philosophy to the 
Englishman. So he said, “Look now, there is a hedge 
at the end of the garden — against what do you see 
the hedge?” 

The Englishman said, “Against the hills.” 

“And what do you see the hills against?” 

He said, “Against the sky.” 

“And what do you see the sky against?” And the 
Englishman didn’t know what to say. 

So the Hindu said, “You see it against conscious- 
ness.” 


In the same way, the space for “being” itself — 
for material vibration — is the space that we think 
of as existing between bodies. That is the ground 


79 


What Is Zen? 


— the field — which quanta must have in order to 
play. In the same way that space itself is invisible, 
consciousness is unknown, because it is not an 
object of our knowledge. This dimension of your 
being is like space. This basis is called amala vijnana 
in Buddhist teachings, and it means “without 
taint.” You can’t make a mark on space! 

The Buddha said, “The path of the enlightened 
ones leaves no track — it is like the path of birds in 
the sky.” 


The Buddhists describe the ultimate reality of 
the world as shunyata, which is often translated as 
“emptiness” or “the void,” or even “the plenum 
void,” meaning it is void, but full of all possibilities. 
The basic doctrine of Buddhist Mahayana philoso- 
phy is given in the Heart Sutra: 


Form is emptiness; emptiness is form. 


To indicate this idea in Chinese, they use a char- 
acter for shunyata or emptiness that also means 
“sky” and “space.” Space is contrasted with the 


80 


Space 


word for form (which also means “shape” and 
“color”), and the character between them means 
something like “exactly is” — space exactly is, or is pre- 
cisely the same as form. And when the characters are 
reversed it says form is precisely emptiness. 

The Chinese word for “is,” however, is not quite 
the same as the English or European “is” (in Latin 
est); it means rather “is inseparable from,” or “always 
goes with.” The two are interdependent. You can't 
have space without form; you can’t have form with- 
out space. They are relational, and in that sense, they 
are each other, because underneath every inseparable 
relation is a common ground. 

To perceive that form reveals the void, and to 
see that the void reveals form, is the secret for the 
overcoming of death. To the extent that one is 
unaware of space, one is unaware of one’s own eter- 
nity — it’s the same thing! 


People sometimes imagine that to be aware of 
the eternal dimension, the forms must disappear. 
This belief is held by many in India who believe 
that in nirvikalpa samadhi, which is the highest state 


81 


What Is Zen? 


of consciousness (samadhi means the meditation 
state; concentration; absorption into ultimate real- 
ity beyond words; nirvikalpa means without con- 
cept), is without “content.” They will say that in 
the state of nirvikalpa the mind is completely devoid 
of any form or motion whatsoever. 

That sounds like a total “blank.” And in Zen it 
is said that a person whose mind is in that state is 
a “stone” Buddha, just like the Buddha made of 
stone sitting on the altar: there is no consciousness. 
There’s no point in that, and so in Zen they inter- 
pret all this in a very different way indeed. To have 
nirvikalpa samadhi, the highest state of conscious- 
ness, is not to have consciousness in which there 
are no forms, it is simply to reawaken to the reality 
of space. To see that forms come and go in space as 
the leaves come and go on the trees, as the stars 
come and go in the sky. 

The sky is in a way the mother of the stars, and 
of course no woman is a mother until she has a 
child. So in this sense space does not come into 
being as the matrix of the world until there is 


something there to nurture. That’s why the Chinese 


82 


Space 


use the term “to arise mutually” to indicate the 
relationship between all opposites: they come into 
being, they arise mutually. 

Space and form arise mutually — as do being and 
non-being. Then you can see what it means in prac- 
tical life: To the degree that you are unaware of 
space, you are unaware of the fullness of your nature. 

As our population increases, and we become 
more crowded, space will become more valuable, 
and this will help us to be more aware of it. 
Perhaps that’s the reason why species multiply: as 
many-ness increases, the consciousness of one-ness 
increases. 

So in Zen, in answer to the question, “What is 
the ultimate reality?” the master says, “Three pounds 
of flax.” 

He chooses something very particular, extremely 
concrete and “everyday” — something quite worldly 
— to answer this metaphysical question. Why? 
Because space does not obliterate the particular, but 
rather it is precisely the particular, ordinary every- 
day event that proclaims and advertises the underly- 
ing unity of the world. 


83 


What Is Zen? 


The many advertise the one — the solid implies 
and indeed exhibits and brings out the fact that 
there is space. Were there no solids, there would be 
no space. If you try to imagine space with no solids, 
you have to get rid of yourself looking at it, because 
youre a solid in the middle of the space! Space, 
space, space forever — with nothing in it — is 
absolutely meaningless, an unimaginable concept. 
You have to have space and solid — they always go 
together. 


This explains some of the many ways in which 
Zen life has feeling for space. Here’s another very 
different thing to consider: their idea of poverty. 
The poverty of the monk, for example, is not 
poverty as we have thought of it in the Western 
tradition. It is not poverty as a sort of oppression, 
where the poor are deprived and feel denuded by 
poverty. In Zen, poverty is voluntary, and consid- 
ered not really as poverty so much as simplicity, 
freedom, unclutteredness. 

They have the same feeling for it as they do for 
purity. The “pure” mind — the “taintless” mind — 


84 


Space 


means not that you are a “prude,” in any sense, 
because they don’t think of purity in that sense at 
all. It does not mean not having any appetites — 
not feeling hungry, never feeling sexual, or any- 
thing like that! In Zen, purity means “clarity.” A 
“pure” eye is a clear eye — without dust in it, just 
aS a pure mirror is a mirror without dust. But the 
real prototype of purity in Buddhist literature is 
not so much the mirror as space itself. That is purity, 
clarity, transparency; it is also freedom. 

Purity and poverty are simply an absence of 
pain. 


The peculiarly noticeable thing about the per- 
sonality of Zen people is the uncluttered mind. 
When you deal with Zen masters, you have a strange 
feeling that so long as you are with them and 
addressing them, they are absolutely with you. They 
have nothing else to do but to talk to you. They are 
just “right there.” 

They’re willing to have some “small talk.” 
They’re not like those terribly serious spiritual 
people who have no time for small talk at all and 


85 


What Is Zen? 


who cant just pass the time of day! But on the other 
hand they don’t waste time. They don't dither 
around, and they’re never distracted. When some- 
thing is finished, it’s finished; and they go right on to 
the next thing. 

You can see this in the way they walk. They have 
a characteristic walk that is quite different from 
other Japanese people’s walk. This may be partly 
due to dress, because Zen monks have a wide skirt 
on their robes, and they stride as they walk, with a 
kind of arhythm that is completely characteristic. A 
Zen monk walking down the street is exactly like a 
cat crossing the road. When you see a cat crossing 
the road, the cat always looks as if it knows exactly 
where it’s going. Both cats and Zen monks move in 
a way that conveys a feeling of freedom. 


I stayed one time in an inn on the edge of 
Nanzengi in the northern corner of Kyoto. I got up 
early, as I usually do, and sat on the balcony. In the 
distance I heard this sound: “Hoa! Hoa! Hoa!” It came 
nearer and nearer; then I saw these monks with 


their big mushroom hats on and their begging 


86 


Space 


bowls held out in front of them. Hoa means “the 
dharma.” 

They came down the street with a swinging, 
thythmic walk: boom-boom-boom-boom-boom! I 
thought I’'d put something in their bowls, and I 
shot downstairs. But by the time I got there, they 
were gone. 

We had dinner in the monastery that night and 
I told the priest who was entertaining us about this 
incident, and said, “You know, I don’t think your 
monks are serious about begging! In the early morn- 
ing the little cart comes with groceries, and it stays 
around long enough for the housewives to come out 
and buy their vegetables. At night, there comes a 
man who sells ramen (noodle soup) on a little cart, 
and he stays around long enough for people to come 
out. But your monks don’t stay around long enough 
for anybody to give them anything! I don’t think 
they’re really begging at all; they’re just fat and rich 
and their begging is a gesture!” 

The next morning I went down early, and stood 
on the lower level. The monks came by, but they 
weren't begging at all. They carried their big 


87 


What Is Zen? 


mushroom hats in their hands in front of them, 
pointing outwards — the way they hold them when 
they’re just walking, and not begging. There were 
about three of them walking single-file, Indian 
style, and the lead monk looked at me and bowed 
with a kind of evil grin! The priest must have told 
them what I had said, and their answer was word- 
less — and comical. 


It’s so interesting the way they have this “free” 
walk. You have a sense that, as D.T. Suzuki put it, 
“a Zen monk is a concentration of energy which is 
available immediately for anything.” In one Zen 
master’s writings, this is likened to water in a 
vessel. If you make a hole in the vessel, the water 
immediately comes out. It doesn't stop to think 
about it. 

When you clap your hands, the sound is the clap- 
ping of the hands. It comes out at once. It doesn’t 
stop to think. When you strike a stone with steel, 
the sparks fly immediately! 

In the same way, as you can see so clearly in the 
walk of those who practice Zen, there is always 


88 


Space 


availability, always readiness to act. Therefore they 
live a life which is empty and spacious — in the 
sense of being “unblocked.” To get rid of blocks is 
to have space in one’s life, the same space we've 
been talking about all along. 

The heart doctrine of Buddhism, and the final 
feeling about the universe at the end of the line, 
when you really get down to it, is called in Japanese 
ji-ji-muge. Or in Chinese, cher cher mu-gai. Between all 
things and events in the universe — muge — there is 
no block. In other words, every thing, every event 
in the universe that ever happens, implies all the 
others. 

And the connection between them is: 


space. 
Which is no block. 


If you can see that space is an effective reality, 
then you can understand the life and death rela- 
tionship, because you don’t need any more informa- 
tion about this relationship than you already have. 


89 


What Is Zen? 


When we watch sparrows, this year’s sparrows 
seem to be the same as last year’s sparrows coming 
back again, because we don’t pay much attention 
to the unique individuality of each particular 
sparrow. 

This is in a way like the story of the fisherman 
who was using worms for bait. Someone came up to 
him while he was fishing and said, “It’s a terribly 
cruel thing. How can you put those poor little 
worms on hooks?” And he replied, “Oh, they are 
used to it.” 

We look at our own lives from a perspective in 
which we are enormously preoccupied with the 
uniqueness of each life. Somebody else at another 
level of magnification might see human lives as a 
vast continuity of comings and goings, and they 
would be just as right from their vantage point as 
we are from ours — for after all, all these human 
beings are just different ways of repeating the same 
event. Whether you call someone Jane or Joan, or 
John or Peter, it is always the same person coming 
back with slight variations — there always have to 
be slight variations because no two things are quite 


go 


Space 


the same. As is said in Pali, the language of the 
Buddhist texts, “Each incarnation is not the same, 


yet not another.” 


Think about what happens when you die. What 
will it be like to go to sleep and never wake up? 
You can't even think about what it would be like 
because you have nothing to compare it to. It isn’t 
like being shut in the dark forever or buried alive. It 
is like everything you remember before you were 
born — after all, what happened once can always 
happen again. 

You know very well that after you die, and after 
everyone else that you have ever known has died, 
babies of all kinds — human, animal, and vegetable 
— will be born. And each one of them will feel that 
it is “I” in the same way as you do, and each will 
experience itself to be the center of the universe, 
exactly as you do. And in this sense, then, each one 
of them is you, for this situation can only be expe- 
rienced one at a time. 

So you will die, and then someone else will be 
born, but it will feel exactly as you do now. It will 


Ql 


What Is Zen? 


be, in other words, “I” — and there is only one “I,” 
although it is infinitely varied. So you don’t have 
to worry; you are not going to sit and wait out 
eternity in a dark room. 

To put this another way, allow me to make two 
propositions. After I die I will be reborn as 
another baby, but I will have no memory of my 
past life. That is proposition number one. 
Proposition two is simply that after I die another 
baby will be born. I maintain that these proposi- 
tions really are the same thing, because if there is 
no memory of having lived before then effectively 
that baby is someone else. But after a while you 
have accumulated so many experiences and col- 
lected so many memories that they are lined up 
like a shelf of mystery stories that you have 
already read, and it comes time to get rid of them. 

You want a surprise, a new situation. You do 
not want to know what the outcome will be. One 
of the rules of the game of chess is that if you know 
the outcome of a game for certain, you cancel it and 
begin a new one in which the outcome is not cer- 
tain. This is also part of nature, and so we have to 


g2 


Space 


have forgetfulness as well as a memory, just as we 
have to have a capacity to retain food — the stom- 
ach and so on — but also a capacity to reject it. We 
have to have a hole at each end, and so it is with 
memory. 

By being able to lose yourself utterly — every- 
thing you have clung to, everything you have built 
up, all of your accomplishments and your pride — 
the world may begin anew, and see itself again 
through your eyes. 


93 


PART IV 


ZEN MIND 


» Un 


rp 


ZEN MIND 


If we say that Zen is a certain kind of under- 
standing of the world, or a certain kind of awareness 
of the world, we must ask, what kind of awareness is 
it? It is very often said that Zen lies beyond the intel- 
lect and beyond logic, and that this kind of under- 
standing is not accessible to reasoning or any other 
intellectual processes. 

What exactly does this mean? From some points 
of view, this way of putting it is misleading, because 
when we say “intellectualizing” and the Japanese 


say “intellectualizing,” we don’t necessarily mean 


97 


What Is Zen? 


the same thing. When in India they say, “The 
knowledge of Vedanta is not to be obtained from 
books,” this statement has a very specific meaning. 
It means the books are only lecture notes, and they 
have to be explained by a teacher. 

In the Yoga Sutra of Patanjali, the first verse says, 
“Now yoga is explained.” Period. Then the second 
verse follows. The teachers using these texts know 
this is just to remind them what to say, in the same 
way that musical notation for the East Indians is 
not something you read while you play, it is just to 
remind you of the basic form of the melody. 

The word “now” indicates that something had to 
go before this; there had to be a preparation before 
you got to this point in your study of yoga. The word 
“now” gives the teachers a clue for their pitch. 

In the same way, the Upanishads in their compact 
style are simply the notes to accompany the teach- 
ing. This is especially true of the Brahma Sutras; if 
you come across Radhakrishna’s translation of the 
Brahma Sutras you will find these funny little laconic 
verses from the sutra, and then pages upon pages of 
Radhakrishna’s commentary. That’s one reason 


98 


Zen Mind 


why it is said that you can't get it from books. 

Another reason is that books by their very 
nature are intellectual, and the understanding of 
Zen is intuitive. 

What is the difference between intellectual 
understanding and intuitive understanding? When 
you talk about these deep matters, people often say, 
“I understand what you're saying intellectually, but 
I don’t really feel it.” And I often say, “Well, I don’t 
think you understand it intellectually, because the 
intellect and the feelings aren't really two different 
compartments of the mind.” 

Carl Jung has a schema of the mind as having 
four functions — intellect, feeling, intuition, and 
sensation — but these are only colors in a spec- 
trum, as it were. The spectrum of light is continu- 
ous, and red is not in a different compartment 
from blue. Light is all one spectrum, with many 
colors. 

In the same way, we have one mind, and it has 
various different ways of functioning. 

A psychologist was ribbing me a while ago, kid- 


ding that I was only proficient in words. “You put 


99 


What Is Zen? 


on a great talk, but you don’t understand it other- 
wise,” he said. 

“Don't you put down words like that!” I said, 
“Words are noises in the air; they are patterns of 
thought, patterns of intellect, like a fern. Do you put 
down a fern because it has a complicated pattern?” 

“No,” he said. “But the fern is real — it’s a living, 
natural thing.” 

And I said, “So are words! I'l] make patterns in 
the air with words, and make all sorts of concepts 
and string them together, and they’re going to be 
great! So don't put it down — it’s a form of life like 
any other form of life.” 


Zen indeed has an intellectual aspect. This 
aspect is known in Japanese as kegon, and in 
Chinese, hua-yen. Hua means the flower, so this is 
the school of the flower garland. 

In Sanskrit, it is what is called ganda-vyuha, the 
most sophisticated form of Mahayana philosophy. 
When we were talking earlier about ji-ji-muge, the 
mutual interpenetration of all things and events, 
this is the philosophy that evolved in this school. 


100 


Zen Mind 


The study of yoga has an intellectual aspect, as 
well. There are various forms of yoga: bhakti yoga, 
which is devotional, emotional, related to feelings; 
karma yoga, which is practical and active; hatha 
yoga, which is physical; and jnana yoga, which is 
intellectual. 

But so many people have great difficulty in 
seeing the bridge between intellectual understand- 
ing and intuitive understanding. They know the 
words, but don’t get any real “sense” of the meaning 
in a way that their sense-experience has changed. 
When we say “an intuitive understanding,” the 
word “intuition” is subtle, even vague, but “Zen 
understanding” is sensuous. It is something that 
you feel not so much in an emotional way as in a 
direct way, just like when you feel that something 
is hard. As they say, “It is like tasting water and 
knowing for yourself that it’s cold.” It is sensation, 
an actual, physical sensation. 

But how is the intellect related to physical sen- 
sation? Or is it completely unrelated? What differ- 
ence does it make to your sensation whether you 
think at dawn that the sun is rising or whether you 


101 


What Is Zen? 


know that the earth is rotating on its axis and 
revolving around the sun? Is the sensation of a 
person who does not know that the earth is revolv- 
ing on its own axis and going around the sun the 
same as the sensation of a person who does? 

Or let’s look at another example. There are cer- 
tain indigenous people in the world whose number 
system consists of one, two, three, and many. They 
do not differentiate after “three.” For those people it 
can never be a “fact” that a table has “four” corners 
— it has “many” corners. So they wouldn't differen- 
tiate between a five-cornered and a six-cornered 
table because they have no “concept system” to give 
them the cue. 

Take an illustration like this — it is very 
simple, but all depends on concept: 


B 


A 


If you have no concept, that drawing is simply a 
flat-surface pattern. But if it has been explained to 


102 


Zen Mind 


you that it is a cube, then you can imagine and actu- 
ally sense the three-dimensionality in it. Now then, 
let’s go further and ask which surface of the cube is 
in front? Is it the one with corners “A”? Or the one 
with corners “B”? 

You can see it either way, and so you can make 
either of them the one in “front.” Once you've 
caught on to the idea, it becomes sensation to you 
— you can actually “feel” it. 

This points to the connection between intellect 
and physical sensation: Concepts lead to sensations 
— and therefore, false concepts lead to illusions. 

We have seen this principle demonstrated 
before with all kinds of optical illusions. In those 
illusions our concept influences our sensation. A cen- 
tral point in Zen is that we have a concept of our 
own existence and of the world which is fallacious, 
and Zen will help us get rid of that concept so that 
we will have a new sensation. People get worried 
when they hear this, and say, “Well, are we just 
going to exchange one hallucination for another?” 

Let me respond with a question or two: How do 


103 


What Is Zen? 


you know when you know that you know? What is 
the test of “truth” about something that you “feel”? 

You may say, “Well, I can feel that I’m Napoleon, 
or that I’m being persecuted by the government.” 
But this is hallucination — even though one might 
feel it very strongly. 

In our culture, we have a “test” of truth, which 
is science. We say, “If something can be demon- 
strated scientifically, then we’re inclined to believe 
that it’s not hallucination.” All right, let’s go along 
with that. I think this is rather relative, but I will 
always in any argument grant the premises of the 
person who wants to argue with me, and take it 
from there. Let’s assume that sciences like biology 
and physics are ways of discovering the “truth.” 
When we grant that, we find that the hallucination 
of being a separate ego will not stand up to biolog- 
ical tests) 

From the point of view of biology, the individ- 
ual organism is in the same “behavior system” as the 
environment, and in fact the organism and the envi- 
ronment constitute a single system of behavior 
which is neither deterministic nor voluntary. The 


104 


Zen Mind 


two are really one activity, and they call it the “field 
of the organism-environment.” Ecology is the study 
of these kinds of fields. 

When I am in academic circles, where people so 
often think that mystical matters are not at all 
respectable, I don't talk to them about mystical 
experience. I talk instead about “ecological aware- 
ness.” It’s just a matter of observing current eti- 
quette and nomenclature, because these are two 
ways of describing the same reality. From a biolog- 
ical point of view it is perfectly clear that every 
individual instance of life is a function of the whole 
universe. This becomes even clearer in quantum 
theory. 

Then you might ask this question: “Why do you 
scientists — biologists and physicists — who 
understand this to be so still go on behaving as if 
you were separate egos?” And they would answer 
that, in spite of the evidence to the contrary, they 
still feel that way. Their theory is only still at the 
point of being theory, in that it hasn’t convinced 
them so far as they themselves are concerned. They 
are still under the social hypnosis that we were all 


105 


What Is Zen? 


conditioned to in childhood that made us feel as if 
we are separate egos. 

So Zen is a process of “de-hypnotization,” if you 
like. Zen takes away the concepts that are much like 
optical “tricks,” concepts that give us the hallucina- 
tion of separateness. 

Then, when we find out what things are like 
when the concepts have been taken away, we can say 
to the biologist, “Isn't this just like you said it was?” 
And he has to agree. What we arrive at is a state of 
sensation or feeling that is far more in accord with 
the findings of science than the ordinary sensation 
we have of being separate individuals. 

So the way in which Zen is non-intellectual is 
not so much that it regards intellection as some- 
thing always false and misleading; instead, Zen 
begins by taking away our concepts, and by showing 
us how to see what it is like to view the world with- 
out concepts. Once we have discovered this new 
view of the world, we can re-fabricate new con- 
cepts to try and explain now how it is that we see. 

For this reason, many Zen masters are also great 
intellectuals. In the history of Zen there have been 


106 


Zen Mind 


scholars of all kinds, and physicists in modern 
times. Zen does not rule out the life of the intellect. 
It only says, “Do not be hoaxed by concepts.” 


Is Zen illogical? Ilogical is not the right word, 
because what often appear in Zen to be paradoxes 
are statements that make perfect sense in another 
system of logic than that to which we’re accus- 
tomed. We in the West are accustomed to a kind of 
logical thinking that is based on exclusiveness — 
“either-or.” Chinese logic, on the other hand, is 
based on “both-and.” 

To us it is either “black” or “white,” it either “is” 
or it “is not,” it is either “so” or it is “not so.” This 
kind of logic is fundamental to our thinking, and so 
we emphasize the mutually exclusive character of 
logical categories: “Is you is or is you ain't?” Is it in 
the box or outside the box? 

In so many of our tests we are asked “true” or 


” a 


“false,” “yes” or “no,” and we're given only those 
choices. It’s amusing to think that when we toss a 
coin to decide whether we will do it or we won't, we 


have only a two-sided coin. The Chinese are able to 


107 


What Is Zen? 


toss a sixty-four-sided coin by using the Book of 
Changes in the same situations where we would toss 
a coin. It’s a rather nice idea, when you think about 
it, and even though the Book of Changes is based on 
yin and yang, black or white, you can get everything 
out of black and white if you provide for all of the 
permutations that are possible — just as you can 
get all numbers out of zero and one in the binary 
system. But whereas we think something is 
either/or — either black or white — both Indian 
and Chinese logic recognize that black and white 
are inseparable, that in fact they need each other, and 
so it isn’t a matter of making a choice between them. 

“To be or not to be” is not the question — 
because you can’t have one without the other! Not- 
being implies being; just as being implies not-being. 

The existentialist in the West — who still 
trembles at the choice between being and not- 
being and therefore says that anxiety is ontological 
— hasn’t grasped this point yet. When the existen- 
tialist who trembles with anxiety before this 
choice realizes suddenly one day that not-being 


108 


Zen Mind 


implies being, the trembling of anxiety turns into 
the shaking of laughter. 

Nothing has changed except one’s perception. 
And in the same way, you may have the same view of 
the world — just what you're looking at now, seeing 
everything that you see now — but it can have a 
completely different feeling, and a completely dif- 
ferent meaning to it. Because in one’s ordinary sen- 
sation of the world the differentiations — the solids 
— are stressed, and the space is ignored. 

But when you practice Zen meditation, you have 
a kind of a “conceptual alteration,” and then sud- 
denly you notice the physical world — everything 
you're seeing now — in a completely different way. 
You see that it all goes together; it’s all-of-a-piece. 
You see that every inside implies its outside, and 
every outside implies its inside. 

You may think now, in the ordinary way we’re 
conditioned to think, that “I — me, myself — am 
only on the inside of my skin.” But when you expe- 
rience this perceptive “flip,” you discover your out- 
side is as much you as your inside. You can’t have an 


109 


What Is Zen? 


inside without an outside, so if the inside is yours, 
then the outside is yours! 

Finally you have to acknowledge that the world 
outside your skin is as much yours as the world inside 
the skin. And even though everybody’s outside 
appears different to us, in reality everybody’s out- 
side is all the same! Do you see? 

It is in this way that we’re one. 


Your soul isn’t in your body; your body is in 
your soul! 

That’s why the ancients were partly correct 
with their astrology. When they drew a “map” of a 
person’s soul, they drew a crude map of the universe 
as it was at the moment of the persor’s birth, seen 
from that place and time. That map, that horoscope, 
is considered to be a “picture” of that person’s mind 
— because your mind is not in your head, your head 
is in your mind. And your mind is the total system of 
cosmic interrelationships as they are focused at the 
point that you call “here and now.” 

The question is then: Can this become clear to 
us? Can it become clear in the way a sensation is 


110 


Zen Mind 


clear, as when we taste water and know for our- 
selves that it is cold? The experience of this requires 
some meditation, and it also depends on an intellec- 
tual process. 

We get into trouble through an intellectual 
process and we’re going to get out of trouble 
through an intellectual process. From an intellec- 
tual standpoint, the process by which we get into 
trouble could be called “additive,” whereas the 
process by which we get out of trouble is “subtrac- 
tive.” In the words of Lao-tzu, “The scholar gains 
every day; the man of Tao loses every day.” 

The scholar acquires ideas, and in Zen the intel- 
lectual operation is to get rid of ideas — to see that 
all ideas are projections that we make upon the 
cosmic Rorschach blot. 

The world is a Rorschach blot, full of movement 
and wiggles. Only when we see straight lines and 
grid-iron patterns do we know people have been 
around. People are always trying to straighten 
things out, and so we create straight lines! 

Look at how the stars are sprayed across the 
heavens. In order to “make sense” of the stars, we 


111 


What Is Zen? 


can get stellar maps and see straight lines joining 
the stars in various patterns to make up constella- 
tions. But all those joining lines are of course pro- 
jections by which we try to make sense of the stars. 
In the same way we make projections upon the 
surface of nature for the purpose of discussing it 
with each other — and, inevitably, some person 
with a strong will and a powerful and compelling 
personality describes the world in one way, and 
everybody else agrees with him. That’s the way it 
is. And it’s passed down through the generations. 
So now, let’s go back to seeing that the world is 
a primordial Rorschach blot. Wiggles of the world 
unite; you have nothing to lose but your names! 
Once you see the movement and the wiggles to 
be what they are, once you realize that we have cre- 
ated the world from our own projections, you see 
then that the difference between your inside (your 
ego, your self) and the outside (the subject-perceiver 
and the object-perceived) is artificial. 
You can confirm this realization through neurol- 
ogy, because neurologists will tell you that the so- 
called “external world” that you see is experienced 


112 


Zen Mind 


by you only as a state of your own nervous system. 
What you see out in front of you is an experience in 
the nerve ganglia in the back of your head, and you 
have no other awareness of an external world except 
in terms of your own body. 

You can infer that your body is, in turn, some- 
thing “in” the external world, but you only know it 
by union with it. You are in the external world, and 
scientist and mystic alike will tell you that you are 
an inseparable part of it. 

Yet “part” isn’t even the right word, because 
the world doesn’t have “parts” like an automobile 
engine — it isn’t bolted or screwed together. The 
world is like a body: When your body was born, it 
grew not by the addition of “bits,” but by an 
organic process in which the whole thing constel- 
lated itself at once. It grew larger and larger, grow- 
ing from the inside to the outside. 

It did it in a field called the womb. And the womb 
could only do it in a field called a female body. And a 
female body could only do it in a field called human 
society, in a field called the biosphere of the planet Earth. If 
you take the body out of its field, it cannot grow. 


113 


What Is Zen? 


Blood in a test tube cannot do what blood in the 
veins does, because all of the body’s conditions 
have to be replicated, and that’s impossible in a test 
tube, because it’s a different environment. 

Just as words change their meaning in accor- 
dance with the context of the sentence, so organ- 
isms change their nature in accordance with the 
context of their environment. Even from this 
strictly scientific point of view, our body-mind — 
contrary to what we usually feel — is not some- 
thing separated from other minds and from the 
external world. It is all one process. If we don't feel 
that to be so, it is because we have been indoctri- 
nated with concepts that contradict the facts. The 
concept of what we might call the “Christian ego” 
simply does not fit in with the facts of life; it has 
become a social institution that is obsolete. 

When we say “social institution,” people usu- 
ally think of things like hospitals, parliaments, 
police forces, fire departments, and so forth. But 
marriage is a social institution, the family is a social 
institution, the clock and the calendar are social 
institutions, latitude and longitude are social insti- 


114 


Zen Mind 


tutions. And the ego is a social institution; it is, in 
other words, a “convention” (from the Latin con- 
venire, “to come together”); it is a consensus, an 
agreement. With it we are agreeing to a set of rules 
for the purpose of playing a game. 

What happens, however, is that we are apt to 
confuse the rules of our social game with the laws 
of nature — with the way things are. Even the 
“laws of nature” are social conventions. Nature 
does not obey a lawgiver who says, first of all, this 
is the way things shall be, and then all beetles, all 
butterflies, all rocks, and so on follow it. The laws 
of nature are our way of describing what we believe 
to be “regular behavior” in nature. 

But what is regular? Interestingly, regulus in 
Latin means a “rule.” And what is a rule? It is a 
ruler — it is marked-out in inches, it is straight, 
and you measure things with it. But you don’t find 
rulers growing on trees! Nature is all of a piece, and 
everything in it goes with everything else in it, in 
an eternal dance. But we chop it so that we can dis- 
cuss it and even try to rule it. 

Laws of nature are therefore tools, like axes, 


115 


What Is Zen? 


hammers, and saws; they are instruments we use to 
control what is going on. To keep in touch, then, 
with what is really going on in the present, always 
preserve this careful distinction between the game 
rules of the human game, and the behavior of the 
world in itself. It is true that the behavior of the 
world in itself includes the human games, and it’s 
all a part of nature. But don't try to make the tail 
wag the dog. 

The whole point of Zen is to sagen the rules 
we have superimposed on things and to see the 
world as it is — as all of a piece. This has to be done 
in a special setting of some kind, because you can't 
just gaily walk out into the street and suspend the 
rules. And if you do, you'll create traffic confusion of 
every conceivable kind! 

But we can set up a certain environment in 
which we have an agreement to suspend the rules 
— that is to say to meditate, to stop thinking for a 
while, to stop making formulations. 

This means, essentially, to stop talking to yourself. 


That is the meaning of the word in Japanese — munen 


116 


Zen Mind 


— that is ordinarily translated as “no thought.” To 
meditate is to stop talking to yourself! 

We say, “Talking to yourself is the first sign of 
madness,” but we don’t follow our own advice. 
We're talking to ourselves most of the time — and 
if you talk all the time you’ve got nothing else to 
talk about but your own talking! You never listen 
to what anybody else has to say, without a running 
commentary of your own talking. And if all you 
ever listen to is talking — be it your own or other 
people’s — you have nothing to talk about but 
talk. 

You have to stop talking in order to have some- 
thing to talk about! 

In the same way, you have to stop thinking in 
order to have something to think about, because 
otherwise all youre thinking about is thoughts — 
and that’s scholarship, as we practice it in the univer- 
sities today, where we study and write and talk 
about books about books about books! 

In order to be able to symbolize, to think effec- 
tively, one has to suspend thought occasionally and 


117 


What Is Zen? 


be in a state of what I will call “pure sensation.” 
Drink water, and know for yourself that it’s cold. 


Sit, just to sit. 


Sitting quietly doing nothing. 
Spring comes and the grass grows by itself 


You can take that literally or you can take it 
symbolically. But that is the meaning of munen. 

Sometimes the word used is mushin — no mind. 
Mushin means being open to the way that the world 
is experienced sensuously, without the distortion 
of concepts, so as to find the original nature before 
any thought is made. 

It is the way you experienced it when you were 
first born, before you thought any thoughts about 
it! It is called your original mind, or the “root mind.” 

One of the koans that are studied in the Rinzai 
school of Zen is: “Who are you before your father 
and mother conceived you?” You could put it this 


way: “Who are you before your father and mother 


118 


Zen Mind 


bamboozled you!” Conceived is used in the sense of 
“thought about” you, or taught you to conceive. 
What is your original mind? Before all this 
started, where were you really? 
To go back to that, you have to take a fresh look 
at the world. You have to come to it unprejudiced, 
with your mind wiped clean, like a mirror, of all 


conceptions about life and what it is. 


Even now, of course, I am giving you conceptions 
about the unity of the world and about the process of 
meditation. And those who understand these words 
still have difficulty if they’ve only got the conception. 
It may alter their feeling to some extent, and their 
sensation, but not nearly as vividly as their sensation 
will be altered if they look at the world without any 
conception at all. 

“Well,” you might say, “how can we stop? We 
think perpetually — we are always talking to our- 
selves. It’s a nervous habit!” 


To stop thinking, there are certain technical aids: 


119 


What Is Zen? 


Concentrate on breathing, and think of 
nothing but your breathing — in and out, in 
and out.... One, two, three, four, five.... 


One, two, three, four, five. 


Or look at a point of light and think of 
nothing else but the point of light — just 
concentrate, concentrate, on that light. 


Both of these help you to eliminate all concepts 
from the mind except that which you are concen- 
trating on. The next thing is to get rid of the point 
you're concentrating on. 

Most people think that means a “blank mind,” 
but it doesn’t. You concentrate on something in 
order to cause the thought process, the verbalizing, 
to stop. Then when you take away the point of con- 
centration, you are simply perceiving the world as it 
is, without verbalizing. 

The trick of concentration stops our verbaliz- 
ing. Concentration is only preliminary. It leads us 
deeper, beyond concentration, until we reach the 


Zen Mind 


state of samadhi. This is dhyana, in Sanskrit — which 
came to be called chan in China and zen in Japan. 
It is not concentration in the ordinary sense, like 
staring at a point or thinking of one thing only. It 
comes after concentration has stopped, after the 
point on which you have concentrated has fallen 
away, after your body and mind have fallen away, 
and you're open to the world with your naked 
senses. 

See that. 

That is the foundation experience. 

After you see that, and on the basis of seeing 
that, you can, of course, go back to concepts and 
construct this idea of the world, that idea, and the 
other idea. 


This is why Zen does not really involve any 
beliefs in any theory or doctrine. In this sense, it is 
not religion — if by religion you mean something 
that involves a system of beliefs. It is purely exper- 
imental and empirical in its approach, and it allows 
us to get rid of belief — to get rid of all dependence 
upon words and ideas. 


121 


What Is Zen? 


This is not because words and ideas are “evil,” 
nor because they are necessarily confusing; it is just 
because we do happen to be confused by them at 
this stage in our evolution. 

That is really the essential nature of the whole 
meditation process: the suspension of talking to 
yourself, either in words or in any other conceptual 
image. 

It is of interest that words are a form of nota- 
tion — words are the notation of life. Just as musi- 
cal notation is a way of writing down music so as 
to remember it, words are essential vehicles of 
memory: we repeat them, we write them down, and 
we remember. That gives us a wonderful sense of 
control, but to the extent that we are tied to our 
notations, we pay a price for it. 

In music, notation limits our ability to conceive 
of variations and other musical forms. The Hindu, 
however, is not tied to notes in music, and there- 
fore values a kind of music in which a musical 
instrurnent — be it a drum, flute, or sitar — is 
immediately responsive to every subtle motion of 
the human organism. They therefore play things — 


122 


Zen Mind 


odd quarter-tones and strange rhythms — which 
are impossible to reproduce with our notation. 

The Hindu rejoices in the extreme subtlety of a 
flute, so responsive to human breath, an organic 
phenomenon. When they listen to our music, it all 
sounds very structured and rigid to them, like a 
military march, because of the regular beat and the 
fixed harmonic intervals. 

In the same way, when you get free from certain 
fixed concepts of the way the world is, you find it is 
far more subtle, and far more miraculous, than you 
thought it was. You find that human relationships 
and situations are amazingly subtle. And you gain a 
facility for understanding them, not through con- 
ceptualizing, but through asking your brain how it 
would deal with them. 

Your brain is an organ like your heart, and it can 
deal with situations without having to think about 
them! The brain is not only an organ of thought — 
only one of its functions is thinking. The brain does 
a lot of things other than thinking, and enables 
your body and mind to perceive and act in new, 


unique, and wonderful ways. 


123 


What Is Zen? 


You have a fantastic computer in your skull — 
and what we call “thinking” is only fifteen percent 
or less of the brain’s activity. The brain is very 
active in controlling all our organic processes — 
our gland functions, our digestion, our circulation, 
and everything else. The brain is in control of the 
entire autonomic nervous system. Through the 
practice of Zen, you can learn to use your nervous 
system in a much more wonderful way than you 
would ever have thought it could be used! 

By practicing Zen, you find you can let your 
nervous system answer questions and pass through 
problems without any interference from your con- 
scious thinking process. We cannot solve the 
puzzle of the Zen koans or of the situations we 
encounter in life through our conscious thinking 
process — but the brain will! And the practice of 
Zen shows us how. 


124 


WHAT IS TAO? 


ALAN WATTS 


The tao that can be told 

is not the eternal Tao. 

The name that can be named 
is not the eternal Name. 


The unnameable is the eternally real. 
Naming is the origin — | 
of all particular things. 


Free from desire, you realize the mystery. 
Caught in desire, you see 
only the manifestations. 


CONTENTS 


Introduction by Mark Watts 


Part I: The Way of the Tao 21 
Our Place in Nature 23 
Taoism and Confucianism 27 
The World and Its Opposites 32 
Lao-tzu 34 
Tao 37 
Tzu-Jan — By ItselfSo 41 
Wu Wei — Not Forcing 43 
Te — Virtue: Skill at Living 46 


Part II: The Gentle Way 51 
The Strength of Weakness 53 
Judo — The Gentle Way 55 
Li — The Patterns of Nature 58 
I Ching — Book of Changes 66 
Advice from the Oracle 72 
A Western Point of View 75 
An Eastern Point of View 76 
Probabilities and Decisions 78 
Disadvantages and Advantages 79 
A Comparison of East and West 81 
Conclusion 87 


About the Author 93 


INTRODUCTION 
By Mark Watts 


The ancient philosophy of the Tao is one of the 
most intriguing and refreshing ways of liberation to 
arrive in the West from the Far East in modern 
times. With over fifty translations of the Tao Te 
Ching into Western languages to date, the classic 
work of Taoist literature offers its readers great 
wisdom for living as well as advice on worldly 
affairs. It is also a fascinating window into the mys- 
terious world of pre-dynastic China. 

The very practical nature of Taoist thought is 
often overlooked by Western readers who are hesi- 
tant to embrace a seemingly strange and foreign 


What Is Tao? 


way of knowing, but in the philosophy of the Tao 
one finds a surprisingly contemporary perspective. 
The word Tao, properly pronounced “dow,” has lent 
its name to a way of understanding and living 
in the world with profound implications for 
modern societies. Above all else Taoism places 
great emphasis on the balance between our human 
awareness and our natural being, as an integral 
part of the web of life. It embodies our deepest 
understanding of ecological awareness. 

The mystical side of Taoist thought, on the 
other hand, is highly enigmatic, for here one finds a 
doorway into the shamanistic world that flour- 
ished in China over a span of at least five thousand 
years, right up to the period in which the Taoist 


texts were written. 


As Alan Watts explains it, the word Tao embod- 
ies two broad meanings in our language: it means 
approximately the Way — in the sense of “the way 
to go” — and it also refers to nature in the sense of 
one’s own true nature. Everything is said to have its 


Introduction 


own Tao, but it is impossible to define it, to put one’s 
finger on it exactly. 

As I sat working on this manuscript my eight- 
year-old son came up to me and asked, “Papa, what 
are you working on?” I told him it was a book on 
the Tao, and began to explain a little bit about it, 
but without a moment’s hesitation he said, “Oh, 
you mean what’s behind everything” — and then he 
headed off. Intuitively and experientially we know 
what it is, but for most of us the problem arises 
when we try to explain it. 

This enigma reminds me of a story that my father 
used to tell about a debate years ago in the House 
of Lords in England concerning a Church-related 
matter. Apparently one of the representatives had 
put forth the argument that it was not proper for 
a governing body with so many atheists to rule on a 
religious issue. One of the members rose to the occa- 
sion, however, and replied, “Rubbish, Sir! I am quite 
certain that everyone here believes in some sort of 
something somewhere or other.” And by and large we 
do even if it is no more definite than to sense the Tao. 


What Is Tao? 


In classic Chinese literature the Tao is described 
as following the path of least resistance, occupying 
the invisible or lowest position, and embracing the 
goodness of nature without ever attempting to do 
so. The Tao is passive but not weak, and in his book 
the legendary sage Lao-tzu describes the paradoxi- 
cal quality of the Tao by asking one to consider the 
following: 


How do coves and oceans become kings of the hundred rivers? 
Because they are good at keeping low — 

That is how they are kings of the hundred rivers. 

Nothing in the world is weaker than water, 

But it has no better in overcoming the hard. 


THE ORIGIN OF THE TAO TE CHING 


The Tao Te Ching has traditionally been attrib- 
uted to Lao-tzu, the legendary sage and founder of 
the Taoist school. However, the Tao Te Ching was 
originally called the Lao-tzu as well, and this makes 
it difficult for us to fully understand the origin of 
the earliest texts describing its origin because in 


Introduction 


Chinese it is often impossible to know whether 
“Lao-tzu” refers to the person or the text. 
Nevertheless the original work has been tentatively 
dated to the sixth century B.c.£., the time in which 
Lao-tzu was supposed to have lived, although it is 
likely that the collection did not come into circula- 
tion until the fourth century s.c.£. This was the 
period of the golden age of Chinese philosophy that 
gave rise to tremendous diversity — known as “the 
hundred schools” of thought — and gave us the 
other great classic of Chinese literature, the I Ching. 

It is not until the first century B.c.£., however, 
that we find a history, the Shih chi (or Records of the 
Historian), that contains one of the oldest recorded 
stories about Lao-tzu. Here we find the story of 
Confucius visiting Lao-tzu at the Court of Chou 
where, by this account, Lao-tzu served as the court 
librarian. In that meeting, Lao-tzu was said to have 
scolded Confucius for his pompous and self-serving 
ways, and afterward Confucius is reported to have 
said to his disciples: 

“I know that birds can fly, fish can swim, and 
animals run. For those that run a net may be set, for 


What Is Tao? 


those that swim a line cast, and for those that fly an 
arrow set free. But a dragon’s ascent to heaven 
walks the wind and swims through clouds, and I 
know of no way to trap him. Today I have met Lao- 
tzu, who is both man and dragon.” 

The reference to the ascension of the dragon to 
heaven offers a clue to the early origins of Taoist 
rituals, because it reveals a link to the ancient 
shamanic ancestry of the region. The dragon, like 
the Feathered Serpent in South and Central 
American mythology, combines the scales of the 
snake with the feathers or wings of the bird. The 
feathers or wings of the dragon or bird are repre- 
sentative of the shamans flight, and the scales rep- 
resent rebirth, for the snake sheds its skin only to 
find a new one beneath the old. 

The combination of these attributes accurately 
describes dream/death and rebirth rituals of the 
shamans known to date far back into the Neolithic 
period. Pottery dating from 5000 B.c.£. discovered 
in the village of Banpo near Xi’an in the 1950s 
included a ritualistic vessel showing four views of a 


shaman in a dreaming or trance state, and a fifth as 


Introduction 


a transformed being. This pottery example is fairly 
typical of representations of the wizards who were 
said to leave their bodies in flights of vision, and 
following such a flight the shaman or initiate 
would be reborn with the sunrise fully trans- 
formed. 

Although the antiquity of the underpinning is 
apparent, the actual history of the legendary sage 
Lao-tzu has proved to be elusive. To further 
obscure matters, the histories we do have that men- 
tion Lao-tzu were not recorded until hundreds of 
years after the events they detail, and it is possible 
that some of the facts were adapted to corroborate 
the legendary accounts of the origin of his works. 

One popular legend holds that the Tao Te Ching 
was written in the gatehouse by Lao-tzu as he was 
about to leave his post in the city to retire and 
become a hermit in the country. According to this 
story the gatekeeper is said to have insisted that 
Lao-tzu record his wisdom before he left. Another 
more plausible theory is that the philosophy was 
recorded over a period of time by several anony- 
mous writers to give the benefit of the country 


What Is Tao? 


dwellers’ wisdom to the rulers of the cities, in the 
hope they would make life easier for the common 
people — and the gatehouse story may simply be 
symbolic of the source of this knowledge originat- 
ing outside the pale. This theory fits in with the 
tumultuous climate of the Warring States period, 
and is supported by the fact that the later chapters 
of the work carry decidedly political overtones and 
candidly offer advice to those in positions of 
authority. 

In the first century a.p. the Lao-tzu was divided 
into two works, and so we received the Tao Ching 
and the Te Ching. This division reflects the varying 
emphasis of each section of the book, the first on 
the Tao and the second on Te, which means approx- 
imately “virtue,” though Alan Watts calls it “skill 
at living.” These sections were then combined to 
form the book we know today. 

Some scholars firmly believe the Tao Te Ching is 
in fact a compilation of writings by various authors 
who simply attributed their works to the legendary 
Lao-tzu; however, the consistency of the style and 
the rhythm of the arguments presented in both 


Introduction 


parts of the work suggest otherwise. It seems more 
likely that this book of sage advice was the work of 
a single author drawing upon the prevailing folk 
wisdom of his day, and that perhaps the two books 
were written during different periods of the 
author’s life, or in response to different issues. 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 


Taoism has often been described as the philoso- 
phy of nature, and it is in this respect that its 
wisdom most strongly suggests its origins were in 
the shamanic world of pre-Dynastic China. Living 
close to the earth one sees the wisdom of not inter- 
fering with the course of life, and of letting things 
go their way. This is the wisdom that also tells us 
not to get in our own way, and to paddle with the 
current, split wood along the grain, and seek to 
understand the inner workings of our nature 
instead of trying to change it. 

According to the laws of nature every creature 
finds its own way, and so each of us is known to 
have our own path or way. In classic Chinese texts 


What Is Tao? 


there are references to the Tao of Earth with all its 
creatures, the Tao of Man, which refers to our 
awakened path, and to the Tao of Heaven, by which 
the broad forces of heaven and earth come together 
in a field of polar energies. Together these forces 
create the world in which all life plays, and instill 
in us the instinctive knowledge of the primal forces 
at work in the human psyche. 


In this book, Alan Watts brings his years of 
study of the Tao into focus through lively explana- 
tions of the essential ideas and terms of Taoist 
thought. He gives the reader an opportunity to 
experience the Tao as a personal practice of libera- 
tion free from the limitations of the commonly held 
beliefs within our culture. This book is based on 
talks given during seminars during the last ten years 
of his life, and it offers a way of understanding the 
true value of ourselves as free-willed individuals 
enfolded within the ever-changing patterns of the 
natural world. 

We explore the wisdom of the way things are of 
themselves (tzu-jan, or “by itself so”), and of letting 


Introduction 


life unfold without interference and without forc- 
ing matters when the time is not right (wu wei, or 
“not forcing”). In the philosophy of the Tao we soon 
discover that striving to succeed — in the theory 
that “you can’t get something for nothing” — must 
be balanced by the realization that “you can’t have 
something without nothing,” because something 
always requires its opposite, a place to be, whether 
it is a receptive vessel, a clear mind, or an open 
heart. 


PART I 


THE WAY 
OF THE TAO 


When people see some things as beautiful, 
other things become ugly. 

When people see some things as good, 
other things become bad. 


Being and non-being create each other. 
Difficult and easy support each other. 
Long and short define each other. 
High and low depend on each other. 
Before and after follow each other. 


Therefore the Master 
acts without doing anything 
and teaches without saying anything. 


OUR PLACE IN NATURE 


Many years ago, when I was only about fourteen 
years old, I first saw landscape paintings from the 
Far East. It was as a result of looking at these paint- 
ings that I first became interested in Eastern phi- 
losophy. What grasped me and excited me about 
the Asian vision of the world was their astonishing 
sympathy and feeling for the world of nature. 

One painting in particular that I remember was 
called Mountain after Rain. It showed the mist and 
clouds drifting away after a night of pouring rain, 
and it somehow pulled me into it and made me feel 
part of that mountain scene. It is fascinating for us 
to consider that pictures of this kind are not just 


what we would describe as landscape paintings, 


23 


What Is Tao? 


because they are also icons, a kind of religious or 
philosophical painting. 

In the West, when we think of iconographic or 
religious paintings, we are accustomed to pictures of 
divine human figures and of angels and saints. When 
the mind of the Far East expresses its religious feel- 
ing, however, it finds appropriate imagery in the 
objects of nature, and in this very important respect 
their feeling for nature is different from ours. The 
contrast in these two forms of expression arises as a 
result of the sensation that the human being is not 
someone who stands apart from nature and looks at 
it from the outside, but instead is an integral part of 
it. Instead of dominating nature, human beings fit 
right into it and feel perfectly at home. 

In the West our attitude is strangely different, and 
we constantly use a phrase that sounds peculiar 
indeed in the ears of a Chinese person: We speak of 
“the conquest of nature” or “the conquest of space,” 
and of the “conquest” of great mountains like Everest. 
And one might very well ask us, “What on Earth is the 


matter with you? Why must you feel as if you are in a 


24 


The Way of the Tao 


fight with your environment all the time? Aren't 
you grateful to the mountain that it lifted you up as 
you climbed to the top of it? Aren't you grateful to 
space that it opens itself up for you so you can travel 
right through it? Why do you even think of getting 
into a fight with it?” 

Indeed, it is this domineering feeling that under- 
lies the way we use technology. We use the powers of 
electricity and the strength of steel to carry on a battle 
with our external world, and instead of trying to live 
with the curvature of the land we flatten it with bull- 
dozers, and constantly try to beat our surroundings 
into submission. 

The problem is that we have been brought up in a 
religious and philosophical tradition that, to a great 
extent, has taught us to mistrust the nature that sur- 
rounds us, and to mistrust ourselves as well. We have 
inherited a doctrine of original sin, which tells us not 
to be too friendly, and to be very cautious of our own 
human nature. It has taught us that as reasoning and 
willing beings we should be suspect of our animal 
and instinctual nature. 


25 


What Is Tao? 


In one sense this is all very well, for we have 
indeed achieved great technological advances through 
harnessing the powers of nature. If we carry this 
effort beyond a certain point, however, our manipula- 
tions interfere withthe very course of nature, and this 
gets us into serious trouble indeed. 

As a result of our interference we are experienc- 
ing today what we could call the “law of diminishing 
returns.” For example, we want to go faster and faster 
everywhere we go, and so we attempt to obliterate the 
distance between ourselves and the place we are 
trying to reach. But as the result of this attempt to 
minimize the span of the Earth between these points, 
two things begin to happen. 

First, all places that become closer and closer to 
each other by the use of jet planes tend to become the 
same place. The faster you can get from Los Angeles to 
Hawaii, the more Hawaii becomes exactly like Los 
Angeles. This is why the tourists keep asking, “Has it 
been spoiled yet?” What they are really asking is, “Is it 
just like home?” 


Second, if we begin to think about our goals in life 


26 


The Way of the Tao 


as destinations, as points to which we must arrive, this 
thinking begins to cut out all that makes a point worth 
having. It is as if instead of giving you a full banana to 
eat, I gave you just the two tiny ends of the banana — 
and that would not be, in any sense, a satisfactory meal. 
But as we fight our environment in our tendency to get 
rid of the limitations of time and space, and try to make 
the world a more convenient place to live, this is 
exactly what happens. 

For a much better understanding of our place in 
nature, we can look to the great religions and philoso- 
phies that blossomed and took deep root in the con- 
sciousness of so much of the population throughout 
Asia and the Far East. 


TAOISM AND CONFUCIANISM 


There are two great main currents in traditional 
Chinese thinking: the Taoist current and the Confucian. 
Both of them agree on one fundamental principle, and 
that is that the natural world in which we live, and 
human nature itself, must be trusted. They would say of 


27 


What Is Tao? 


a person who cannot trust his own basic nature, “If you 
cannot trust your own nature, how can you trust your 
own mistrusting of it? How do you know that your mis- 
trust is not wrong as well?” If you do not trust your own 
nature, you become as tangled up as anyone can be. 
Their idea of nature is that which happens of itself 
so, and that is a process which is not fundamentally 
under our control. By definition it is that which is hap- 
pening all on its own, just as our breathing is happen- 
ing all on its own, and just as our heart is beating all on 
its own — and the fundamental wisdom behind Taoist 
philosophy is that this “self-so” process is to be trusted. 


Taoist thought is generally attributed to Lao-tzu, 
who is thought to have lived somewhere around 400 
B.c.E., and to Chuang-tse, who lived from 369 to 286 
B.c.E. Taoism is known to us as the uniquely Chinese 
way of thought, living, and liberation, although its 
roots certainly lie in shamanic traditions common to 
much of northeastern Asia, and probably to North 
America as well. In its final form, however, it is so sim- 


ilar to Buddhism that Taoist terms are often used to 


28 


The Way of the Tao 


translate Sanskrit texts into Chinese. Once Buddhism 
was imported to China, Taoism so completely perme- 
ated Mahayana Buddhism in general and Zen Bud- 
dhism in particular that the philosophies of these 
schools are often indistinguishable. 

Like Vedanta and yoga in India, older gentlemen in 
China traditionally adopted Taoism after they had 
made their contribution to society, and thereafter they 
would retire to primitive dwellings or caves to live in 
the wild and meditate for long periods of time. As in 
Buddhist lore, where the return of the sage into the 
world is known as the path of the Bodhisattva, Taoist 
stories are filled with accounts of the return of the lib- 
erated sage into worldly affairs. In fact the primary 
text, the Tao Te Ching, was originally written as a 
manual of advice for the ruling class. The teachings of 
Lao-tzu and of Chuang-tse must not be confused, inci- 
dentally, with the Taoist cult of alchemy and magic 
preoccupied with life extension — that is Taoist only 
in name, and not in practice. 

Although Taoism proper has never become an 
organized religion, it has attracted the curiosity of 


29 


What Is Tao? 


scholars and philosophers of the Far East for more 
than two thousand years. 

Taoism regards the entire natural world as the 
operation of the Tao, a process that defies intellectual 
comprehension. The experience of the Tao cannot be 
obtained through any preordained method, although 
those who seek it often cultivate inner calm through 
the silent contemplation of nature. Taoists understand 
the practice of wu wei, the attribute of not forcing or 
grasping, and recognize that human nature — like all 
nature — is tzu-jan, or “of-itself-so.” 


When we look to Confucian ideas, which gov- 
erned Chinese moral and social life, we find a differ- 
ent word that represents the basis of human nature. 
This word has a funny pronunciation, and although 
we Romanize this word in English as jen, it is pro- 
nounced “wren,” with a sort of rolling “r.” This word 
is symbolic of mankind’s cardinal virtue in the 
system of Confucian morality, and it is usually trans- 
lated “human-heartedness” or “humanness.” When 


Confucius was asked to give a precise definition of 


30 


The Way of the Tao 


it, though, he refused. He said, “You have to feel the 
meaning of this virtue. You must never put it into 
words.” 

The wisdom of his attitude toward defining jen is 
simply that a human being will always be greater than 
anything they can say about themselves, and anything 
they can think about themselves. If we formulate 
ideas about our own nature, about how our own 
minds and emotions work, those ideas are always 
going to be qualitatively inferior — that is to say, far 
less complicated and far less alive — than the actual 
author of the ideas themselves, and that is us. So there 
is something about ourselves that we can never get at, 
that we can never define — and in just the same way 
you cannot bite your own teeth, you cannot hear your 
own ears, and you cannot make your own hand catch 
hold of itself. So therefore you must let go and trust 
the goings-on of your humanness. Confucius was the 
first to say that he would rather trust human passions 
and instincts than trust human ideas about what is 
right, for like the Taoists he realized that we have to 


allow all living things to look after themselves. 


31 


What Is Tao? 


THE WORLD AND ITS OPPOSITES 


When we say what things are, we always contrast 
them with something else, and when we try to talk 
about the whole universe — about all that there is — 
we find we really have no words for it. It is “one what?” 

All of this “one what?” is represented by the 
symbol of the great circle. But in order to think about 


life, we have to make comparisons, and so we split it in 


32 


The Way of the Tao 


two and derive from the circle the symbol of the yang 
and the yin, the positive and the negative. 

We see this symbol over and over on Chinese pot- 
tery, and today on everything from jewelry to T-shirts. 
Traditionally this emblem is one of the basic symbols of 
the philosophy of Taoism. It is the symbol of the yang, 
or the male, and the yin, the female, of the positive and 
the negative, the yes and the no, the light and the dark. 
We always have to divide the world into opposites or 
categories in order to be able to think about it. In the 


words of Lao-tzu, 


When people see some things as beautiful, 
other things become ugly. 

When people see some things as good, 
other things become bad. 


Being and non-being create each other. 
Difficult and easy support each other. 
Long and short define each other. 
High and low depend on each other. 


33 


What Is Tao? 


LAO-TZU 


In the literary tradition of Taoism, the legendary 
Chinese philosopher Lao-tzu is often referred to as a 
contemporary of Confucius. According to some 
accounts, Lao-tzu was supposed to have been a court 
librarian who wearied of the insincerity and intrigue 
of court life and decided to leave the city and go off and 
live in the mountains. But before he left, the guardian 
of the gate is said to have stopped him and said, 

“Sir, I cannot let you go until you write down 
something of your wisdom.” 

And it is said that he sat down in the guardhouse 
and recorded the book known as the Tao Te Ching, the 
book of Tao and Te, of the Way and its power. 

The core of Lao-tzu’s written philosophy deals 
with the art of getting out of one’s own way, learning 
how to act without forcing conclusions, and living in 
skillful harmony with the processes of nature instead of 
trying to push them around. Lao-tzu didn't actually say 
very much about the meaning of Tao; instead, he simply 


offered his advice. 


34 


The Way of the Tao 


It is now believed that although this work was 
probably rendered in a single hand during the time of 
Confucius, or shortly thereafter, the author incorpo- 
rated the wisdom of a much older folk tradition. One 
school believes that Taoist literature was inspired by 
the oral teaching of shamanic hermits in ancient times. 
Another holds that the Tao Te Ching was an attempt to 
bring the practical, conventional wisdom of the 
Chinese people to the ruling class in order to help 
them to rule with greater wisdom and compassion. 
Both schools are probably partially correct, and in 
either case Taoist thought remains among the most 
accessible of the world’s great religious philosophies, 
and is perhaps the only one to retain a sense of humor. 

My favorite picture of Lao-tzu is by the master 
Sengai, and it shows him in the sort of disheveled and 
informal style that is so characteristic of Taoist humor, 
and was later assimilated in Zen Buddhism. This play- 
fulness is one of the most delightful characteristics of 
the whole of Taoist philosophy and, as a result, I know 
of no other philosophical works besides those of Lao- 
tzu and his successor Chuang-tse that are so eminently 


35 


What Is Tao? 


readable. Of all the great sages of the world, they alone 
have a sense of the enjoyment of life just as it comes. 

Lao-tzu literally means “the old fellow,” since Lao 
means “old” and tzu means “fellow,” or sometimes boy. 
So Lao-tzu is the old boy, and he is sometimes shown 
as a white-bearded youth, which is of course symbolic 
of his great wisdom at an early age.” 

Long before Buddhism came to China in about 60 
A.D., Lao-tzu’s philosophy had revealed to the Chinese 
that you cannot characterize reality, or life itself, as 
either being or non-being, as either form or emptiness, 
or by any pair of opposites that you might think of. As 
he said, “When all the world knows goodness to be 
good, there is already evil.” 

We do not know what any of these things are 
except by contrast with their opposite. For example, it 
is difficult to see a figure unless there is a contrasting 
*You will find the writings of both Lao-tzu and his contemporary 
Chuang-tse in a book called The Wisdom of Lao-tzu, translated by 
Lin Yutang. He has arranged the Lao-tzu book that was supposed 
to have been written for the guardian of the gate, and then added 
quite a few substantial excerpts from the book of Chuang-tse as 
arunning commentary on Lao-tzu’s passages. [Editor’s note: That 


book is currently out of print. There are of course many other edi- 
tions in print. | 


36 


The Way of the Tao 


background. Were there no background to the figure, 
the figure would vanish, which is the principle of 
camouflage. Because of the inseparability of opposites, 
therefore, you realize that they always go together, and 
this hints at some kind of unity that underlies them. 


Ws 
ya 


TAO 


In Lao-tzu’s philosophy this unity is called Tao. 
Although it is written t-a-o, in Chinese it is pro- 
nounced almost as if it were spelled d-o-w. It has the 
sense of a rhythmic motion, of going on and stopping, 
and also a sense of intelligence, and so you get an idea 
of a sort of rhythmic intelligence that ebbs and flows 
like the tides. 


The word has two general meanings. One is perhaps 


37 


What Is Tao? 


”» 


best rendered into English as “the way,” “the way of 
things,” or “the way of nature.” The other sense of the 
word means “to speak,” so when the opening words of 


Lao-tzu’s book say, 
The Tao that can be spoken is not the eternal Tao, 


it makes a pun in Chinese. It says literally, “The Tao 
that can be Tao is not Tao,” or if you read it like a 
telegram, “Tao can Tao no Tao.” The first meaning of 
Tao is “the way,” and the second meaning of it is “to 
speak,” or in other words, 


The way that can be expressed is not the eternal way. 


I prefer not to translate the word Tao at all because 
to us Tao is a sort of nonsense syllable, indicating the 
mystery that we can never understand — the unity 
that underlies the opposites. In our deepest intuition 
we know that there is some sort of unity underlying 
these various opposites because we find that we can't 
separate one from the other. We know that a whole 
universe exists, but we can't really say what it is. So 


38 


The Way of the Tao 


Tao is thus a reality that we apprehend deeply without 
being able to define it. 
A Chinese poet put it this way: 


Plucking chrysanthemums along the eastern fence, 
gazing in silence at the southern hills, 

the birds fly home in pairs, 

through the soft mountain air of dusk. 

In all these things there is a deep meaning, 

but when we're about to express it, 


we suddenly forget the words. 


Lao-tzu also said, “Those who speak, do not know; 
those who know, do not speak.” And another Chinese 
poet satirized him by saying, “Those who speak, do 
not know; those who know, do not speak; thus we 
have heard from Lao-tzu, and yet how does it come 
that he himself wrote a book of five hundred charac- 
ters?” The point, then, is that his whole book does not 
in any way define what the Tao means. He speaks not 
so much about it, but rather speaks with it, using it, as 


it were, as the power by which to express himself. 


39 


What Is Tao? 


So what is the reason why Tao is inexpressible and 
yet at the same time the basis for a philosophy? The 
reason is that we cannot have any system of thought — 
whether it be philosophical, or logical, or mathematical, 
or physical — which defines its own basis. This is an 
extremely important principle to understand. In other 
words, I can pick up a paint brush with my right hand, 
but I can't pick up my right hand. My right hand picks 
itself up. If I try to pick up my hand, what would I pick 
it up with? There always has to be something, as it 
were, that isn't picked up, that picks itself up, that 
works itself and is not worked upon. 

In the same way, you will find that if you look up “to 
be” in a dictionary, it is defined as “to exist.” Then when 
you look up “to exist,” you will find it defined as “to 
be.” And are you any the wiser? A dictionary cannot 
really completely define itself; ultimately it can only 
put words together that correspond to other words. 

In this sense, to try to say anything about the Tao is 
like trying to eat your own mouth, and of course you 
cannot get outside of it to eat it. Or to put it the other 
way, anything you can chew is not your mouth. 
Anything that is expressed about the Tao is not the Tao. 


40 


The Way of the Tao 


TZu-JAN 
By Itself So 


There is always something that we don't know. This 
is well illustrated by the elusive qualities of energy in 
physics: We cannot really define energy, but we can 
work with it, and this is the case with the Tao. The Tao 
works by itself. Its nature is to be, as is said in Chinese, 
tzu-jan, that which is “of itself,” “by itself,” or “itself so.” 
Tzu-jan is almost what we mean when we say that 
something is automatic, or that something happens 
automatically. We sometimes translate this expression 
in English as “nature,” as when we talk about the nature 
of the mountains, the birds, the bees, and the flowers. 
That sort of nature in Chinese would be tzu-jan. 


41 


What Is Tao? 


The fundamental sense of it is that the Tao operates 
of itself. All that is natural operates of itself, and there 
is nothing standing over it and making it go on. In the 
same way one’s own body operates of itself. You don’t 
have to decide when and how you're going to beat your 
heart; it just happens. You don't decide exactly how you 
are going to breathe; your lungs fill and empty them- 
selves without effort. You don’t determine the structure 
of your own nervous system or of your bones; they 
grow all by themselves. 

So the Tao goes along of itself. And since there is 
always a basic element of life that cannot be defined — 
in the same way the Tao cannot be defined — it cannot 
be controlled. In other words, you can't get outside 
yourself to define yourself or to control yourself. Lao- 
tzu would go on to say that since man is an integral 
part of the natural universe, he cannot hope to control 
it as if it were an object quite separate from himself. 
You can't get outside of nature to be the master of 
nature. Remember that your heart beats “self-so” — 
and, if you give it a chance, your mind can function 
“self-so,” although most of us are afraid to give it a 
chance. 


42 


The Way of the Tao 


WU WEI 
Not Forcing 


Whenever we have the feeling of being able to 
dominate ourselves, master ourselves, or become the 
lords of nature, what happens is that we do not really 
succeed in getting outside of nature or of ourselves at 
all. Instead we have forced our way of seeing these 
things to conform to an illusion that makes us think 
they are controlled objects, and in doing this we 
invariably set up a conflict inside the system. We soon 
find that the tension between our idea of things and 
things as they are puts us out of accord with the way 
of things. 

For this reason you might say that not-forcing is 
the second principle of the Tao — the spontaneous or 


43 


What Is Tao? 


of-itself-so activity (tzu-jan) being the first. In Chinese 
the second principle is called wu wei, and it means lit- 
erally “not doing,” but would be much better trans- 
lated to give it the spirit of “not forcing” or “not 
obstructing.” In reference to the Tao it is the sense 
that the activity of nature is not self-obstructive. It all 
works together as a unity and does not, as it were, 
split apart from itself to do something to itself. 

Wu wei is also applied to human activity, and 
refers to a person who does not get in his or her own 
way. One does not stand in one’s own light while 
working, and so the way of wu wei (this sounds like a 
pun but it isn’t) is the way of non-obstruction or non- 
interference. This is the preeminently practical Taoist 
principle of life. 

What I mean by forcing yourself is something like 
this: When children in school are supposed to be 
paying attention to the teacher, their thoughts will go 
wandering all over the place, and the teacher will soon 
get angry and say, “Pay attention.” And the children 
will wrap their legs around the legs of the chair, and 
they will stare at the teacher and try to look frightfully 
intelligent. But what happens was expressed very well 


44 


The Way of the Tao 


in a cartoon I saw the other day: A small boy is stand- 
ing and looking at his teacher and saying, “I’m sorry, I 
didn't hear what you were saying because I was listen- 
ing so hard.” In other words, when we try to be loving, 
or to be virtuous, or to be sincere, we actually think 
about trying to do it in the same way the child was 
trying to listen, tightening up his muscles and trying 
to look intelligent as he thought about paying atten- 
tion. But he wasn't thinking about what the teacher is 
saying, and therefore he wasn't really listening at all. 
This is a perfect example of what is meant by blocking 
yourself or getting in your own light. 

To offer another illustration of it, suppose you are 
cutting wood. If you go against the way the tree grew, 
that is to say against the grain of the wood, the wood 
is very difficult to cut. If you go with the grain, how- 
ever, it splits easily. Or again, in sawing wood, some 
people are in a great hurry to get on with sawing and 
they try and power right through the piece. But what 
happens? When you turn the board over you see the 
back edge of the wood is full of splinters, and you find 
that you are rather tired as well. Any skilled carpenter 
will tell you, “Let the saw do the work, let the teeth do 


45 


What Is Tao? 


the cutting.” And you find that by going at it quite 
easily, and just allowing the blade to glide back and 
forth, the wood is easily cut. 

As our own proverb says, “Easy does it.” And wu 
wei means easy does it. Look out for the grain of 
things, the way of things. Move in accord with it and 
work is thereby made simple. 


Ve 
ed 
Jee 

TE 
Virtue: Skill at Living 


In one book the philosopher Chuang-tse tells a 
wonderful story about a butcher who was able to keep 
the same chopper for twenty years because he was 
always careful to let the blade fall on the interstices 
between the bones. And so in this way he never wore 
it out. 

Once again we see that the person who learns the 
kind of activity which is, shall we say, in accord with 


46 


The Way of the Tao 


the Tao, is said to possess virtue. This peculiar Chinese 
sense of virtue is called Te, but it is not virtue in quite 
our ordinary sense of being good. Te is like our word 
virtue when it is used more in the sense of the healing 
virtues of a plant. When we use the word virtue in this 
way it really designates an extraordinary kind of skill 
at living. And in his book Lao-tzu says the superior 
kind of virtue is not conscious of itself as virtue, and 
thus really is virtue. But the inferior kind of virtue is so 
anxious to be virtuous that it loses its virtue alto- 
gether. 

We often come upon the kind of virtuous person 
who is self-consciously virtuous, who has, you might 
say, too much virtue. These are the sorts of people who 
are a perpetual challenge to all their friends, and when 
you are in their presence you feel they are so good that 
you don’t know quite what to say. And so you are 
always, as it were, sitting on the edge of your chair and 
feeling a little bit uncomfortable in their presence. In a 
Taoist way of speaking, this kind of person stinks of 
virtue, and doesn't really have any virtue at all. 

The truly virtuous person is unobtrusive. It is not 
that they are affectedly modest; instead they are what 


47 


What Is Tao? 


they are quite naturally. Lao-tzu says that the greatest 
intelligence appears to be stupidity, the greatest elo- 
quence sounds like a stammer, and the greatest bright- 
ness appears as if it were dull. And of course this is a 
kind of paradoxical way of saying that true virtue, Te, 
is the living of human life in such a fashion as not to get 
in its own way. 

This is the thing we all admire and envy so much 
about children. We say that they are naive, that they 
are unspoiled, that they are artless, and that they are 
unself-conscious. When you see a little child dancing 
who has not yet learned to dance before an audience, 
you can see the child dancing all by itself, and there is 
a kind of completeness and genuine integrity to their 
motion, 

When the child then sees that parents or teachers 
are watching, and learns that they may approve or dis- 
approve, the child begins to watch itself while danc- 
ing. All at once the dancing becomes stiff, and then 
becomes artful, or worse, artificial, and the spirit of the 
child’s dance is lost. But if the child happens to go on 
studying dance, it is only after years and years that, as 
an accomplished artist, the dancer regains the naivete 


48 


The Way of the Tao 


and the naturalness of their original dance. But when 
the naturalness is regained it is not just the simple, we 
could say embryonic, naturalness of the child, com- 
pletely uncultivated and untutored. Instead it is anew 
kind of naturalness that takes into itself and carries 
with itself years and years of technique, know-how, 
and experience. 

In all this you will see that there are three stages. 
There is first what we might call the natural or the 
childlike stage of life in which self-consciousness has 
not yet arisen. Then there comes a middle stage, which 
we might call one’s awkward age, in which one learns 
to become self-conscious. And finally the two are inte- 
grated in the rediscovered innocence of a liberated 
person. 

Of course there is a tremendous advantage in this, 
because one must ask, if you are enjoying life without 
knowing that you are enjoying it, are you really enjoy- 
ing it? And here, of course, consciousness offers an 
enormous advantage. But there is also a disadvantage, 
even a danger, in developing it, because as conscious- 
ness grows, and as we begin to know how to look at 
ourselves and beyond ourselves, we may start over and 


49 


What Is Tao? 


over again, and cause much interference with our- 
selves. This is when we begin to get in our own light. 

You know how it is when you get in your own light 
or get in your own way — when it becomes desper- 
ately essential that you hurry to catch a train or plane, 
for example, instead of your muscles being relaxed and 
ready to run, your anxiety about not getting there in 
time immediately stiffens you up and you start stum- 
bling over everything. It is the same sort of thing on 
those days when everything goes absolutely wrong. 
First of all, when you're driving to the office, all the 
traffic lights are against you. Of course this irritates 
you, and because of your irritation you become more 
tense and more uptight in your way of handling things, 
and this leads to mistakes. It could lead to being so 
furious and going so fast that the police stop you, and 
so on and so forth. It is this way of battering against 
life, as it were, that ties it up in knots. 

And so, the secret in Taoism is to get out of one’s 
own way, and to learn that this pushing ourselves, 
instead of making us more efficient, actually interferes 
with everything we set about to do. 


50 


PART II 


THE GENTLE 
WAY 


The Tao is like a well: 

used but never used up. 

It is like the eternal void: 

filled with infinite possibilities... 


The Tao is called the Great Mother, 
empty yet inexhaustible, 
it gives birth to infinite worlds. 


It is always present within you. 
You can use it any way you want. 


THE STRENGTH OF WEAKNESS 


Lao-tzu writes about the philosophy of the 
strength of weakness. It is a strange thing, I think, 
how it is men in the West do not realize how much 
softness is strength. One of old Lao-tzu’s favorite 
analogies was water. He spoke of water as the 
weakest of all things in the world, and yet there is 
nothing to be compared with it in overcoming 
what is hard and strong. You can cut water with a 
knife and it lets the knife go right through, yet 
water alone cut the Grand Canyon out of solid 


rock. 


53 


What Is Tao? 


Lao-tzu also said that while being a man, one 
should retain a certain essential feminine element, 
and that he who does this will become a channel 
for the whole world. 

The ideal of the hundred-percent tough guy, the 
rigid, rugged fellow with muscles like steel, is 
really a model for weakness. We probably assume 
this sort of tough exterior will work as a hard shell 
to protect ourselves — but so much of what we fear 
from the outside gets to us because we fear our 
own weakness on the inside. 

What happens if an engineer builds a completely 
rigid bridge? If, for example, the Golden Gate Bridge 
or George Washington Bridge did not sway in the 
wind, and if they had no give, and no yielding, they 
would come crashing down. And so you can always 
be sure that when a man pretends to be 100 percent 
male on the outside, he is in doubt of his manhood 
somewhere on the inside. If he can allow himself to 
be weak, he can allow himself to experience what is 
really his greatest strength. This is so not only of 
human beings, but of all living things. 


54 


The Gentle Way 


JUDO 
The Gentle Way 


The philosophy of the strength of weakness 
that came from China to Japan through the migra- 
tion of Zen Buddhism has inspired the astonishing 
forms of self-defense known as judo and akido. The 
word judo is fascinating because it means ju, the 
gentle, do, way. Do is the Japanese way of pronounc- 
ing the Chinese Tao, and so it is the gentle Tao, the 
philosophy of the Tao as applied to self-defense. 

This philosophy has various components, and 
one of the most basic elements to the whole prac- 
tice of judo is an understanding of balance — and 
balance, indeed, is a fundamental idea in Taoist 
philosophy. The philosophy of the Tao has a basic 
respect for the balance of nature, and if you are sen- 
sitive you don’t upset that balance. Instead you try 
to find out what it is doing, and go along with it. 

In other words you avoid such mistakes as the 


wholesale slaughter of an insect pest or the intro- 


55 


What Is Tao? 


duction of rabbits into a country like Australia 
without thought as to whether they have a natural 
enemy, because through such interference with the 
balance of nature you inevitably find yourself in 
trouble. The philosophy of balance is the first thing 
that all students of judo and akido have to learn, 
and it is the underlying principle of the Tao. 

If we look at the principles of judo, the question 
of balance is easily demonstrated by looking at 
what happens when we try to lift a heavy roll of 
material. We would be foolish to try and just pick 
it up from the top, because that shows no under- 
standing of the laws of balance. If you want to lift 
something, go below its center of gravity. Put your 
shoulder to it, undermine it, and then swoop it up. 
That principle follows throughout judo. Part of the 
understanding of balance in judo is to learn to walk 
in such a way that you are never off center: your 
legs form the base of a triangle, and your body is on 
the apex, and when you turn you always try to keep 
your feet approximately under your shoulders, and 
in this way you are never off balance. This is a good 
practice in everyday life as well as in judo. 


56 


The Gentle Way 


The second principle, beyond understanding 
and keeping balance, is not to oppose strength 
with strength. When you are attacked by the 
enemy, you do not oppose him. Instead you yield to 
him, just like the matador yields to the bull, and 
you use his strength and the principle of balance to 
bring about his downfall. 

Suppose, for example, there is a blow coming at 
me from a certain direction. Instead of defending 
myself, and pushing the blow off, the idea in judo is 
to carry the blow away. But as the adversary goes 
by, the knee goes out, catching him below his point 
of balance. The adversary then falls heavy and hard 
— brought about by his own initiative, and your 
receptivity. By letting him follow his punch 
through, and not deflecting it, he has fallen into 
your trap. 

The same attitude of relaxed gentleness is most 
beautifully seen when you watch cats climbing 
trees. When a cat falls out of a tree, it lets go of 
itself. The cat becomes completely relaxed, and 
lands lightly on the ground. But if a cat were about 
to fall out of a tree and suddenly made up its mind 


57 


What Is Tao? 


that it didn’t want to fall, it would become tense 
and rigid, and would be just a bag of broken bones 
upon landing. 

In the same way, it is the philosophy of the Tao 
that we are all falling off a tree, at every moment of 
our lives. As a matter of fact, the moment we were 
born we were kicked off a precipice and we are 
falling, and there is nothing that can stop it. So 
instead of living in a state of chronic tension, and 
clinging to all sorts of things that are actually 
falling with us because the whole world is imper- 
manent, be like a cat. Don’t resist it. 


Li 
The Patterns of Nature 


Thus far, like a typical philosopher, I have been 
trying to explain what Taoism is, and odd as it may 
seem, this is really quite the wrong thing to do. 

Stranger still, if I succeed in giving you some 
sort of impression that you really understand, if I 
succeed in making the whole problem clear in 


58 


The Gentle Way 


words, I shall have deceived you. One reason life 
seems problematic to us, and one reason why we 
look to philosophy to try to clear it all up, is that 
we have been trying to fit the order of the universe 
to the order of words. And it simply does not work. 

Yet I continue to talk and write about Eastern 
philosophy, and I have often said that the real basis 
of Buddhism is not a set of ideas but an experience. 
This of course is equally true of Taoism as well, 
which like Buddhism recognizes that experience is 
altogether something different from words. If you 
have tasted a certain taste, even the taste of water, 
you know what it is. But to someone who has not 
tasted it, it can never be explained in words because 
it goes far beyond words. 

The order of the world is very different from the 
order we create with the rules of our syntax and 
grammar. The order of the world is extraordinarily 
complex, while the order of words is relatively 
simple, and to use the order of words to try to 
explain life is really as clumsy an operation as 
trying to drink water with a fork. Our confusion of 
the order of logic and of words with the order of 


59 


What Is Tao? 


nature is what makes everything seem so problem- 
atic to us. 

When we say that we are trying to make sense 
out of life, that means that we are trying to treat 
the real world as if it were a collection of words. 
Words are symbols, and they mean something 
other than signs formed out of letters, but actual 
people, mountains, rivers, and stars are neither 
symbols nor signs. And so the difficulty that we 
encounter in trying to make sense out of life is that 
we are trying to fit the very complex order of life 
itself into a very simple system that is not up to the 
task, and this gets us involved in all sorts of unfore- 
seen difficulties. 


In the Chinese language there are two terms 
that signify these two different orders. The first is 
the word tsu, which means “the order of things as 
measured,” or “the order of things as written 
down.” In one sense this word has the meaning of 
“law,” and although we sometimes speak of the 
laws of nature, the laws of nature could never be tsu 
unless we made an attempt to describe them or 


60 


The Gentle Way 


write them down in order to think about them in 
words. 

Since tsu only refers to the order of things as we 
think about them in words or numbers, the Chinese 
use another word, li, for the actual order of nature. 
This is a peculiar and interesting term; its original 
meaning is the markings in jade, the grain in wood, 
or the fiber in muscle, and it has been translated 
by the great student of Chinese thought, Joseph 
Needham, as “organic pattern.” It refers to the kind 
of complex pattern we see when we look at the 
stars, for example, and see a gaseous nebula, which 
is an extremely indeterminate form, or when we 
look at the sculpted layers forming the patterns in a 
rock, and see the glorious rippling that is incredibly 
difficult to describe, although easy enough to 
understand with our eyes and our feelings. But to 
try to put that kind of order into words is always 
beyond us, and it is for this reason that the attempt 
to make sense out of life will always fail. 

The order of li, of the infinite complexity of 
organic pattern, is also the order of our own bodies, 
and of our brains and nervous systems. We actually 


61 


What Is Tao? 


live by that order, for as I have often noted we do not 
figure out in words or ordered thoughts how we 
grow our own bodies, structure our bones, or regu- 
late our metabolism. In fact we really have no idea 
how we manage to do any of this, no idea how 
we manage to be conscious, how we actually think, 
and how we actually make decisions. We do these 
things, but the processes and the order of the physi- 
cal body that underlies them are completely myste- 
rious to us. Even though we can do these things, we 
cannot fully describe them. 

All the time we are actually relying on this 
strange and unintelligible form of natural order. It 
is at the basis of everything we do, and even when 
we try to figure something out and describe it in 
words, and then make a decision on the basis of 
that process, we are still unconsciously relying 
upon an order that we cannot figure out. That 
order constitutes our basic nature, but we are too 
close to it to see it — and so following the Tao is 
the art of feeling our way into our own nature. 

In the process of our upbringing, however, 
and particularly in our education, our parents and 


62 


The Gentle Way 


teachers are very careful to teach us not to rely on 
our spontaneous abilities. We are taught to figure 
things out, and our first task is to learn the different 
names for everything. In this way we learn to treat 
all of the things of the world as separate objects. 

A tree is a tree, and it begins with its roots, and 
ends with the leaves on its branches, and that’s 
that. We are also taught to behave consistently, 
almost as if we are characters in a book, and you 
know how the critics hate an author who doesn’t 
make his characters consistent. If we were actually 
consistent in life it would be very boring, but I 
think that sometimes, in this respect, we take our 
cues for living from literature, and attempt to 
impose a consistency on top of our natural, ever- 
changing spontaneity. 

Since we are brought up to make sense of our- 
selves, and to be able to account for ourselves, we 
are always expected to be able to rationalize our 
actions in words. When we try to accomplish this 
we develop a kind of second self inside us, which in 
Zen is called the observing self. This observing self 
can be a very good thing for us to develop, and it can 


63 


What Is Tao? 


also cause problems, and run a commentary on who 
we are and what we are doing all the time. It asks, 
“What will other people say? Am I being proper? 
Does what I am doing make any sense?” 

The sociologist George Herbert Meade called 
this “the interiorized other.” That is to say, we have 
a kind of interior picture, a vague sense of who 
we are, and of what the reaction of other people to 
us says about who we are. That reaction is almost 
invariably communicated to us through what other 
people say and think, but soon we learn to main- 
tain the commentary on our own, and each thought 
or observation is then compared to the idea we 
have formed. Therefore this image becomes interi- 
orized — a second self who is commenting all the 
time upon what the first one is doing — and in any 
given situation we must either rationalize why a 
certain behavior is consistent with that image, or 
force ourselves to change that behavior, or fail to 
change it and feel guilty for failing. The difficulty 
with this is that although it is exceedingly impor- 


tant for all purposes of civilized intercourse and 


64 


The Gentle Way 


personal relationships to be able to make sense of 
what we are doing, and of what other people are 
doing, and to be able to talk about it all in words, 
this nevertheless warps us. 

We have all admired the spontaneity and fresh- 
ness of children, and it is regrettable that as chil- 
dren are brought up they become more and more 
self-conscious. In this way people often lose their 
freshness, and more and more human beings seem 
to be turned into creatures calculated to get in 
their own way. 

Humans get in their own way because they are 
always observing and questioning themselves. They 
are always trying to fit the order of the world into 
the order of sense, the order of thought and words. 
And therefore the children lose their naturalness 
and spontaneity. For this reason we admire the 
people, whether they be sages or artists, who have 
the ability to return in their mature life to a kind of 
childlikeness and freshness. They are not bothered 
any more by what people are thinking or saying. 
This is the charm that surrounds the Taoist sages of 
ancient China. 


65 


What Is Tao? 


] CHING 
Book of Changes 


For an illustration of the pattern intelligence of 
li, and of how it can be used in decision making, 
let’s look at an ancient Chinese method of divina- 
tion that is infused and linked inextricably with 
Taoism. Perhaps you know of divination as a kind 
of fortune-telling, but this particular form of div- 
ination is based on what some people believe to be 
the very oldest of all the Chinese tracts, the I Ching, 
or the Book of Changes. As such, I think one would 


66 


The Gentle Way 


not presume to ask such an ancient and honored 
book of wisdom as the I Ching what to bet on the 
stock market, but rather one asks questions about 
one’s spiritual or psychological state or consults 
the oracle concerning momentous decisions in life. 

The old and orthodox way of consulting the 
Book of Changes is to use the stalks of a yarrow plant, 
which are long, straight, and narrow. A number 
of stalks are taken and divided at random, and then 
the calculations are made. But this is a rather 
long and elaborate way of casting, and the not-so- 
ancient but equally respectable way is to use coins. 
I keep three Chinese coins for this purpose; any 
other coins work just as well. 

The kind of question to ask the Book of Changes 
that would be appropriate under most circum- 
stances is something like this: “What is the best 
thing for me in my present state?” We phrase a clear 
question, and then take the coins and shake them 
and drop them; according to the way they fall on 
each toss — heads or tails — we construct a six-line 
hexagram consisting of a pair of three-line trigrams. 

It works like this: We shake and throw all three 


67 


What Is Tao? 


coins together at the same time; each throw of the 
three coins gives us a single line. The inscribed 
side of the Chinese coin — or the “tails” side of an 
American coin — counts as yin, with the value of 
2. The reverse side — or the “heads” side of an 
American coin — counts as yang, with a value of 3. 
There are then four different possibilities for the 
three coins: 

If all the coins are yin, the total value of all three 
coins is 6, and a broken line, or negative line, is 
drawn, and forms the bottom line of the hexagram. 
This is the so-called “old yin” line: 


<P ap 


If two coins are yin and one is yang, the total 
value is 7, and an unbroken, or positive, line is 
drawn, the so-called “young yang” line: 


~~ 


If one coin is yin and two are yang, the total 
value is 8, and a broken, or negative, line, the so- 


68 


The Gentle Way 


called “young yin,” is drawn. And if all three coins 
are yang, the total value is 9, and an unbroken, or 
positive, line is drawn: the “old yang.” 

Let’s look at a particular case, and assume that 
on the first throw we get a total of 6, a negative 
reading, and the symbol that records the negative 
reading is the drawing of a broken line, a yin line. 

We do it again, and this time the total is 8 — the 
reading is again negative, and again we record it, 
and draw another broken line on top of the first 
broken line, beginning to create our hexagram from 
the bottom to the top. 

We shake them again, drop the coins, and this 
time the total is 7 — a positive reading. We record 
this toss by an unbroken line, or a yang line repre- 
senting the positive principle, and the first trigram 
is completed. 


Q_- 

> > f 

a wr 
We throw again, and once more the total is 6 
and the line is negative. And again, and the total is 


69 


What Is Tao? 


8 and the line is once more negative. And then we 
throw a final, sixth time, and the total is 9, and the 
line is indisputable: an unbroken, yang line goes on 
the top. 
And so we arrive at this figure: 

ed 

. a 4 

~~ Ww 

DP 

Pp a> 


wp wy 


In order to know what it means we have to take 
a look at a very ancient diagram, one that may be 
familiar to you. Perhaps you've seen it on Chinese 
bowls or jewelry or carving in jade. These are the 
eight trigrams — symbols composed of three verti- 
cally stacked lines — arranged ina circle, and in the 
center of the design, you see the figure we saw ear- 
lier, the symbol of the yang and the yin principles.” 

In China the symbol in the center is also known 


*You will find the picture at the beginning of this section (page 66). 


79 


The Gentle Way 


as Tai Chi, the symbol for the two fundamental 
principles, the positive and the negative, the yang 
and the yin that are held to lie at the root of all phe- 
nomena in the world. The Chinese character for the 
word yang looks like a fish; it represents the light 
side, and means the southern or bright side of a 
mountain. The character for yin is the black fish; it 
represents the shady or dark side of a mountain. 
Respectively, as we have seen, they represent the 
male and the female principles. 

Notice the symbolism of a light and dark side of 
a mountain — you do not find a mountain with only 
one side; the two sides must always go together. 
And so, in the same way, the Chinese feel that the 
positive and the negative, the light and the dark, the 
male and the female, the auspicious and the inaus- 
picious always go together in human life, because 
one cannot be distinguished without the other. 

Outside the rotating figure of the positive and 
negative principles you will find the eight tri- 
grams, which are every possible combination of 
broken or unbroken lines. These trigrams repre- 
sent the eight fundamental principles or elements 


71 


What Is Tao? 


that, according to the Book of Changes, are involved in 
every life situation. 

The one at the top, for example, means heaven, 
or sky, which is symbolic of the creative principle, 
and the one directly below means earth, and is 
symbolic of the receptive principle. In the Chinese 
system each trigram also corresponds to a family 
member, and the creative symbol is the father, the 
receptive symbol the mother. 

Over on one side, we find a trigram with two 
yang or radiant lines enclosing a receptive line, and it 
is associated with the element of fire and means 
clinging, or perhaps holding. Opposite, the trigram 
has two receptive lines surrounding a receptive line, 
and is associated with water, and with the chasm and 
the dangerous abyss. Between the four cardinal tri- 
grams appear the four intercardinal trigrams: thun- 
der, wind, lake, and mountain. Within the oracle, 
every situation in life may be represented by two of 
these principles in preponderance. In our example 
above, one trigram is repeated twice, and what we 


have cast is a Mountain over a mountain. 


72 


The Gentle Way 


ADVICE FROM THE ORACLE 


Altogether there are sixty-four possible combi- 
nations of these eight trigrams, which makes the 
meaning of each combination pretty difficult 
to remember. So now we will look to the Book of 
Changes itself to see what it has to say about this 
particular hexagram, and what advice the oracle 
would want to give us in answer to our question 
about our present situation. 

The mountain over the mountain happens to be 
number 52, called, not surprisingly, “the Moun- 
tain.” The figure of the mountain is a symbol asso- 
ciated with the idea of quietness, or keeping still. 
And when we have “keeping still” or “quietness” 
above “quietness,” we have before us a whole em- 
blem whose meaning is profound calm. 

And so the oracle says, 


THE JUDGMENT 


Keeping still. Keeping his back still 
So that he no longer feels his body, 


73 


What Is Tao? 


He goes into his courtyard 
And does not see his people. 
No blame. 


True quiet means keeping still when 
the time has come to keep still, and going 
forward when the time has come to go for- 
ward. In this way rest and movement are in 
agreement with the demands of the time, 
and thus there is light in life.... 


THE IMAGE 


Mountains standing close together: 
The image of keeping still. 

Thus the superior man 

Does not permit his thoughts 

To go beyond his situation. 


The heart thinks constantly. This cannot 
be changed. But the movements of the heart 
— that is, a man’s thoughts — should restrict 
themselves to the immediate situation. All 


74 


The Gentle Way 


thinking that goes beyond this only makes 


* 
the heart sore. 


You can see that this is pretty generalized ad- 
vice, and it is in a way appropriate to the question 
because the question was vague, and so the answer 
is vague. But the symbolism of this answer is simply 
that sitting so as to keep one’s back still, so that 
one’s back is not noticed, is self-forgetfulness. And 
keeping one’s thoughts to the immediate situation 
suggests the practice of meditation or calmness or 
quietness. That’s what we're advised to do. It’s good 


advice. 
A WESTERN POINT OF VIEW 


You may well say, however, that this is a thor- 
oughly crazy way of coming to decisions, especially 


if I were to ask something more specific than this, or 


*Reprinted by permission of the Princeton University Press from 
The I Ching or Book of Changes, the Richard Wilhelm translation, © 
1950 by Bollingen Foundation, Inc. 


75 


What Is Tao? 


if I had asked advice on some momentous decision I 
had to make. We would say, from our modern, sci- 
entific point of view, that flipping coins to come to 
the great decisions of life is the stupidest thing one 
could possibly do. After all, it neglects all rational 
cogitation about our situations. It takes no account 
of the data available in the situation. It makes no 
intelligent assessment of the probabilities, and 
before we make any important decision, we like to 
think over all the factors involved. 

We go into the situation and think it out thor- 
oughly. We balance the pros against the cons, and 
we balance assets against deficits. And therefore we 
believe that nothing could be more superstitious 
than relying upon an oracle that in turn relies 
entirely on the random chance of falling coins. 
We know that the coins have no relation to the 
problem whatsoever, and so naturally our contem- 
porary point of view about this — and all other 
methods of fortune-telling, divination, and so on — 
is that if they work at all, it is nothing more than 
pure chance. 


76 


The Gentle Way 


AN EASTERN POINT OF VIEW 


To someone who believes in this system, how- 
ever, perhaps a traditional Chinese or Japanese 
person, it does not seem farfetched at all. They 
might say to us, “First of all, when you consider the 
facts that are involved in any particular decision, 
and calculate all the data, how do you select which 
facts are most relevant? 

“If you are going to enter into a business con- 
tract, for instance, perhaps the facts you believe 
pertain to this contract are the state of your own 
business, the state of the other person’s business, 
and the prospects of the market, but you probably 
would not think about many of the personal matters 
that might affect the plan. And nevertheless, some- 
thing that you may never have considered at all may 
enter into the situation and change it completely. 
The person you're going into business with may 
slip on a banana peel and get seriously injured 
and become inefficient or even detrimental in the 
business. How could anyone ever predict such an 


(7 


What Is Tao? 


eventuality by taking a sane and rational assessment 
of the situation?” 

Or perhaps they might say to us, “How do you 
know when you have collected enough data? After 
all, the data and the potential problems involved 
in any particular situation are virtually infinite. 
What causes you to stop collecting data, or stop 
gathering information about how to solve a prob- 
lem? I think you just collect information until you 
are either tired of collecting it, or until the time 
comes to act and you have run out of time to collect 
more data.” And one could present a very convinc- 
ing argument that because you decide when to stop 
investigating in a very arbitrary way, this method is 
just as arbitrary as flipping coins. 


PROBABILITIES AND DECISIONS 


“Well,” we could argue, “what about probabili- 
ties? After all, we rely a great deal upon statistics in 
order to make decisions.” But statistics have their 
limitations — they work very well when averaging 
what a large number of people are going to do, but 


78 


The Gentle Way 


are useless in individual cases. The actuarial tables 
used by insurance companies, for example, will tell 
you quite accurately the average life span of an 
adult male or female, smoker or nonsmoker, but in 
any individual case these tables will not tell us 
when someone is going to die. And the same is 
probably true if we look at any given decision that 
we may make: The probability is that we will weigh 
all the information, and in the final moment make 
our decision based upon our “hunch,” which is 
really a gut feeling about the situation that has 
little to do with rational thought. 

Now I am of a somewhat skeptical temperament, 
and I very much doubt if in fact this way of coming 
to decisions really works. But I say this with a cer- 
tain qualification, because we can never really prove 
whether any method of coming to a decision really 
works. I may make a supremely foolish decision and 
as a result of it I get killed, but there would be 
absolutely no way of showing that my getting killed 
at that moment did not preserve me from a worse 
fate, and perhaps from making mistakes that involve 
the lives of many other people. If I do happen to 


79 


What Is Tao? 


succeed by making a right decision in business 
affairs and I earn millions of dollars, there is like- 
wise no way of showing that this was not so bad for 
my character that it was the worst thing that could 
have possibly happened. So we never really know 
whether the outcome of a decision will be a failure 
or a success in the long run, because only the 
unknown — only what comes next — will show 
whether it was good or bad. And the unknown 
stretches infinitely before us. 


DISADVANTAGES AND ADVANTAGES 


There are advantages and disadvantages to both 
modern scientific inquiry and to the system of this 
old Chinese book of divination. There is a bad side 
to the Book of Changes and a distinct disadvantage in 
Chinese culture. The Chinese came to rely so much 
on the Book of Changes and its system of symbols for 
classifying all natural phenomena that in the 
course of time it became a very rigid structure and 
eventually excluded the perception of novelty. 

The warning for us in this, whereby we might 


80 


The Gentle Way 


take advantage of their mistake, is to realize that 
we are doing the same thing with scientific 
method. There are certain kinds of personalities 
who tend to become very rigid in their scientific 
ideas and thereafter automatically exclude certain 
possibilities because they do not happen to con- 
form with alleged scientific dogma. 

Take for example what we call ESP, or extra- 
sensory perception, although I prefer to call it extra- 
ordinary sensory perception. There is extremely 
strong evidence that perception of this kind occurs, 
and yet many scientific people will ignore that evi- 
dence because they say that it simply can’t happen. 
Limiting their inquiry in this way is to fall into the 
same rut that the Chinese fell into when they relied 
too exclusively upon the classification of the world 
and of events found in the Book of Changes. 

Both systems, on the other hand, have their 
advantages. Just as there is a positive use for sci- 
ence, there is a positive side to the Book of Changes. 
The picture seen in the book through the interplay 
of these forms is founded on a view of life that is 


very suggestive to us of a new way of looking at our 


81 


What Is Tao? 


information, and is in accord with certain points of 
view that are now developing in our own science. It 
is a way of looking at life that focuses on not so 
much the causal relationship between the events, 
as the pattern of events as a whole. 


A COMPARISON OF EAST AND WEST 


Let me try to show the difference between 
these two ways of investigation. When we think of 
causality, we think chiefly of the way events are 
determined by the past, and by extension the way 
the behavior of people is determined by their past. 
It is as if events were a lot of different marbles that 
are thrown together and knock each other around. 
In tracing the movement of any particular marble, 
therefore, we will try to find out which other mar- 
bles knocked it about, and so trace its individual 
history further and further back. Until quite recent 
times the point of view of Western science was 
based almost exclusively on the idea of causality; it 
had become a study of the way things are influ- 
enced by past things. 


82 


The Gentle Way 


The point of view that underlies the Book of 
Changes is that instead of trying to understand 
events as relationships to past causes, it under- 
stands events by relation to their present pattern. 
In other words, it comprehends them by taking a 
total view of the organism and its environment 
instead of what we might call a linear view. 
Although the Chinese have not really applied this 
approach to their technology, they have tradition- 
ally applied it to their art and to their philosophy of 
natural law, and their essential point of view is 
quite different from ours. 

We can find a suitable analogy for the Western 
way of looking at things by saying that we are 
attempting to understand events in accordance 
with the order of words. I can say, “This dog has no 
bark,” and then say, “This tree has no bark,” and the 
meaning of “bark” in these two sentences is deter- 
mined by what went before them — so if I want to 
know what “bark” means, I have to go back to what 
happened in the past. 

If you look at what I would rather call the order 
of design, however, and not the order of words, you 


83 


What Is Tao? 


find a rather different situation because all of the 
elements of the design come at you together. They 
are, as we would say, “of a piece,” and you see their 
relationship to their context and meaning all at 
once, much as you see the image appear when you 
develop a photographic plate. The meaning of each 
part of the design is relative to the rest of the 
design just as you see it at this moment. 

In the same way, the fundamental philosophy of 
the Book of Changes and of the Chinese idea of the 
relationship between events is to understand every 
event in its present context. We do not understand 
something by what went before so much as we do 
by understanding it in terms of what goes with it. 
So the idea of the Book of Changes is to review 
through its symbols the total pattern of the 
moment when the question is asked, and the sup- 
position is that the pattern of this moment governs 
even the tossing of the coins. 

The interesting comparison that arises out 
of this comes about because we in the West have 
tended to understand events in accordance with 
linear or sequential orders like the order of words. 


84 


The Gentle Way 


In accordance with the rules of causality, we have 
evolved or constructed a conception of nature 
based on the structure of written law. 

But in the Chinese language we come again to li, 
the word for natural law that originally meant the 
markings in jade, the grain in wood, or the fiber in 
muscle, which is really the basic fundamental pat- 
tern of things. Images such as the markings in jade 
or the grain in wood are used because they have an 
extremely subtle, complex pattern that shows a 
large area of events all happening together at once. 
These patterns have to be taken in and understood 
at a glance, in the same way as we take in a design 
at a glance. 

The fundamental Chinese idea of the order of 
nature is not compatible with formulation in the 
order of words, because it is organic, and is not 
linear pattern. 

In other words, when we think of beauty we 
know very clearly what beauty is, but it is 
absolutely impossible to write down a set of laws 
and rules that can show us how to create beauti- 
ful objects. And mathematicians, for example, 


85 


What Is Tao? 


often feel that certain equations, certain expres- 
sions are peculiarly beautiful. Because they are 
meticulous people, they try to think out exactly 
why they are beautiful, and ask if we could make 
up a rule or formula to describe when beauty will 
or will not appear. Although they have proposed 
the criteria of elegance as a new kind of proof to 
be considered, their general conclusion is that if 
we could make up a rule and apply it in mathe- 
matics, and if we could always by the use of this 
rule get a beautiful result, eventually those results 
would cease to impress us as being beautiful. They 
would become sterile and dry. 

And in the same way, the order of nature, the 
order of justice, and the order of beauty are things 
that we can know in ourselves, yet we cannot write 
down in black and white. The wiser person, there- 
fore, is one who has the sensibility to see those 
things in themselves, and to know that beauty lies 
in the variability of experience from one situation 
to another. 


86 


CONCLUSION 


Ultimately, of course, it is absolutely impossible 
to understand and appreciate our natural universe 
unless you know when to stop investigating. 

In our restlessness we are always tempted to 
climb every hill and cross every skyline to find out 
what lies beyond, yet as you get older and wiser it 
is not just flagging energy but wisdom that teaches 
you to look at mountains from below, or perhaps 
just climb them a little way. For at the top you can 
no longer see the mountain. And beyond, on the 
other side, there is, perhaps, just another valley like 
this. 

An old aphorism from India says, “What is 


87 


What Is Tao? 


beyond, is that which is also here.” 

And you must not mistake this for a kind of 
blasé boredom, or a tiring of adventure. It is instead 
the startling recognition that in the place where we 
are now, we have already arrived. 

This is it. 

What we are seeking is, if we are not totally 
blind, already here. 

For if you must follow that trail up the moun- 
tainside to its bitter end, you will discover that it 
leads eventually right back into the suburbs. But 
only an exceedingly stupid person will think that 
is where the trail really goes. For the actual truth is 
the trail goes to every single place that it crosses, 
and leads also to where you are standing and 
watching it. Watching it vanish into the hills, you 
are already in the truth beyond, which it leads to 
ultimately. 

Many a time I have had intense delight listening 
to some hidden waterfall in the mountain canyon, a 
sound made all the more wonderful since I have set 
aside the urge to ferret the thing out, and clear up 
the mystery. I no longer need to find out just where 


88 


Conclusion 


the stream comes from and where it goes. Every 
stream, every road, if followed persistently and 
meticulously to its end, leads nowhere at all. 

And this is why the compulsively investigative 
mind is always ending up in what it believes to be 
the hard and bitter reality of the actual facts. 
Playing a violin is, after all, only scraping a cat’s 
entrails with horsehair. The stars in heaven are, 
after all, only radioactive rocks and gas. But this is 
nothing more than the delusion that truth is to be 
found only by picking everything to pieces like a 
spoiled child picking at its food. 

And this is also why the Platos of the Far East 
so seldom tell all, and why they avoid filling in 
every detail. This is why they leave in their paint- 
ings great areas of emptiness and vagueness, and 
yet the paintings are not unfinished. These are not 
just unfilled backgrounds, they are integral parts of 
the whole composition, suggestive and pregnant 
voids and rifts that leave something to our imagina- 
tion. And we do not make the mistake of trying to 
fill them in with detail in the mind’s eye. We let 


them remain suggestive. 


89 


What Is Tao? 


So it is not by pushing relentlessly and aggres- 
sively beyond those hills that we discover the 
unknown and persuade nature to disclose her 
secrets. What is beyond is also here. 

Any place where we are may be considered the 
center of the universe. Anywhere that we stand can 
be considered the destination of our journey. 

To understand this, however, we have to be 
receptive and open. In other words, we have to do 
what Lao-tzu advised when he said that while 
being a man one should also preserve a certain fem- 
ininity, and thereby one will become a channel for 
the whole universe. And this is not just good advice 
for men. 


Yet that is one of the misunderstandings in 
which I believe our culture in the West is sub- 
merged. The feminine values are despised, and we 
find typically among men a strange kind of reluc- 
tance to be anything but an all-male man. 

But there is a tremendous necessity for us to 
value — alongside, as it were, the aggressive, mas- 
culine element symbolized by the sword — the 


go 


Conclusion 


receptive feminine element symbolized, perhaps, 
by the open flower. After all, our human senses are 
not knives, they are not hooks; they are the soft veil 
of the eye, the delicate drum of the ear, the soft skin 
on the tips of the fingers and on the body. It is 
through these delicate, receptive things that we 
receive our knowledge of the world. 

And therefore it is only through a kind of weak- 
ness and softness that it is possible for knowledge 
to come to us. 

To put it another way, we have to come to terms 
with nature by wooing her rather than fighting her, 
and instead of holding nature at a distance through 
our objectivity as if she were an enemy, realize 
rather that she is to be known by her embrace. 


In the end, we must decide what we really want 
to know about. 

Do we trust nature, or would we rather try to 
manage the whole thing? 

Do we want to be some kind of omnipotent god, 
in control of it all, or do we want to enjoy it 
instead? After all, we can’t enjoy what we are 


gl 


What Is Tao? 


anxiously trying to control. One of the nicest 
things about our bodies is that we don’t have to 
think about them all the time. If when you woke up 
in the morning you had to think about every detail 
of your circulation, you would never get through 
the day. 

It was well said: “The mystery of life is not a 
problem to be solved, but a reality to be experi- 
enced.” 

The song of birds, the voices of insects are all 
means of conveying truth to the mind. In flowers 
and grasses we see messages of the Tao. 

The scholar, pure and clear of mind, serene and 
open of heart, should find in everything what nour- 
ishes him. 

But if you want to know where the flowers 
come from, even the god of spring doesn’t know. 


Q2 


AN INTRODUCTION 
TO MEDITATION 


ALAN WATTS 


An Introduction to Meditation 
has also been published under the title 
Still the Mind 


What I am really saying ts that you 
don’t need to do anything, 
because if you see yourself in the correct way, 
you are all as much extraordinary phenomenon 
of nature as trees, clouds, the patterns 
in running water, the flickering of fire, 
the arrangement of the stars, 
and the form of a galaxy. You are all just like that, 
and there is nothing wrong with you at all. 


— Alan Watts 


CONTENTS 


Publisher’s Preface 
Introduction by Mark Watts 


Part | 
The Essential Process of the World 
Chapter One: Who We Are in the Universe 21 
Chapter Two: Meet Your Real Self 53 
Part Il 
The Essential Process of Meditation 
Chapter Three: The Philosophy of Meditation 81 
Chapter Four: The Practice of Meditation 97 
Part Ill 
Still the Mind 
Chapter Five: Contemplative Ritual 113 


About the Author 123 
Recommended Reading 125 


PUBLISHER S PREFACE 


By MARC ALLEN 


LAN WATTS BECAME FAMOUS in the 1950s as a bril- 

liant, intense intellectual, a former Episcopalian 
priest with a vast knowledge of both Eastern and 
Western religious and spiritual traditions. Unlike most 
of his peers, though, he embraced and actually prac- 
ticed the various traditions he studied.. His under- 
standing, expressed through a great number of books 
and public talks, was peerless. 

In the 1960s, he became a serious student of Zen 
Buddhism, and was a teacher — and eventually dean 
— at the American Academy of Asian Studies (now 
CHS, the California Institute of Integral Studies). The 
popularity of his books and talks soared. He gave a 


weekly talk on San Francisco public radio that was 


broadcast nationally. A large number of people listened 
every Sunday morning; many considered it their church 
service. 

Watts lived on a houseboat in Sausalito, just north of 
San Francisco, which became renowned as a center 
of endless discussions, parties, and meditation sessions, 
with famous and infamous spiritual leaders, gurus, intel- 
lectuals, writers, and others continually dropping by. 

He continued to practice his meditation, and his 
writing and talks deepened. More and more, he was 
leading people into meditation and spiritual experience 
rather than just talking about it. 

In the last years of his life, he left the houseboat and 
retreated to a small, isolated cabin deep in the woods. 
He spent nearly every morning alone, usually beginning 
with a Japanese tea ceremony followed by a period of 
meditation and contemplation. Then he would write. 

His writing and speaking grew quieter and deeper. 
This book has been transcribed from recordings of sev- 
eral talks he gave in his later years. They show a matu- 
rity and an understanding of his subject that only comes 
after years of meditation. He had transformed over the 
years from a serious intellectual to a joyous, sponta- 
neous lover of life. 

His words are still leading-edge, as fresh today as 
when they were spoken many years ago. He is a writer 


and student and teacher who will be remembered, and 
this book shows us why: 

He is able to use words to take us beyond them, he 
is able to instill in readers and listeners not only an 
understanding of meditation but an actual spiritual 
experience as well. 


INTRODUCTION 


By MarK WATTS 


N THE BEGINNING Of Still the Mind, Alan Watts men- 
| eae the gift he had been given — and it was a 
unique gift. Watts was able to take his readers and 
listeners on a journey beyond the often-ignored lim- 
itations of calculation and reckoning. Perhaps the 
greatest part of this gift was his ability to show us 
how to discover simple ways of getting out of the 
mental trap we create for ourselves. 

In our modern society, it has become apparent 
that the power-based world — the world of politics, 
government, and international finance that influ- 
ences all of us — has been absolutely hypnotized 
and driven crazy by words and by thoughts. We have 


become slaves to recurring patterns in an endless 


stream of words. Our political leaders talk incessantly 
about our many problems, but it’s as if they’re speaking 
a foreign language one might call “memorandese.” 
Almost everyone has had the experience of watching a 
political debate and wondering afterward what on earth 
the candidates were talking about. To some degree, all 
civilized people are out of touch with reality because we 
fail to distinguish between the way things are and the 
way they are described. For politicians this dichotomy 
has reached extreme proportions, but it affects every- 
one. We confuse money, which is an abstraction, with 
real wealth; we confuse the idea of who we are with the 
actual experience of our organic existence. 


During the sixties and early seventies, Alan Watts 
lectured at universities and blossoming growth centers 
across the country. To help his audiences better under- 
stand their connection with the world, he would 
describe in great detail the many ways that our organic 
existence inseparably connects us to the entire world. 
Starting when I was sixteen, and on into my early twen- 
ties, I followed along whenever I could with a portable 
tape deck, recording his talks. 

Whether the title of his talk was Ecological 
Awareness, The Psychology of Mystical Experience, or 
The Practice of Zen Meditation, he would often return to 
the theme of the inseparability of man and world. It was 


something he grasped on a deep level and could invari- 
ably help his audiences understand. His essential point 
was that one’s actual organic being is inseparable from 
the universe, but the distinct idea you have of this dis- 
tinct wiggle of the whole universe, which you call your 
body, can very easily persuade you to accept the illusion 
that you are a separate entity. 

One reason we fall for the idea of the separate, iso- 
lated self is that, even though we admire the beauty of 
the natural world, nearly everyone who has grown up in 
Western society has certain misgivings about actually liv- 
ing as an integral part of nature. Instead, we adopt cer- 
tain conventions that allow us to live in modern society; 
we cultivate our consciousness in order to “rise above” 
the level of natural instinct. 

At one extreme, we are rugged individualists who feel 
the need to conquer the physical world and claim new 
territory for mankind. But even those who do not try to 
dominate the world in a physical sense may try to over- 
come what they perceive as their animal nature through 
the repression of their natural desires. We see this mani- 
fested nearly everywhere in our culture in conscious 
attempts to adhere to abstract ideals of virtuous living. 

But as Carl Jung wrote in his essay The Stages of 
Life that “instinct cares nothing for consciousness.” 
Like my father, Jung believed that the problems we have 
are manifestations of our consciousness, and more 


particularly, the direct result of self-consciousness and 
our attempt to make things better. This is at the root of 
so many of the dilemmas we create in so many areas of 
our lives. 

Look at the issue of ecology, for example: Although 
we sincerely want to get along with nature and not 
destroy it, we still see ourselves as people living sepa- 
rately from the natural world. We are still not a part of 
it, due to a trick of perception that many people have 
called the ego. In reality the whole problem is a mental 
trap, and the only way out of the trap is to wake up and 
simply be in the real world. 

It is necessary therefore to experience the real world 
directly — but here we run into a problem because 
some people beligye that the real world is the spiritual 
world and others believe it is the physical world. Both 
of these, however, are simply ideas, concepts. As Alan 
Watts and so many others keep pointing out, the real art 
of connecting with the universe is to stop thinking, at 
least from time to time. 

Practicing the art of meditation or contemplation can 
help us stop the perpetual chatter that goes on inside 
our skulls. As my father often said, “A person who 
thinks all the time has nothing to think about except 
thoughts, and lives in a world of illusions.” To the 
degree we can stop thinking and start experiencing, we 
are getting back to sanity, and to reality. In meditation 


or contemplation we can occasionally discover a state of 
consciousness that is truly not self-conscious. But the 
only way to do this is by allowing all attempts to men- 
tally describe the world to cease. If we talk all the time, 
we won’t hear what anyone else has to say, and if we 
think all the time, we will never experience the nature 
of our organic existence. 


In the following pages we will explore what lies at 
the heart of what may still to this day be considered a 
new way of thinking and living. As Alan Watts and many 
others have understood, there is nothing new in it: We 
are connecting — or reconnecting — with an energy as 
old as the universe, and with a form of wisdom at least 
as old as the human race, well understood by indige- 
nous peoples and brilliantly taught by Buddhists and 
Hindus. 

In Still the Mind, we are taken on an experiential 
journey. By participating in the experiments suggested, 
you will find a way to get back in touch with the real- 
ity that exists beyond our thinking — the great, unified 
-reality our thoughts are supposed to represent but can 
never capture or express. 

Alan Watts says it much more clearly than I do — 
and it has been a gratifying experience for me to spend 
so much time with the hundreds of hours of his words 
that were recorded on tape. He is a speaker and writer 


whose voice has continued to have a great impact many 
years after his passing, and I believe it is well worth 
spending a few quiet hours from time to time with the 
book you’re holding in your hands. You will see how he 
used words and thoughts to guide us beyond our words 
and thoughts, and you will come to understand that we 
are far greater, far more miraculous in our nature than 
our words can express. 


PAR T I 


THE ESSENTIAL PROCESS 
OF THE WORLD 


C H APT ER ONE 


WHO WE ARE 
IN THE UNIVERSE 


WAS TAUGHT when I was a little boy that it was good 

to be unselfish and loving, and I used to think that 
I should grow up to serve other people. But after a 
while I found out that unless one has something to 
give people, there is nothing one can do to help 
them. Just because I thought I ought to help, it didn’t 
mean that I had anything to give. 

Gradually, over the years, as I understood what it 
was that I had received of significance from the 
world, I realized that these things were never intend- 
ed as gifts to be given in the usual sense of the word. 
However much one enjoys the song of birds, they are 
not singing for the advancement of music, and the 
clouds are not floating across the sky to be painted 
by artists. 


21 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


In the words of a Zen poem, 


The wild geese do not intend 
to cast their reflection 
The water has no mind 
to retain their image 


When a mountain stream flows out of a spring 
beside the road, and a thirsty traveler comes along and 
drinks deeply, the traveler is welcome. But the mountain 
stream is not waiting with the intention of refreshing 
thirsty travelers; it is just bubbling forth, and the travel- 
ers are always welcome to help themselves. So in exactly 
that sense I offer these ideas, and you are all welcome 
to help yourselves. 


THREE WISHES 


I am offering these words for your entertainment, 
and to entertain myself. I am not trying to improve you, 
and I really do not know how I would improve you. It 
would be imprudent for me to recommend any improve- 
ments, because one never knows how these things may 
turn out — and as they say, be very careful of what you 
wish for, because you may get it. 

One of the problems when people ask for miracles 
is that they never know what the miracle they ask for 
ultimately involves. That is why magicians and genies 


22 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


always grant three wishes, so that after the first two 
you can always use the third one to get back to where 
you began. 

What invariably happens is that with the first wish, 
things never quite work out as you expected. You may 
not realize what it may involve if you wish for a glass to 
be changed into gold, for instance. If we change the 
arrangement of the universe in such a way that glass 
becomes gold, you may suddenly find that your eyesight 
fails or you lose all your hair, because that might go 
with it. We do not understand all the interconnections 
between things, because in reality what we call “things” 
are not really separate from each other. The words and 
the ideas about them separate them from each other, but 
they are not separate. They all go with each other, inter- 
connected in one vast vibratory pattern, and if you 
change it at one point it will be changed at all sorts of 
other points, because every vibration penetrates through 
the entire pattern. 


Wuy Do You BELIEVE? 


You never really know what is going to happen, and 
therefore I would not presume to say that you ought to 
be different than the way you are. I am not a guru, in 
the sense of a spiritual teacher or an authority from 
which you may expect something more than what you 
have. When you confer spiritual authority on another 


23 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


person, you must realize that you are allowing them to 
pick your pocket and sell you your own watch. 

How can you be certain with any great teacher (or 
scripture for that matter) that they know what they say 
they know? You may believe in a religion, that is a 
choice you have made. But how do you know, and why 
do you believe? 

If you believe in something simply because the 
Bible says it is true, for instance, you do so because you 
believe that the Bible has the authority to tell you it is 
true. You may well say that your fathers and mothers 
and all sorts of reliable people believed it, and therefore 
you have accepted it on their authority. If you are curi- 
ous, however, you will also ask, “How did they know it 
was true?” Did they, by their light and example, show 
that they were enormously improved because of their 
belief? 

If we look at human history with a clear eye, we see 
that over an appallingly long period of time people have 
not improved very much despite their religions and 
ideals. When you become a grandfather with five grand- 
children as I am, you realize that you are just as stupid 
as your own grandfather was because you still look at 
things from your own limited position. And although my 
grandchildren may think that I am a wise and venerable 
man with a beard, I know that I am still a child, and I 
feel pretty much as I have always felt. So when you set 


24 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


someone up as an authority, never forget that the belief 
that you have in this authority is just your opinion. 


IT RESTS ON OUR AUTHORITY 


When De Tocqueville said that the people get the 
government they deserve, he was quite right. We allow 
the government, whether it be political or spiritual, to 
get away with it, and so it rests on our authority. This is 
true also of God. If you believe in God — that God 
is good, or that God is God at all — it is your opinion. 
And so God derives from you, and therefore this 
thought has some very peculiar implications with regard 
to the government of the universe. 

Awareness of the source of spiritual authority — 
understanding that it comes from us, from the people — 
may imply that there is some sort of democracy in the 
kingdom of Heaven. Of course it does not overthrow 
God, except in the sense of a certain kind of God, and 
most people do not realize that there can be many quite 
different ideas of God. 

God does not have to be a monarch; there can also 
be an organic god. There are also personal and imper- 
sonal gods, and there are gods that are neither personal 
nor impersonal. There are gods that exist and gods that 
do not exist, and there are gods that neither exist nor do 
not exist. But whatever you believe God is, it always 
goes back to you. 


25 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


WHAT DOES CONSCIOUSNESS REST UPON? 


When his disciples approached the great Hindu sage 
Sri Ramana Maharshi and asked, “Guruji, who was I in 
my last incarnation?” he would answer, “Who wants to 
know?” 

When they asked, “Guruji, how does one attain lib- 
eration?” he would reply, “Who is it that wants to attain?” 

Who is asking the question? It always gets back to 
you, where it all begins — and what is that? Of course 
we might think we know who we are — we have been 
told who we are, and we bought the story we were told. 

So you can’t really blame anybody else for what you 
think of yourself. You can’t go way back, in a sort of 
psychoanalytical way, and find the causation for what 
you are now. The answer is not in the behavior of your 
parents, or in your peer group, or whatever your situa- 
tion was when you were a child, because the universe 
doesn’t work that way. Instead it works the other way: 
It goes backward into the past from you, because you 
started it. And so when you blame somebody else for 
putting you into your current situation, it merely means 
that you have defined yourself incorrectly. Perhaps you 
have defined yourself as being limited to your conscious 
attention, and limited to your voluntary musculature. 
But is that all there is? Is that the real you? 

What does consciousness rest upon? Have you ever 
asked yourself that question? 


26 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


WHo ARE You? 


Consciousness does not illumine the lamp from 
which it shines, just as a flashlight doesn’t shine on the 
battery that powers it. When you make a decision, does 
that come from somewhere other than you? No, it comes 
from the depths of you, of which you are not really 
aware. You encompass far more than anything you 
know about in a conscious way. 

But we are so used to thinking of “I” as simply the 
center of our consciousness, and the center of our will, 
that we ignore (or are ignorant of) most of ourselves. 
When you think of a particular person, what do you 
think of? Suppose I say, “Think of your uncle,” or “Think 
of your mother.” What instantly comes to mind is their 
face, because we are most accustomed to seeing photo- 
graphs and images of faces. When we see images of the 
president, most often it is the president’s face, the head 
and shoulders, and only occasionally is the whole body 
seen. 

What do you think of when you think of a flower? 
In the same way, you think mostly of the blossom, 
sometimes of the stalk, and occasionally of the whole 
plant. But very rarely when we think of a flower do we 
think of the flower out in a field. We would say, “That’s 
more than the flower. The flower is not the field.” But is 
that so? Where would the flower be without the field? 

I can say in words, “The flower grows in the field.” 


2/ 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


In words I can chop the field off and say, “The flower 


” 


grows,” and the phrase will still make sense. However, 
it will not make sense in nature. If I take the field away 
from the flower, the flower cannot grow. The flower is 
connected with the field in a very deep way, and so in 
the same way a person is not just their head. The head 
has to go with the body, and the body has to go with a 
social and natural environment — but we never think of 
in that way. We know it is all there, but it doesn’t come 
to mind automatically. 

So who are you? And who decides on the limits of 
an organism? Who are you that gives spiritual authority 
to somebody else, and then pretends, “Of course it does 
not come from me. I bow down because I know that 
person really knows.”? 

Now the Buddhists have a very funny trick when it 
comes to bowing, because Buddhists do not have the 
idea of a supernatural authority that watches over them. 
So why, then, do they bow when they pay respect to 
a Buddha? Why do they bow when they meet you, and 
greet you so reverently? Bowing is paradoxically the act 
of a king, because it confers authority. The one who 
bows sets the revered image on its pedestal, and if there 
were no one to bow, there would be no image on the 
pedestal. 

You put it there, but again you would ask, “How 
could it be so that what puts the authority up there is 


28 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


just poor little me, who is neurotic, or sinful, and doesn’t 
really even understand what’s going on?” But funda- 
mentally the you that does this is the greater you, which 
is not just the activity of consciousness but the whole 
activity that expresses itself as you sit here and read this 
page. And what is it that expresses itself as you read? 
And what am I that is called Alan Watts and is offering 
these ideas? 

I stated in the beginning that I am doing all this for 
entertainment, and I meant it. But who is it that is doing 
this for entertainment? If I say, “Alan Watts is a big act,” 
who is it that puts on this act? 

To try to trace the answer down, we might go to an 
astrologer and ask, “Who puts on the act?” “Well,” he 
would say, “Where were you born, and at what time?” 
And he would go and look up the positions of the stars 
and the planets, and then he would draw a picture of 
my character, which just happens to be a very crude pic- 
ture of the universe. 

“There you are,” he would say. “But I see you’ve 
drawn a picture of the universe,” I would reply. That may 
be a surprise to him, because he probably thinks of the 
influences of the stars and of the planets as something 
that affects me, and that implies a certain separation 
between the bodies that cast the influences and the pup- 
pet that is influenced. But does the root of a flower influ- 
ence the flower as something fundamentally different 


29 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


from it? No, surely the root and the flower are one 
process, and like your head and your feet it all goes 
together. In that sense then, the universe, and what you 
or I do, all goes together, and so that picture of the uni- 
verse is really a picture of you. 

We may not recognize ourselves because we think 
of ourselves as a chopped-off piece surrounded by our 
skin, and therefore we see ourselves in a rather impov- 
erished way. And this form of perception is almost auto- 
matic. We think of ourselves as separate beings who 
stand alone and move through all sorts of different 
places but are cut off from the environment. 

As a result we have an underlying feeling of alien- 
ation, of not really belonging in this universe, and we 
feel that we are being confronted by something that 
does not give a damn about us. It was here long before 
us, and will be here long after we are gone. We come 
into this world for a brief span as a little flash of con- 
sciousness between two eternal darknesses. Of course 
during our lives all sorts of other things go on, but nev- 
ertheless the feeling that haunts almost everybody is that 
this “I” is an orphan, here on a visit, and we don’t feel 
that we really belong here. 

In the same way, what do you feel when you look 
out at those galaxies? If you go out into a desert or up 
in the mountains where the sky is clear, you see this 


colossal affair that you are involved in. It makes a lot of 


30 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


people feel very small, but it shouldn't. It should make 
you feel as big as it is, because it is all inseparably con- 
nected with what you call you. 

This tremendous whirling of energy is exactly one 
and the same energy that is looking out of your eyes, 
that is running along inside your brain, that is breathing, 
and that makes noises when you talk. The whole energy 
of the universe is coming at you and through you, and 
you are that energy. 


THE NATURE OF ENERGY 


“Well,” we say, “but surely we die, and we disap- 
pear, we turn into dust, and this will go on long after I 
am gone.” The whole nature of energy, however, is that 
it is a vibration, and a vibration is a wave, and a wave 
has a crest and a trough. It is like a pulse, it goes on and 
it goes off, and everything goes on and off. 

Things like light go on and off so quickly that you 
can't see the off, because by definition on is always a lit- 
tle bit more noticeable than off. It is positive, whereas 
off is negative. 

The outside of things is vibration, but because it goes 
very fast we don’t quite sense it, and therefore it seems 
constant or solid, like the blades of an electric fan. This 
is true of light and also true of sound, but when you 
hear a very deep sound it vibrates noticeably. You can 
hear the texture in it; you can hear the vibrations 


31 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


going on and off. When you hear a great pipe organ, 
the whole building shudders with these vibrations. We 
barely notice most of the pulses, however, including 
the slower pulses created by the turning of the earth, 
the cycles of the tides, or the coming and going of the 
equinoxes. These are very slow vibrations, but they 
always go on, and then off. 

We are aware of these changes only because of the 
contrast within them. Of course you would not know 
something was on if it did not occasionally go off, and 
you would not know it was off if it did not sometimes 
go on. So I have often asked the question “How would 
you know you are alive unless you had once been 
dead?” 


WHERE WouLbD You BE wiTHOouT NOTHING? 


Where were you before you were born? 

Where will you be when you die? 

We may think we will become nothing, but what 
we don’t realize is that nothing, in its own way, is as 
important as something. Where would you be without 
nothing? What is the background to being if it is not 
nonbeing? 

You have to have nothing to have something. It is so 
simple, but nobody sees it because it is fundamental to 
Western philosophy that out of nothing comes nothing. 
But how can that be? According to our logic, in order for 


32 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


something, or someone, to come out of nothing, there 
must be some kind of hidden structure inside nothing. It 
must contain some sort of inner workings out of which 
something comes. But this is not the case at all. The 
whole point is that there is no concealed structure, and it 
is just because it is honest-to-goodness plain nothing that 
something comes out of it. That is elementary logic, but 
no one sees it because everybody is afraid of nothing. 

People think, “Well, if it’s nothing, it will never be 
something again, because that’s going to be the end.” 
The theologians get this mixed up too, and even some- 
one like Saint Thomas Aquinas believed that out of noth- 
ing comes nothing, and then he said, “God created the 
world out of nothing.” He made a mistake because he 
tried to identify God exclusively with being — and of 
course you cannot have being without nonbeing. 

The Hindus understand this, as well as the Buddhists, 
who inherited their philosophy and mythology. They say 
God is neither being nor nonbeing; it is what they have 
in common. Yet nobody can say what that is, and still 
you know perfectly well that being and nonbeing go 
together, like an inside and an outside, a front and a 
back, a top and a bottom. Being and nonbeing are polar- 
ities, like the North and South Poles. What is in between? 

Nobody really knows, because you can only know 
what you can compare with something else. You can 


know something only because you can compare it with 


33 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


nothing, and vice versa, but nobody knows what to 
compare with that which is common to both something 
and nothing. 

It is for that same sort of reason that you cannot see 
for yourself the color of consciousness. What’s the color 
of eyesight? We know all of the colors because they are 
different from each other. We see different colors in a 
mirror, but what is the color of the mirror? 

We may say, “Silver” — but it isn’t really. Although 
a mirror will reflect a silver spoon as something differ- 
ent from something else, the mirror is a noncolor. We 
can’t compare it with any other color, and so it is trans- 
parent to our consciousness. And like your conscious- 
ness, and like space, it is a big nothing. 

Most people treat space and consciousness as if they 
were not there, yet suppose there wasn’t any space, 
only solid. There would be no outside the solid, and no 
one would know if it was round or square because there 
would be nothing to compare it to, and it would be all 
there would be. 

It would appear rather dense, but of course most of 
what we call something is largely nothing when you get 
down to atoms. Whatever it is they are really made of is 
vast distances apart, and when we get to the inner struc- 
ture of atoms, we find precious little there. It is a lot of 
nothing — and this nothing turns out to be very power- 
ful stuff. 


34 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


EVERYTHING GOES AROUND 


In order to have room to move around, you have to 
have a void to move around in, and moving around is 
energy, which is definitely something. So that is the sort 
of thing we are in, and that is the sort of thing we are. 
We are not just in it, we are it, and it vibrates, it oscil- 
lates, and it goes around. 

The cycles are not just simply wave motions or 
undulations, they are also cycles of a circular kind. 
Everything goes around, just as when we dance we go 
around — and it is tremendously important to get hold 
of this principle of going around. We are in a phase of 
the life of mankind when we seem to have forgotten 
that cyclic quality; instead of going around we all think 
we are going somewhere, and that implies there is 
somewhere else to go. But as I wander along, I can’t 
help but wonder where that other place would be. 


HIGHER ORDERS OF BEING 


In the same way, when we think of evolution, we 
think of a scale and of a hierarchy of different sorts of 
beings. We might think, for example, that above us there 
are angels, and then gods, and then Buddhas with 
attending bodhisattvas going up to we know not what 
heights of amazing human development. And then we 
think that below us are the other mammals, perhaps 


35 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


demons, insects, bacteria, plants, rocks, down, down to 
we know not what depths. 

SO we congratulate ourselves and say, “How great it 
is to be human and not to be a cat, not to be a rose, and 
not to be a fish.” And we think how much better it will 
be when we can get to be angels. We human beings are 
very conceited, and we think we can get up there and 
be gods or Buddhas. 

But how do you know that you are a higher order 
of being than a potato? What do you really know about 
potatoes anyway? You probably have never studied 
potatoes beyond knowing how to cook and eat them. 
That’s probably about it. But have you ever thought 
about how a potato feels? 

“Well,” you say, “it doesn’t feel, it’s only a potato, it 
has nothing to feel with.” But wait a minute. When you 
put a lie detector on a potato — some kind of skin 
response machine — it certainly registers, and its readings 
change when you do certain things. If you prick the po- 
tato, or shout at it, it will flinch. As a matter of fact, if you 
learn how to turn on your alpha waves and you sit beside 
a plant, you will find that it will pick up those alpha 
waves. So maybe plants are not so stupid after all. 

“Well,” we might say, “how can it be? It has no civ- 
ilization. It has no house. It has no automobiles. It has 
no pianos, no art galleries, and no religion.” 


But the potato might say, “I don’t need them. It’s 


36 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


you poor uncivilized human beings who have to have all 
this crap around you to tell you who you are and what 
it’s all about. You are messy and inefficient, and you are 
cluttering up the planet with your culture. But I, the 
potato, have it all built into me.” 

“Well,” we might say, “that’s impossible, because 
you are stuck in one place all the time. How can you 
know anything about the world?” 

But the potato doesn’t need to go running around 
because its sensitivity extends all over the place. And so 
it might say, “I want to introduce you to a few things. 
There is my neighbor over here, the thistle. Have you 
ever seen how my thistle neighbor gets around? It has 
tiny seeds with down sticking out all over them, and 
when the wind comes these seeds float off into the air. 
And my neighbor the maple tree has little helicopters it 
sends off, and they spin in the air and fly away. And 
then I have a friend the apple tree, and it has fruit that 
is so delicious that the birds like it. They eat the apple 
and swallow the seeds, then they fly away and when 
they drop the seed it is sown.” 

These are incredible devices. Others have burrs that 
stick in the hides of deer, and they carry these seeds 
around, “This is one of the ways we get around and 
we spread our people so that we aren’t all crowded 
together and don’t strangle ourselves.” 

The potato would go on to explain, “But this is only 


37 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


the beginning of the extraordinary things that we do. We 
have vibrations going on inside our fibers that are quite 
as good as anything invented by your Bach and Mozart. 
We enjoy this, and although you may think we are not 
doing anything because we just sit here all the time, we 
are vibrating, and we are in ecstasy. We are humming to 
the great hum that is going on everywhere.” 

Your plants may be in such an advanced state of 
consciousness that, unknown to you, angels are growing 
in a flowerpot at your door. Unbeknownst to you they 
may have a great deal to do with the way you think. 

Consider also that the humble fly may be extremely 
intelligent too. With all those eyes he sees a complex rela- 
tionship of perspectives, and with the ability to walk 
upside down on the ceiling he may have a certain per- 
spective that is far beyond ours. Whatever do flies do 
when they buzz? What is it all about? We don't know, 
because we don’t even how know to begin to study them. 

It took many years to find out that bees communi- 
cate with each other by dancing, and that was such a 
shock that one entomologist at UCLA said, “I have the 
most passionate reluctance to accept this evidence.” 

It is a shock to find out that dolphins, for example, 
may be more intelligent than people, and that so-called 
killer whales are a very intelligent kind of dolphin. Look 
at those creatures. They are mammals, and it is said — 


although we are not sure if this is true — that they once 


38 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


lived on the land. Apparently they decided that being on 
the land is a pretty stupid way for a mammal to live, and 
they said, “Let’s go skin diving.” 

They said, “You really don’t have to do much for a 
living, and you can dance and play.” And so dolphins 
spend most of their time simply fooling around — and 
they fool around in very complicated ways. If we were 
dolphins, we would call this art. 

When we practice any art, we are in a way just fool- 
ing around. We mix a lot of paint and make beautiful 
patterns on flat surfaces or on textured surfaces. We put 
together all kinds of boxes with pluckable wires, little 
tubes that we can blow our breath through, and enor- 
mous tubes that we blow breath through mechanically. 
We stretch great taut skins that we bang with our fists or 
with sticks, and do all kinds of other things. 

When a symphony orchestra gets up on a Stage, it is 
essentially just a lot of baboons blowing through holes, 
and yet this is something very important. There is a 
hush, the concertmaster comes in, and everybody 
applauds and sits down. The concertmaster then sum- 
mons the orchestra into being, and people in their tiaras 
and pearls and ties sit back because this is culture and 
this is very serious. The whole atmosphere of the con- 
cert hall is very proper, like a church. 

It is a little different when a rock band takes over, 
and there is a light show and everything is just blowing. 


39 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


This is authentic music, and it is very important music. 
Perhaps this is the continuation of the great Western tra- 
dition. The concert hall is good for classical music, but 
as the new artists take over with their rather sophisti- 
cated new music, musicians like the Beatles and the 
Grateful Dead continue the tradition, but it is done in a 
different spirit. That music is a celebration, and there is 
nothing sedate about it. It’s music to groove with, to be 
right there with, because you are not pretending that 
you are doing something important in a solemn sense. 
You are doing something important because you are 
right in the belly of things, and you’re moving with it. 

All of the vegetables understand this, and so from 
their point of view they are very highly evolved beings. 
Perhaps they don’t consider us inferior beings, and just 
regard us as something different, but we are very unfair 
to vegetables. When at last a human being approaches 
the end of life and lapses into a coma, we say, “Poor old 
so-and-so, he’s just a vegetable.” Or when somebody is 
lazy, we say, “They’re just vegetating.” 

Now that shows a lack of compassion toward veg- 
etables. The word “compassion” means to feel with, or 
to have passion with. If you have compassion for veg- 
etables, or for flies, or mushrooms, or viruses, what it 
means is that you have put yourself in their position. 
When you begin to really empathize, you discover that 
they think of themselves as people, and they have just 


40 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


as much right to think that they are civilized and cul- 
tured as you and I do. 

So what does that do to our perception of an 
ordered universe? Think about it fora moment in human 
terms. For one thing, most of the people we call primi- 
tive are far less violent and less diabolical than we are 
as a society. They live more peaceable lives, and even 
though the tools they use are not as developed or com- 
plex as ours, these are very dignified, civilized people. 
They certainly are not savage. 

Many primitive peoples look at us with grave con- 
cern. They don't regard us as civilized at all. Instead 
they view us as a rather serious menace to the planet, 
because we are out of touch with the ecology of nature, 
and tend on the whole to be extraordinarily miserable. 
Some of the richest places I know of are full of wealthy 
people who are really amazingly miserable because, 
despite their tremendous resources, they are always 
worrying about their health, their taxes, politics, or los- 
ing their money. You can always worry about something 
if you are the worrying type, and it doesn’t matter how 
rich you are or how poor you are. 


A PLACE CALLED You 


As you carefully observe the cycles of life, a very 
strange kind of relativity begins to take root in your 
consciousness. Everywhere on a sphere is the same 


41 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


place, because there is as much east of you as there is 
west of you, and by the same logic, any point on the 
surface of the sphere is the center of the circle. 
Furthermore, if we live in a curved space-time continu- 
um, any planet can be regarded as the center of the 
whole universe, and therefore any person on a planet 
stands in the situation of God — as that circle whose 
center is everywhere and whose circumference is 
nowhere. So when you want to become something more 
than you are, different from what you are, or higher 
than where you think you are, all that means is that you 
haven’t discovered where you are, and you are under 
the illusion that there is somewhere else that you ought 
to be besides here. 

What we are engaging in here is a journey to the place 
where we are, and I would like to describe to you some 
of the peculiarities of this journey. It is a sort of Alice in 
Wonderland story, because it is full of paradoxes. 

If I say, “We are going on a journey to where we are, 
a journey to the center of the universe and to the mid- 
dle of space and time, and it’s a place called you,” peo- 
ple will invariably begin to pass judgment about one’s 
progress along the way. They will say things like, “I 
think this person is more aware than somebody else. 
He’s more there than so-and-so is.” 

Then we begin to think about the stages one goes 
through in getting to be more where they are than they 
were before. You find this particularly in sophisticated 


42 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


circles, where people are concerned with spiritual and 
psychological development, and with religion. Some 
very curious games are played, and many of them are 
forms of spiritual one-upmanship. People become con- 
cerned with being more humble than other people. 


PASSING JUDGMENTS 


Suppose we see somebody who has a reputation, 
either deserved or undeserved, for being “spiritually 
evolved.” That is the sort of phrase that is usually used. 
But if they get influenza and feel very sick, people shake 
their heads and say, “If so-and-so were really spiritual, 
they wouldn’t be affected by sickness.” 

We have a funny notion in our heads that truly spir- 
itual people are made of cast iron, that they are not sen- 
sitive, so that if you bang them about it won’t affect 
them. But as the great Sixth Patriarch of China pointed 
out, you must learn to distinguish between a living 
Buddha and a stone Buddha, because if a buddha was 
simply one who was not affected by anything, then 
lumps of wood and pieces of stone would be Buddhas. 
And perhaps they are in their own way, but that wasn’t 
the point he was making. His point was that if you think 
that the greatest ideal in life is to be invulnerable, then 
you are on your way to becoming geological rather than 
spiritual. 

This kind of spiritual geology is very prevalent if you 


43 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


know spiritual people as well as I do. I perpetually hear 
tales of people insisting that “my guru’s better than 
yours.” This goes on insufferably, whether it is my min- 
ister, my church, my society, or my own organization. I 
have heard all the reasons why, and I have heard peo- 
ple putting down other teachers and gurus, saying how 
dreadful it is that such and such a Zen master made 
them do so-and-so. Or we hear of the yogi who is a 
drunk, or sleeps with his students, or gambles, or drives 
cars too fast. 

A great many spiritual people in this country are 
actually crypto-Protestants and still believe strongly in 
the Protestant ethic. Therefore they pass all of these 
judgments, despite the fact that the founder of the 
Christian religion said, “Judge not that you be not 
judged.” 


ALL THE DIFFERENT PERFORMANCES 
OF THE UNIVERSE 


If you look at all the religions and all the different 
kinds of practices that people are doing in the same way 
that you look at different kinds of vegetables and differ- 
ent kinds of flowers and insects and butterflies, you will 
see that while yogis are assuming one perspective and 
Baptists are assuming another, what they are all really 
doing is a different kind of dance — and you can accept 
this, and look at it with absolute amazement, and say, 


44 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


“Wow, look at all these different performances this uni- 
verse is doing.” 

If you do this, you tend to stop griping and arguing 
about which one is the right one. Of course, you may not 
accept all of the performances entirely, you may not 
agree with their points of view. I must admit that I have 
some prejudices. I don’t like the flavor of some Bible Belt 
religions, because I find them exceedingly depressing. I 
also don't like boiled onions; they’re distasteful as well. 

On the other hand, I can worship with the Roman 
Catholics, and the Episcopalians, and Theosophists, and 
Hindus, and Muslims, and feel perfectly at ease because I 
find that they are all doing the same thing in different and 
fascinating ways. Sometimes I draw the line, but I know 
when I do that it is nothing more than a personal preju- 
dice, and I am entitled to some because I am human. 

After all, to be human you have to have within you 
a touch of rascality. When God created Adam, he put in 
him just a touch of the wayward spirit, in the same way 
that one adds a little salt to a stew. If this slight oddity, 
this bit of unpredictability, had not been there, nothing 
would ever have happened, because Adam would never 
have tasted the apple. 


A PINCH OF RASCALITY 


Once, Carl Jung felt that he had met a man with no 
human failings at all, and he was terribly disturbed, 


45 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


because it made him feel guilty. He thought that he 
should probably take a closer look at himself. Then a 
day or two later Jung met the man’s wife, and he ceased 
to worry about it. It wasn’t because she had said, “You 
should know my husband is very difficult to live with.” 
That wasn’t the story at all. Instead, the wife embodied 
all the things that were repressed in her husband, 
because when you live together that intimately you 
begin to share your psychic life. So if one becomes too 
much of a light, their partner may grow compensatory 
and become a shadow, and vice versa. So there has to 
be the element of rascality — but not too much, just a 
pinch of it. 

When I come across somebody who does not 
appear to have it, especially so-called spiritual people 
who are very pure and sincere, I always suspect they are 
unconscious of human nature. There is something about 
these solemn purists that makes me feel uncomfortable, 
because I like people I can let my hair down with. 


THE HIERARCHY OF LIFE 


You may find this is disconcerting, however, 
because then you begin to wonder, “Is there no perfect 
human being? Isn’t there somebody up there, a great 
being who we can all look up to and respect, or are 
saints and saviors pretty much like anyone else?” 

When you look closely at the idea of the hierarchy 


46 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


of life, you realize that even someone as remarkable as 
Jesus Christ — who from a Buddhist point of view would 
be considered a great bodhisattva — can emerge at any 
level. According to the Buddhist idea of reincarnation, 
we have all occupied every position in the hierarchy, or 
on the Wheel of Becoming, as the Buddhists call it, since 
the image of time they use is a wheel. In this view, by 
moving around the wheel, you eventually realize that 
every position to which you can shift is the same posi- 
tion you were always in. While you are shifting you may 
feel there is a change going on, but once you have set- 
tled into your new position, it feels like any other 
settled position always felt. From the inside we know 
what it feels like to have a settled position because from 
time to time we can change — but, as the French say, 
the more it changes, the more it remains the same. 

We who live in a fidgety culture are apt to feel that 
this is an awfully boring philosophy, and that we are not 
going to get anywhere because there is no real progress. 
But, on the other hand, suppose there is.a possibility of 
real advancement and improvement. Use your imagina- 
tion to the best of your ability, and figure out exactly, 
and in detail, where you would rather be, and who you 
would rather be than who you are. 

If you work on this for a while, somebody who is 
ingenious enough will always be able to point out to 
you that you have left something out, and that there is 


47 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


something else you could improve upon. You can go on 
and on, and as you go about this imaginative creation of 
the perfect life you will eventually realize that what you 
are really doing is extending power. 

The process is very much like the people who are 
now working on gene manipulation so that man can 
direct the future of evolution and we can breed intel- 
lectual Einsteins, physical Elizabeth Taylors, and moral 
Sister Teresas. All of these people had extraordinary 
direction as human beings by virtue of their integrity 
and ingenuity, and so some people may look at this idea 
and think it would be just great. But look how we have 
extended our power now. We may think it would be 
good to be in charge of evolution, but along comes the 
old problem of the three wishes again. How do we 
know which way is really better? 

When human beings attempt to take charge of evo- 
lution, they do so using their minds and a kind of con- 
sciousness that scans the world and looks at everything 
serially — but the problem is that the world itself is not 
serial. The world is what we call multidimensional, 
which is to say that everything is happening all together 
everywhere at once, and going along much too fast for 
us to take adequate cognizance merely through a scan- 
ning procedure. Because scanning is confined to linear 
limits, it always leaves things out, and these things may 
be very important. 


48 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


That is why, as I pointed out before, turning the 
glass into gold may mean that your eyesight will fail or 
your hair will fall out. When we bring about change 
with our quite limited vision, and when we change peo- 
ple by altering their genes, we certainly will have a new 
situation, but it will not necessarily be any better, 
because we are unable to see in advance the fullness of 
the role that every individual will play. 

In terms of projecting power, you will see that the 
geneticists’ power is limited because they have a limit- 
ed view. If we decide to give them all the computers 
they need to add it all up so that they will have a com- 
plete view of life, we are then placing ourselves in a 
position to control life on the planet. This is to be the 
final creation, and we are trying to carefully arrange it 
with our seemingly vast intellect and omnipotent con- 
sciousness. We are to be the master magicians; we are 
to have complete control over ourselves, and nothing is 
to happen that is not in accordance with our will. 

Yet suppose we do all this, and suppose we have 
even managed to will our will so that it is always a good 
will. I am not quite sure how we would know it was a 
good will unless there was a possibility for bad will, but 
suppose we have managed. Ultimately, you must ask, 
“Do I want to be in that kind of situation?” In other 
words, think of where those directions we speak of as 


progressive are really going, and extrapolate on them. 


49 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


Perhaps you will say, “Of course I wouldn’t do that, 
because I realize [m never going to get there.” But 
even so, why are you even heading in that direction? 
Are you sure it’s a better direction to go in? After all, we 
kill more people with cars than we do with wars, and 
you have to think about things like that. I am not argu- 
ing that we should not have technological develop- 
ments, but perhaps it is shortsighted to conclude auto- 
matically that they are improvements. They may not be 
improvements at all in the long run — and so it is very 
important to consider whether you want to control the 


direction in which you are heading. 


FULL OF SURPRISES 


Inwardly, do you really and truly want to have 
power over everything that occurs within the sphere of 
your consciousness? Perhaps, speaking as a man, I 
would like to cast a spell over a woman so that she 
would become exactly as beautiful as I could conceive 
beauty to be, and so that every inflection of her voice 
and gesture would obey me like a violin under the hand 
of a perfect master. I would entirely direct her actions, 
and although in her every action she would be my 
dream, I would quickly begin to worry about this 
Frankenstein woman. I would think that perhaps there 
was nobody home, and that all I had done was to cre- 
ate a machine. When I think about it, what I really want 


50 


WHO WE ARE IN THE UNIVERSE 


is for her to do something that I don’t expect. 

That is one of the reasons why it is so nice when we 
have an occasion to give gifts. We love surprises, 
because a surprise means there was someone else there, 
someone who made it fun by doing something that we 
could not have predicted. 

I’ve heard people who think that in the future, due 
to our psychic development, we are all going to be able 
to read each other’s minds. Through direct transference 
from one mind to another we will have access to every- 
body’s thoughts, and there will be no privacy left. Of 
course, since everybody will be completely transparent 
to everyone else, we won’t be able to surprise each 
other. Personally I am not looking forward to that kind 
of world, because I am afraid it will be quite devoid of 
spontaneity. We may lose that littke element we call 
Vitality. 

Now this may sound as if I am saying the best sort 
of thing is not a universe where we realize that there is 
a profound underlying unity through all things, but 
rather a universe that is pluralistic, that is not one at all. 
Certainly it may be said that one of the best parts of life 
is having lots of separate things all surprising each other, 
but I see still a different scheme. 

The world I see is what we might call unity in diver- 
sity. What we call self and what we call other are like 
something and nothing. They are fundamental polarities, 


51 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


which — just because they contrast with each other — 
have something in common. We cannot say what it is, 


though, and therefore our world will always be full of 
surprises. 


52 


C H APT ER T W O 


MEET YOUR 
REAL SELF 


\ X JE HAVE STARTED Out On a journey together to the 

place where we are. It’s good to reflect, at 
some point along the way, on the futility of a certain 
kind of power game we play with our energy. 


THE FUTILITY OF POWER GAMES 


There are two kinds of games — the game you 
play to win and the game you play to play. There is 
a difference between the two, in the same sense as 
there is a difference between traveling to get some- 
where and traveling just to travel, which we might 
call wandering. 

There is a difference between motion with the 
objective of changing place and motion with the 


53 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


objective of dancing. All those forms of energy that are 
moving to dance, or traveling to wander, are joyous 
manifestations of energy. On the other hand, all those 
forms of energy that have us moving to get somewhere 
tend to become frantic, and have a quality of urgency 
that moves us faster and faster until we simply can’t go 
fast enough to accomplish the object. Even when it 
comes to practicing meditation, people keep asking 
about the fastest way, and they want to know how long 
it is going to take. 

Nishkarma means action or doing (karma) without 
attachment, especially without attachment to the results 
of action. Nishkarma is the whole point and message of 
the Bhagavad Gita, or “Song of the Lord,” which consists 
of the instructions of the charioteer Krishna to the warrior 
Arjuna about his conduct on the field of battle. With this 
principle we can view not only our ordinary activities of 
everyday life, but also our religious activity in an entirely 
new way — not as something done to achieve a result. 


Why Do IT? 


Of course, people then ask, “Why do it?” 

People are always asking why, but one must realize 
that why is a barren question. You expect an answer 
addressed in terms of motivation: you want to know the 
cause of what somebody is doing, and the goal it leads 
to. If you are acting without a goal in mind, however, 


54 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


you can’t say why you’re doing it, except to do it. 

Yet people are still bothered, and ask, “Why do it 
then?” — as if to say, “Why use energy at all? Why not 
just be still?” But of course that’s the same as asking, 
“Why does the universe exist?” Why, in other words, is 
there motion? 

The answer to that is because there is stillness. And 
why is there stillness? Because there is motion. In this 
way you reach an end to the question why, because it 
just goes around in circles. 

Another way to reach an end to the question why is 
to go back into the past, because when you do you find 
explanations behind explanations, so that, in the words 


of a favorite semanticists’ verse: 


Big explanations have little explanations 
upon their backs to bite them, 
and little explanations have lesser explanations, 
and so on infinitum. 


In other words, you can never get there. 

What happens, in fact, when we search the past to 
try to understand why we are doing what we are doing? 
What happens is that the track fades away. Look back as 
far as you may, but you will never find the beginning 
because the track gives out, just as the wake of a ship 
vanishes, or the contrail of a plane melts into the air. 


ao} 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


The past, which we considered to be the push-off point, 
or the cause, is gone. 

The real reason the past doesn’t work as an expla- 
nation, however, is of course very simple: the push-off, 
the cause, never was in the past, it has always been in 
the present. It is perfectly obvious that if there was a 
time when the universe came into being, when it did do 
so, it was now. And that now is still here, and it is still 
beginning, right at this moment. So what we call the 
past is simply the traces, the fade-outs trailing away 
from the present. 

So there is little point in asking why you are here, 
because unless you think you are here to resolve some 
past business — in which case you have been motivated 
as if you were a billiard ball hit by a cue — the issue is 
irrelevant. 

Everybody is always talking about motivation and 
asking why, “Why do it?” But you can always say, “Why 
not?” And although that sounds a little childish by way 
of an answer, there is no why, and in a way that is rather 
splendid. 

We tend to think that things are meaningless and 
dreadful if we can’t explain why they happen. A police- 
man who pulls over a motorist who wasn’t going fast 
enough asks, “Where are you going?” “Nowhere spe- 
cial,” comes the answer. This irritates the policeman 


because he thinks you must be on the road for some 


56 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


reason, and that you ought to be going somewhere. If 
you are not, you are suspect because you’re probably 
crazy or up to no good. 


DESIRES AND DRIVES 


Why do you do anything? Is it because of desire? 

When people refer to their basic desires, they call 
them instincts, which is simply a way to label desires as 
drives. We all feel driven — and yet you don’t realize 
that the energy of a drive is you. When you habitually 
abstract yourself from what you are experiencing as the 
experiencer or the knower of the experience, you come 
to feel like a puppet being driven by your emotions, or 
by your appetites or desires, whatever they are. But in 
fact they do not drive you, for there is no you to be driv- 
en by them. They are you. 

And so this notion that leads to saying or thinking, 
“Excuse me, I am driven,” or “Excuse me, I have to eat, 
I have to work, I have sexual desires” — all this is rub- 
bish. I will not apologize for what is called “my hunger.” 
I am very happy to be hungry, and to eat. So instead of 
saying, “Excuse me, but I must eat,” I eat with pleasure. 
Look at what a degradation of ourselves that attitude 
carries with it, and it all comes from this feeling of being 
pushed or driven by something we believe is greater 


than we are. 


oy 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


THE VAST WoRKINGS UNDERNEATH 


The reason we feel it is greater than ourselves is 
because we have a conception of ourselves as nothing 
more than the superficial scanning mechanism called 
“consciousness.” Of course, if that is all you are, natural- 
ly you feel driven, because you are disconnecting your- 
self from the vast workings that lie behind consciousness. 

We disown the part of ourselves that we call instinc- 
tual, animal, or primitive. We think instead that as human 
beings we are the garnishing on top of the evolutionary 
pile. We feel we are much more evolved, not realizing 
that everything we have by way of consciousness and 
reason grows out of the primal energy that lies under- 
neath it. 

Therefore, if reason grows out of the primal energy 
that we are, then it means that the primal energy is at 
least reasonable, whatever else it may be. You can tell 
the tree by its fruits — for “by their fruits you shall know 
them” — and so it is that figs do not grow on thistles, or 
grapes on thorns, and a stupid universe does not create 
people. People are a manifestation of the potentiality in 
the energy of the universe, and if we are intelligent, then 
that which we express is also intelligent. By logical 
extension, that in which we express it is our central self. 
The world is not something external; it is what is most 
fundamentally you. 

As long as we think we are motivated by something 


58 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


external, however, and therefore feel insufficient, as 
long as we have that conception of ourselves, we are 
playing to win, because what we want is to win more, 
and become more. But as I pointed out, our conception 
or image of ourselves is only a caricature, and as such 
is abstract and completely inadequate. It feels as if we’re 
insufficient in some way. 

If you ask, “What did you do yesterday?” the aver- 
age person will consult memory and give you a very 
attenuated, strung-out chronicle of events, having 
reduced yesterday’s experience to a thin line of words. 
What you did yesterday becomes what you noticed yes- 
terday, and what you noticed yesterday was a very tiny 
part of what happened. It was only as much as you 
could record in some memory code, in words or in brief 
impressions. 

If you identify yourself with that skinny little stream 
of life, it is no wonder that you feel unsatisfied, because 
you ate the fish bones instead of the fish. And since we 
think that is what is happening all the time, and that life 
is only this skinny little thing, we feel hungry for expe- 
rience, for thrills, and for ecstasy. 

We say, “There must be more coming,” and we need 
more and more future, because the past is gone, and it 
was a scraggly past anyway. We have no present, 
because life looks like an hourglass: It has a big future 
and a big past, but only a tiny little neck of a present 


59 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


that everything is squeezed through. 

In Buddhist symbology the idea behind the hour- 
glass is represented as a kind of being called a preta. A 
preta is thought of as a hungry spirit, and these crea- 
tures are represented as having enormous bellies but 
mouths and throats only about the diameter of a needle, 
so they can never get enough. That tiny mouth and 
immense belly represents the neck of the hourglass, 
and the feeling of having no present. 

In fact, our present is enormously rich, and you will 
realize this if you understand that there is no time 
except present time. There is only now; there never was 
any time but now, and there never will be any time but 
now. It is all now. There is no hurry to gobble life 
down, and if you do you won’t be able to digest it. We 
can go on much longer than we suppose without eating, 
so it’s all right to just sit and be in the present. 

But if you identify with the linear conception of 
yourself, with your story, and with the abstract ego, you 
feel inadequate, and therefore it becomes necessary to 
try to make up for that inadequacy by using energy 
to attain more in all sorts of ways. 


WANTING MORE CONTROL 


We want more control over what happens, and this 
leads us through a progression of steps. We start of 
course by attempting to acquire power in a physical 


60 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


way, through the possession of material wealth, histori- 
cally of cattle, of slaves, of land, of crops. Then to retain 
all that and keep command over people’s minds, we 
construct societies to dole out this material wealth. 

But as everybody who has ever had this kind of 
wealth knows, it doesn’t stop the feeling of inner frus- 
tration. We notice that when wealth has been in a fam- 
ily for a few generations, the descendants of the original 
robber baron become spiritual, and they go into the arts 
and into religion because they still feel unsatisfied. Of 
course, many people who have never been through the 
phase of having material wealth have nontheless under- 
stood that it is a blind alley, and gone into the arts or 
religion right away. 


THE FIRST PHASE OF RELIGION: SIMPLE MAGIC 


Religion in its first phase, however, is what we call 
“simple magic” and is typified by the attempt to control 
the world not by the violence of arms and muscular 
strength, but by hypnotizing it and enchanting it. 
Women sometimes control men by enchanting them, 
and men try to control women by a similar process — 
and throughout history, religion has been an attempt to 
enchant the universe, to enchant the gods by offering 
sacrifices and through religious dances and rituals. Thus 
religion becomes magical religion. 

People ask a person who goes to church, particularly 


61 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


if they go to a church where they practice magic, “Why 
do you do that? Why do you have to do those rituals?” 
The answer inevitably is, in one way or another, “We 
perform these rites because we believe they are pleas- 
ing to God, and we have been ordered to do these 
things. This is the way it has been revealed that we 
should worship, and therefore we do it, hoping of 
course that God will bless us with long life, health and 
wealth, and sons and daughters.” In this sense, all of this 
is still being done out of a feeling of inadequacy. 


THE MORAL PHASE OF RELIGION 


A more sophisticated phase of religion comes into 
play when the prophet finally says, “Your burnt offer- 
ings are an offense to me. Your feast days and your rites 
are all foolish. What I require is justice and mercy 
towards other people.” Then religion passes from a 
magical phase into a moral phase, in which the empha- 
sis is placed on living and loving, the building up of 
human solidarity and community. 

At this level the teacher of religion becomes primar- 
ily the prophetic teacher of morals, but unfortunately 
you cannot love out of aridity. If you have an arid iden- 
tity, you have no love to give. If you conceive yourself 
to be this cut-off plant that we call the conscious ego, 
you have no roots into a rich and luscious soil, and so 
all you have to give is just a little surface energy; you 


62 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


have no deep and abiding love. 

As a result, the moral preachings are given to peo- 
ple who are perfectly incapable of observing them. The 
preachers will tell you how you ought to behave, specif- 
ically what you should do and what you should not do, 
but they never tell you how to become the kind of per- 
son who can do those things. And so all they succeed in 
is making matters worse by making you feel guilty and 
inadequate. You know you should do what they say, but 
you can’t figure out for the life of you how to do it, and 
so you feel guilty. 

A person who feels guilty feels more deprived than 
ever, and so has to resort to all sorts of measures to 
assuage their sense of guilt. Naturally this does not 
work, and then we begin to see that religion must 
involve more than moral precepts. 


GRACE: THE TRANSFORMING POWER OF THE DIVINE 


Religion must be a way of putting us in touch with 
what the Christians call “grace” — that is to say, the 
transforming power of the divine. Of course, they usu- 
ally turn this around and say you will receive grace 
through magic, and so they practice the magic cere- 
monies of Baptism and Holy Communion. It is thought 
that if you participate in these ceremonies in the proper 
way, the magical power of God will come through and 
will change you. But it somehow does not seem to do 


63 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


so. In that situation the Buddhists and Hindus might say 
that the magic failed because it was not performed prop- 
erly — beciuse you were in the wrong frame of mind. 

Jesus essentially said the same thing: If you will have 
faith, it will work. But somehow you have to find faith, 
and how do you find faith when you don’t have it? If 
you ask that question of the preachers and the priests, 
they don’t know how to answer. They may write very 
clever books to persuade you that God really does exist 
and that it is quite scientific to believe in God, but they 
cannot instill faith. The more cleverly you reason it out, 
the more all this implies doubt, and the very need to 
resort to clever reasoning assures us there is no genuine 
expression of faith. 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


On this level of religion you find the quest to trans- 
form consciousness through the practice of meditation. 

One may have heard that by fasting or by concen- 
trating on breathing there is a way of opening oneself 
up to higher energies. One may believe that as these 
energies course through you they produce a magical 
power — and so therefore we learn what is essentially 
self-hypnosis, and it can do some very startling things. 

However, we soon come back to the same problem 
we found with the geneticists, who can also do some 
very startling things. As all skilled technologists know, 


64 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


the question is, What are you going to do with it? Do 
you know what to do when you acquire power through 
meditation? How are you going to use it? 

And the question still is, Who are you? Who is going 
to decide how to use it? Who is getting this power? 

Of course, at the back of your mind you still have 
the attenuated and impoverished conception of you 
and the feeling of chronic tension that holds on tight 
and is the basis for the feeling of “I,” of ego. There are 
teachers of sensory awareness who can show you how 
to relieve that chronic tension so you can relax and let 
go of the experience of being an ego for a while. That 
is very nice, of course, but soon afterward you relapse 
once again into that tension. 

As long as you believe that you are your image of 
yourself and that you can govern your thoughts and 
your feelings, you will relapse into the habit of making 
muscular tensions to control yourself, and you will 
experience the ego illusion all over again. Then you 
may feel guilty because you are not relaxing, and the 
minute you feel guilty you can be certain that the ego is 
operating very well, although this guilty feeling means it 
feels injured. The ego’s pride has been hurt, and no 
amount of guilt will get rid of the underlying problem. 

At this point you may begin to realize that the med- 
itation exercises are still a form of magic done to aggran- 
dize yourself, and that like preachers and teachers who 


65 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


inculcate a sense of guilt, you are simply trying to 
quench thirst with salt water. 

The problem is that the self-improvement approach 
is based on an experience of yourself that is completely 
inadequate. So long as you are the thinker separate from 
the experience of thoughts, the feeler separate from the 
experience of feelings, or the experiencer separate from 
the experience, you will feel strangled like the neck of 
the hungry spirit, the neck of the hourglass. 

In trying to make improvements, that is the way 
you've defined yourself, and therefore you will not be 
able to uSe energy joyously because you will be using it 
with an ulterior motive. In approaching “the problem,” 
you have defined yourself as a motivated and driven 
being, as a puppet. 

When this illusion dissolves, however, you will dis- 
cover something very strange — that meditation and 
religious and spiritual exercises of any kind are not nec- 
essary. People always ask if it is necessary to learn yoga 
breathing, or to practice tai chi, or to be psychoana- 
lyzed. And I always ask, “Necessary for what? Where are 
you going? What do you want?” 

Yes, if you want to get to New York it may be nec- 
essary to take the freeway. But where are you going? 
And what do you mean by necessary? Is it necessary for 
becoming a Buddha? Does anybody want to be a 
Buddha? Do you know what it means to be a Buddha? 


66 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


How do you know you want to be a Buddha if you 
don’t know what a Buddha is? 

People think it would be nice to have peace of 
mind, to be serene, to be calm, to be undisturbed by 
this, that, and the other. But as long as you make all 
those things objects of desire, you have defined yourself 
as lacking them, and a person who is looking for peace 
is obviously in turmoil. 

The person who is looking to end conflict is in con- 
flict, and so the more you Strive to stop the interior com- 
motion, the more you are stirring it up. You are trying 
to smooth the waters with an iron, and it will never 


work. 


Wuy Do You MEDITATE? 


Invariably at this point the big question arises: “If 
you are going to tell us that meditation is not necessary, 
and that it is all here and now, then why do you medi- 
tate? Why do you practice religion, perform rituals, or 
chant? Why do you even talk about it?” 

My answer is that there is no good reason for it 
whatsoever. This is all a form of joyous energy, and to 
play with it is a form of dance. It is a great thing to do, 
and there are all kinds of great things to do, and we are 
free to explore according to our own tastes. 

You can make any human activity into meditation 
simply by being completely with it and doing it just to 


67 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


do it. If you really enjoy swimming, you swim not to get 
to the other side of a river, or to complete a certain 
number of laps, or to go so far out into the ocean, or 
to compete in any way with yourself or with other peo- 
ple. You swim to experience the water rippling past 
you, and to enjoy the floating sensation when you lie 
on your back and look at the blue sky and the birds cir- 
cling about. Every moment of it you are simply 
absorbed in this ripply, luminous world, looking at the 
patterns and the shifting net of sunlight underneath, 
and the sand way down below — that’s what swimming 
is about. 

Some of us like swimming, and in the same way 
some of us like religion and meditation. 


A MAGNIFICENT ART FORM 


We have gone through all the levels of religion until 
we arrive at the religion of nonreligion, where we can 
see that it was all here anyway and there was nothing 
that had to be done. In the same spirit we can then go 
back through the rest of life and turn it into an art form 
— and it is a magnificent art form. 

But if you ask me why you should choose that 
expression rather than some other, I won’t have an 
answer for you, except to say that getting together and 
meditating or chanting is what a lot of people did before 
they had television to absorb them. 


68 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


In the jungles and on the terraces in mountain com- 
munities, for as long as anyone can remember people 
have gotten together to do a thing I call “digging 
sound.” Some people still play with this sonic energy of 
the universe, in just the same way as I described some- 
body playing with the water while swimming. When 
these people do this, they don’t worry about where they 
are going, or what their destiny is, or any such non- 
sense. Instead, they are completely alive. 


A VAST CELEBRATION 


To better understand all that I am trying to say, I 
would like to ask if you would for the moment change 
your basic notions of economics — and by this I mean 
the economics of energy. We are always scrimping and 
saving because our economic models are based on 
scarcity rather than exuberance. But notice that the eco- 
nomics of nature are allegedly wasteful by our stan- 
dards, and they are based on exuberance. Many more 
seeds than are necessary for trees and many more sper- 
matozoa than are necessary for people are produced, 
and there are many more stars than anybody could con- 
ceivably want, with galaxies galore. Nature is a vast cel- 
ebration of energy. 

If you complain about this and say, “Oh dear me, it’s 
all going to run out,” that only means you are still look- 
ing for fulfillment in the future. Essentially you are 


69 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


saying, “If there is not enough future, we won't get the 
golden reward we are looking forward to at the end of 
the line.” 

At the heart of our economic model is a view of time 
that is strung out on a line, but in the natural world 
everything happens in cycles, which is to say in circles. 
Life moves through the cycles of birth, growth, flower- 
ing, and bearing fruit, which in turn casts the seed that 
begins life. The flowering is our symbol for the exuber- 
ance of life, and the fruits the enjoyment of its abun- 
dance. 

In religious art, the golden flower represents fulfill- 
ment, and when a human being tries to symbolize what 
it is that they really want at the end of the line, very 
often they think of a flower. It is there in the celestial 
rose in Dante’s vision of paradise, and in the golden 
lotus of Mahavairocana, the great Sun Buddha at the 
center of the mandala. There are rose windows in 
cathedrals, and always that flower at the end of the line. 

Freud says of the flower that it is where everybody 
wants to go, and, being Freud, he says it is going back 
to the womb. What is so attractive about the womb? To 
explain the religious imagery of the flower by analogy 
with sex is only to add another puzzle. What is so great 
about sex? What’s so great about going back to the 
womb? There we are regressed to the place that psy- 
chologists don’t really like to talk about, and they may 


70 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


say that in the womb the baby feels omnipotent, but this 
is of course a fantasy. 

We have assumed the Darwinian struggle for exis- 
tence as our personality, and say of the exuberance of 
flowers and the abundance of fruit that they flourish 
only to ensure survival — but this is truly an impover- 
ished view of life, a secular view in which the person 
in the world is divorced from the womb. In the womb 
the baby floats, and the floating baby does not know the 
difference between what is inside its skin and what is 
outside. It has what Freud calls the “oceanic feeling,” 
and this is just another form of cosmic consciousness, 
only the baby does not have the language to express it 
like an adult. Yet there it is, drifting in the cosmic ocean 
— and in a way that is what everybody wants, because 
that is our original nature. 

Oscar Wilde described the womb-flower of exis- 
tence as “the flowers in which the gold bees dream.” Yet 
that golden flower isn’t at the end of the line — you are 
living in it. The radiating petals, the mandala, the great 
circle of the flower is the galaxy in which you live, and 
it is the whole universe radiating around you. Of course, 
this radiance is also in a cycle, and that cycling is the 
dance you are intimately involved in, if you can only 
realize that the purpose of life is not in the future. 

Of course, if you think it is in the future, you will go 
on and on looking for it there and never find it. The 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


future fades away in the same way the past fades out. 
You get older and older, and the future never comes, 
and you just peter out. It was never there, and you may 
feel vaguely cheated about the whole thing. You 
thought that there was something coming, that there 
was some great thing at the end of the line, the golden 
reward. 

And you have been sitting in the middle of that 
golden reward all the time. 

Now all this should be very easy to understand, 
unless you take a masochistic view and you feel that if 
you do not suffer the experience is not real. Everybody 
seems to be looking for new ways of suffering, as if 
there weren’t enough in life anyway, and trying to get in 
touch with their “authentic” existence. But in fact, 
whether you’re in touch with your authentic existence 
or not, you can’t lose it, so there is no need to worry 
about losing the feeling of it, no need to say, “I know 
it’s there because I’ve seen it once, but I am afraid I will 
lose the feeling of it.” 

Just forget about it. When you are trying to feel it — 
as if you couldn’t — that is pushing it away. You can’t get 
rid of your real self any more than you can get rid of now. 
It is you. It’s your being — to be more accurate, your 
being is not your being, you are the being. It doesn’t mat- 
ter if you live or die; it doesn’t make the slightest dif- 


ference. It is nothing just as much as it is something, and 


72 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


nothing and something are simply the alternations and 


the vibration of energy. 


WHat Does IT FEEL LIKE AT THIS MOMENT? 


How are you feeling now? Just feel yourself. What 
does it feel like just to be here now? Just feel the feel- 
ing — and can you feel, in addition to this feeling, 
someone feeling it, or is that the same as the feeling? 

Some of you may have what you would call nega- 
tive feelings — depression, anxiety — and you may feel 
tension in the chest, a funny feeling in the stomach, or 
pressure in the head. Or if you are sick in a chronic way, 
you may feel trouble from the center where the sickness 
is located. But, at this moment, don’t name that feeling 
— just explore it. It is there, whatever it is. Now you 
may want to change that feeling, but suppose you can’t. 
For a while you may be able to think about something 
else, but now let’s say to ourselves, “I feel the way I feel, 
and I can’t really do much about it.” As we have seen, 
that is because the “I” that is supposed to be separate 
from and controlling the feeling is only imaginary. 


INNER AND OUTER WORLDS 


So if that is the case, then what you are is the total- 
ity of this present experience — the inner feelings, the 
discomfort and rumblings and pulsations inside your 


73 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


organism, together with your outer feelings, because 
actually your outer sensations are happening inside your 
brain. What you see out in front of you is the state of 
your optical nerves, which are inside your head. What 
you hear is the state of your auditory nerves, which are 
inside your head. So inner and outer are really so mixed 
up with each other that there is no difference. 

The skin is the bridge between the world “inside the 
skin” and the world “outside the skin.” But there would 
be no external world if there weren’t an internal one, 
and vice versa. Your internal world is in my external 
world, and my internal world is in your external world. 
It all goes together in a great mixed sensory field where 
everything is essential to everything else, like backs to 
fronts and fronts to backs. 

So here it is, and you can feel everything happening. 
Your breath is going along. Your ears are working. The 
people across from you are moving, the trees and build- 
ings are coloring and shaping. It is all that kind of a hap- 
pening. 

Now we can equally well define this happening as 
your doing. This whole happening that is going on — 
that is you, if there is a you, a self, in any sense what- 
soever. So if you try to change it, you are differentiating 
yourself from it. You are standing away from it and, in 
that moment, you split the unity. 

But don’t worry if you find yourself habitually 


74 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


standing away from it. Simply treat that as part of the 
happening. If you can’t stop standing away from it — 
objectifying it, as it were — that is also part of the hap- 
pening and it is going on. If there are some things you 
can’t accept, and you are fighting them, that fighting is 
part of the happening too. So don’t try to interfere with 
it, just let be whatever is. 

There is no hurry, and no place else to be. I suppose 
you can go away if you want to, if you are nervous and 
want to do something else. But has it occurred to you 
that there may be really nowhere to go, because you take 
yourself with you if you go somewhere else? And if you 
have a problem here, you will have a problem some- 
where else, because you are the problem. So there is 
no hurry, and in a way there is no future. It is all here 
— so take it easy, take your time, and get acquainted 
with it. 


WATCH QUIETLY 


Just watch quietly this “going on.” Whether you 
close your eyes or keep them open makes little differ- 
ence. You find yourself once again tending to put 
names, words, descriptions on everything that you expe- 
rience, and that’s not necessary. Don’t try to stop your- 
self putting names on things, just regard your doing that 
as an activity that is happening, like the sound of a car 
going by. If you ask, “Why am I doing this?” just hear 


75 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


the sound — “why am I doing this, why am I doing this” 
— as “da da da, dadada.” 

When you feel those outside sounds and activities 
and motions, they may seem strange because they are no 
longer under your voluntary control — but neither are 
your belly rumbles or the mechanisms of your optical 
nervous system. None of this is under your control, but 
it is all definitely you. The idea that you control some- 
thing really isn’t under your control either, because when 
we move our fingers, we’re using energy, but we don’t 
control that energy. Our thoughts are just energy too — 
it is all bubbling up in us, and we don’t know why. 

In the same way, all the happenings that are by 
social definition outside your skin — not under your 
voluntary control and so not you — are just as much 
you as the belly rumbles and the energy bubbling up 
inside you. This whole experience is you going along, 
and if you try to control it, you will again begin all sorts 
of absurd straining, like trying to lift an airplane off the 
ground by pulling at your seat belt. So just let all this 
that you are feeling happen, because in fact there is 
nothing else you can do. There is no choice; it is going 
to happen anyway. 


YouR FULL Boby, YourR REAL SELF 


Now in this state it is your full body that you are 
experiencing, the whole body of your experience. 


76 


MEET YOUR REAL SELF 


In the Far East, the Buddhists say that our full body, 
our real body, is composed of a trinity of three bodies: 
Nirmanakaya is the functioning body, the physical 
body with which we usually identify. Sambhogakaya is 
the body of our mental and emotional activity, and it 
is Our capacity to enjoy, for it is the energy of eternal 
delight. Dbarmakaya is our ultimate body, our real 
body, which consists of nothing less than the whole 
quantum field of the universe, for, in truth, we are One 
with All That Is. 

Feel it, it is happening. 

Your wandering thoughts are just happening. The 
buzz in the head is just happening. There you are. 

It is not being pushed around by anything. It is the 
big happening, and that means it’s free. It isn’t happen- 
ing to you, it is you happening, and that’s the difference. 

Meet your real self. 


PA R T fe 


THE ESSENTIAL PROCESS 
OF MEDITATION 


CHAPTER THREE 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF 
MEDITATION 


AM BY NATURE a person who has the fundamental 
feeling that existence is extremely odd. 

Other people apparently think that existence is 
quite even — that is to say, ordinary — and not to be 
questioned, but I have always had in the bottom of 
my heart the sense that it is very strange indeed that 
I am here at all. The feeling of “I” gives me what I 
can only describe as a funny feeling, and I do not 
take it for granted. 

This feeling is not something that I can just toss 
off, and then go on with my everyday business — 
and yet the curious paradox of this is that, at the 
same time, I do not take it seriously. On one hand I 
have the feeling that to be alive, to participate in this 
universe, is so wonderful I simply don’t know what 


81 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


to say about it, but on the other I can’t identify myself 
with any of the parts or the social roles that people play. 


THE PROBLEM WITH EXISTENCE 


There does seem to be a problem with existence, and 
with being alive. What that problem is about, at the sort 
of nitty-gritty level, is the very basic idea in our thinking 
that one must live, that we need to survive to go on, and 
therefore we need money for food and shelter. We feel 
we must go on, even though we know that we are not 
going to get away with it for very long, and we know that 
after a certain number of years we are going to die and 
that this thing we call life is going to end. 

When life ends the thing that we call “I” is going to 
go somewhere else, maybe into a deep sleep, maybe 
even without dreams. Between now and that inevitable 
event we may experience the most ghastly pains — not 
only the pains of physical disease, or of being wounded 
or hurt, but perhaps the pains of worrying about the fail- 
ure of our responsibility to people who depend on us. 
So we suffer other people’s suffering simply because we 
are sensitive and have imagination; we do it so much 
that our adrenaline levels respond simply by imagina- 
tion to the sufferings of other people. 

Obviously all these problems cannot be solved on 
the physical level — we don’t expect in our lifetime that 
medical skill will make us exempt from death. We also 


82 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF MEDITATION 


don’t seriously expect that human beings will all learn 
to be nice to each other, and will refrain from war, racial 
prejudice, and horrors of that kind. We don’t seriously 
expect to find a method of being protected against all 
possible disease and pain by taking some sort of drug. 


ANOTHER Way AROUND THESE PROBLEMS 


Over the years I have begun to wonder if there is 
another way around these problems. Perhaps instead of 
resolving these issues at the technical level, we could 
solve them at the psychological and spiritual levels by 
disciplining ourselves so that we wouldn’t be afraid of 
them anymore. And so, in accord with that motivation, 
we seek out spiritual and psychological teachers. 

We wonder if we could somehow be made over so 
that we would not have to worry about our problems. 
But if you examine the desire to overcome this mess 
through a spiritual discipline, you will see that this want- 
ing to overcome the mess and not to have it anymore is 
precisely the mess. The thing that we object to about 
ourselves is precisely what we continue to do in our 
attempts to overcome it; in other words, the activity that 
we employ in overcoming the mess is the mess that we 
object to. It is very important to realize this, and if you 
do realize it, it raises the question “Then what can I do?” 
What can I do to transform this quaking mess into the 
state of mind of the true mystic? 


83 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


Now, if you are the mess, there is obviously nothing 
that you can do to transform yourself into the state of 
mind you idealize as that of a true mystic, a saint, or 
even the Christ. But by pursuing this line of thought you 
may realize that all your ideals are simply manifestations 
of the mess trying to get away from itself. 

You are put in the position of feeling that it is 
absolutely necessary to be different from the way you 
are, but there is absolutely nothing you can do about it 
because being the way you are, you can't be different 
from your self. It’s as if one were to say, “I know that I 
shouldn’t be selfish, and J would very much like to be 
an unselfish person, but the reason why I want to be an 
unselfish person is that I am very selfish. And really I 
would love myself far more and respect myself far more 
if I were unselfish.” 

The same is true of people who believe that they 
ought to love God. One might well ask, “Why do you 
want to love God?” And the answer is invariably, 
because God is the most powerful ruler, and it is always 
best to be on the side of the big battalions. Most often 
that is the real reason why people believe in God, and 
it comes down to the fact that they are looking out for 
the safety of their own spiritual skins. 

All sophisticated saints have known this, including 
Saint Paul, Saint Augustine, and Martin Luther. None of 


these great men knew what to do about this contradiction, 


84 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF MEDITATION 


because if people believe in it there is really nothing to 
be done. But apparently something has to be done — 
however, when you really look into yourself, you real- 
ize there is nothing you can do. There is nothing any- 
one can do to be anyone else than who they are, or to 
feel any other way than the way they feel at this 
moment. 

We are this mess that has the capacity to know the 
horrors of what life can do to us — yet this is not as 
much of a blind alley as it seems to be. If you discover 
yourself in a blind alley, or even a cul-de-sac, the fact 
that you found yourself there will invariably tell you 
something. 

Watch the flow of water when it floods an area of 
land and you will see that it puts out fingers, and some 
of them stop because they come to blind alleys. But the 
water doesn’t pursue that course; it simply finds its way 
around. The water never uses any effort, however, only 
its weight and gravity, and by following its level it finds 
the path of least resistance. 

As human beings we do the same thing, and when 
we think that we have come to a dead end or a blind 
alley we try to find another way around. Suppose the 
water, when it reaches a place where a finger of water 
stretches out over dry ground and doesn’t go further, 
were to say to itself, “I failed!” Why, we would say it was 


6c 


just being neurotic. “Just wait,” we would advise, “and 


85 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


you will find the way to get through.” 

Now when you discover that you are like the water, 
and that there is no way of transforming yourself, you 
become a fearless, joyous, divine being, as distinct from 
a quaking mess. 

When you see that there is no way, it is not a 
gloomy realization, but a very important communica- 
tion. It is telling you something in the same way that the 
land is telling the water this is not the way to go. It is 
really saying, “There is another way — try over here.” 

Sometimes life is telling you that the course you are 
on is not the way to go, and the message underlying all 
of this is that you cannot transform yourself. Life is giv- 
ing you the message that the “you” that you imagine to 
be capable of transforming yourself does not exist. In 
other words, as an ego, I am separate from my emo- 
tions, my thoughts, my feelings, my experiences. So the 
one who is supposed to be in control of them cannot 
control them because it isn’t there. And as soon as you 


understand that, things will be vastly improved. 


WHaAT Do You MEAN BY THE Woro “I”? 


Now we can go into this and ask, “What do you 
mean by the word ‘I’?” We are going to try some exper- 
iments on a number of different levels, first in the ordi- 
nary way: What do you mean by the word “I”? I, myself. 


Your personality, your ego — what is it? 


86 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF MEDITATION 


First of all, it is your image of yourself, and it is com- 
posed of what people have told you about yourself. 
Who you are is based upon how others have reacted to 
you, and what sort of impression they have given you of 
the kind of person you are. Your education plays into 
the process as well, and out of all this an ego emerges 
that is a conceptual expression of who you think you 
are. The style of life you then live is a reflection of this 
image. 

But remember, it is an image — just an idea. It is 
your thoughts about yourself, but in fact you are not this 
at all. Your total physical organism, your psychological 
organism, and forces beyond that are all you, because 
an organism doesn’t exist as an isolated entity any more 
than a flower exists without a stalk, without roots, with- 
out earth, without the environment. 

In the same way, although we are not stalked to the 
ground, we are nevertheless inseparable from the world 
around us, and from a huge social context of parents, 
siblings, and people who know us and work with us. It 
is simply impossible to cut ourselves off from either our 
social environment or our natural environment. We are 
all that, and there is no clear way of drawing the bound- 
ary between this organism and everything that sur- 
rounds it. 

And yet, the image of ourselves that we have does 
not include all those relationships. Our idea of our 


87 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


personality and of ourselves includes no information 
whatsoever about the hypothalamus or even the brain 
stem, the pineal gland, the way we breathe, how our 
blood circulates, how we manage to form a sentence, 
how we manage to be conscious, or even how we open 
and close our hands. The information contained in your 
image of yourself says nothing about any of this. 

Therefore it is obviously an extremely inadequate 
image, but nonetheless we do think that the image of 
self refers to something because we have the very strong 
impression that “I” exist. And we think that this impres- 
sion isn’t just an idea, it is really substantially there, right 
in the middle of us. And what is it? 

What do you actually sense? When you are sitting on 
the floor, you feel the floor is there and is real and hard. 
What is the “you” sitting on the floor, and what do you 
have the sensation of when you know that it’s you, right 
here? What is it? 

First of all, let’s ask, “In what part of your body do 
you feel your self — the real “I” — exists?” We can 
explore this question very deeply, and maybe you want 
to think about it for a moment before I suggest a pre- 
liminary and superficial answer: 

The sensation that corresponds to the feeling of “I” 
is a chronic muscular tension in the body, which has 
absolutely no function whatsoever. 


What do you do when you try, or concentrate, or 


88 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF MEDITATION 


pay attention? When I was a little boy in school I sat 
next to another boy who had great difficulty in reading. 
And as he worked over the textbook with its perfectly 
piffling information, he groaned and grunted as he read, 
trying to get the sounds out, as if he were heaving 
enormous weights with his muscles. The teacher was 
vaguely impressed that he was trying, and although he 
seemed to be making a tremendous effort, all of his 
straining had absolutely nothing to do with getting any- 
thing done. 

Tying yourself up into a knot has absolutely nothing 
to do with the way your mind works. If you try very 
hard, and look very intensely, perhaps you will tighten 
the muscles around your temples, and maybe clench 
your jaw a bit, but if it does anything, it will just make 
your vision blurry. If you want to see something clearly, 
you relax, and instead of making an effort you simply 
trust your eyes and your nervous system to do their job. 

The other night I was writing and I completely for- 
got somebody’s name, but I knew that eventually my 
memory would produce it. I just sat for a while and said 
to my memory, “You know very well who this person is, 
please give me the answer.” And there it was, because 
that’s the way nerves work. They don’t work by forcing 
themselves, and yet we’ve all been brought up to try to 
force our nervous activity, our concentration, our mem- 


ory, our comprehension, and indeed our very love. 


89 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


We have tried to force it with our muscles — and 
men will understand me if I say you can’t force yourself 
to have an erection by muscular effort. Women will 
understand me if I say you can’t force yourself with 
muscles to have an orgasm — it just has to happen, and 
you must trust it to happen. There is absolutely nothing 
you can do about it by using your muscles. In much the 
same way, the notion that we have of ourselves, of ego, 
is a composite of an image of ourselves that doesn’t fit 
the facts, and a sensation of muscular straining that is 
futile. When you come down to it and take a closer 
look, what you conceive to be yourself is the marriage 
of an illusion and futility. 


We ARE No LESS THAN THE UNIVERSE 


Well what are we, if we aren’t who we think we are? 
When you take a scientific point of view, your organism 
is inseparable from its environment, and so you really 
are the organism/environment. In other words, you are 
no less than the universe, and each one of you is the 
universe expressed in the particular place that you feel 
is here and now. You are an aperture through which the 
universe is looking at itself and exploring itself. 

When you feel that you are a lonely, put-upon, iso- 
lated little stranger confronting all this, you are under 
the influence of an illusory feeling, because the truth is 
quite the reverse. You are the whole works, all that 


90 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF MEDITATION 


there is, and always was, and always has been, and 
always will be. But just as my whole body has a little 
nerve end centered here, which is exploring and which 
contributes to the sense of touch, you are just such a lit- 
tle nerve end for everything that is going on. Just as the 
eyes serve the whole body, you serve the entire uni- 
verse. You are a function of all that is. 

Yet if this is so, the facts just do not fit the way we 
feel, because we feel it the other way around: “I am a 
lonely little thing out here exploring this universe and 
trying to make something out of it. I want to get some- 
thing out of it and do something with it. And I know I 
am going to fail because I know I’m going to die one 
day.” So we are all fundamentally depressed, and as a 
result think up fantasies about what is going to happen 
to us when we are dead, and try to make ourselves feel 
better about it. 

But if you are essentially the universe, what is going 
to happen to you when you are dead? 

What do you mean by you? If you are the universe, 
in the greater context that question is irrelevant. You 
never were born and you never will die, because what 
there is, is you. That should be absolutely obvious, but 
from an egoistic perspective it is not obvious at all. It 
should be the simplest thing in the world to understand 
that you, the “I”, is what has always been going on and 


always will go on, coming and going forever and ever. 


91 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


We have been bamboozled, however, by religionists, 
by politicians, by our fathers and mothers, by all sorts of 
people who tell us, “You’re not it.” And we believed it. 

So, to put it in a negative way, you can’t do anything 
to change yourselves, to become better, to become hap- 
pier, to become more serene, to become more mystical. 
But if I say you can’t do a damn thing, you can under- 
stand this negative statement in a positive way. What I 
am really saying is that you don’t need to do anything, 
because if you see yourself in the correct way, you are 
all as much extraordinary phenomena of nature as trees, 
clouds, the patterns in running water, the flickering of 
fire, the arrangement of the stars, and the form of a 
galaxy. You are all just like that, and there is nothing 
wrong with you at all. 


AN ELEMENT OF DOUBT 


You may have an element of doubt in you, howev- 
er. We all object to ourselves in various ways, and in a 
sense there is nothing wrong with that either, because 
that is part of the flow, of what is going on. That is part 
of nature, and a part of what we do. To deliver you from 
the sense of guilt, I am going to teach you that you 
needn’t feel guilty because you feel guilty. 

They taught you as a child to feel guilty, and you 
feel guilty — that’s no surprise. If somebody comes 
along and says you shouldn’t, that is not the point. I am 


92 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF MEDITATION 


not going to say that you shouldn’t — but I say that if 
you do, don’t worry about it. And if you want to say, 
“But I can’t help worrying about it,” I’m going to say, 
“Okay, go ahead and worry about it.” 

This is the principle called judo in Japanese, which 
means the gentle way. Go along with it, go along with 
it — and then you can redirect the energy to go your 
Own way. 

The most interesting thing you can do in life is really 
the most natural thing to do: to call into question the 
rules of the game. If we say, “Let’s all be honest with 
each other,” what do you mean by honesty? Do you 
know what the truth is? 

If you call these things into question, a curious thing 
happens, and that is that nobody knows what they are 
supposed to do. And this is the most embarrassing situ- 
ation in life. When we are all here and we don’t know 
what we're supposed to do, now we are really up 


against our view of reality. 


THE ESSENTIAL PROCESS OF MEDITATION 


This is the beginning of meditation. You don’t know 
what you’re supposed to do, so what can you do? Well, 
if you don’t know what you’re supposed to do, you 
watch. You simply watch what is going on. 

When somebody plays music, you listen. You just 
follow those sounds, and eventually you understand the 


93 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


music. The point can’t be explained in words because 
music is not words, but after listening for a while, you 
understand the point of it, and that point is the music 
itself. 

In exactly the same way, you can listen to all expe- 
riences, because all experiences of any kind are vibra- 
tions coming at you. As a matter of fact, you are these 
vibrations, and if you really feel what is happening, the 
awareness you have of you and of everything else is all 
the same. It’s a sound, a vibration, all kinds of vibrations 
on different bands of the spectrum. Sight vibrations, 
emotion vibrations, touch vibrations, sound vibrations 
— all these things come together and are woven, all the 
senses are woven, and you are a pattern in the weaving, 
and that pattern is the picture of what you now feel. 
This is always going on, whether you pay attention to it 
or not. 

Now instead of asking what you should do about it, 
you experience it, because who knows what to do about 
it? To know what to do about this you would have to 
know everything, and if you don’t, then the only way 
to begin is to watch. 

Watch what’s going on. Watch not only what’s going 
on outside, but what’s going on inside. Treat your own 
thoughts, your own reactions, your own emotions about 


what’s going on outside as if those inside reactions were 


94 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF MEDITATION 


also outside things. But you are just watching. Just fol- 
low along, and simply observe how they go. 

Now, you may say that this is difficult, and that you 
are bored by watching what is going on. But if you sit 
quite still, you are simply observing what is happening: 
all the sounds outside, all the different shapes and lights 
in front of your eyes, all the feelings on your skin, inside 
your skin, belly rumbles, thoughts going on inside your 
head — chatter, chatter, chatter. “I ought to be writing a 
letter to so-and-so....] should have done this” — all this 
bilge is going on, but you just watch it. 

You say to yourself, “But this is boring.” Now watch 
that too. What kind of a funny feeling is it that makes 
you Say it’s boring? Where is it? Where do you feel it? “I 
should be doing something else instead.” What’s that 
feeling? What part of your body is it in? Is it in your 
head, is it in your belly, is it in the soles of your feet? 
Where is it? The feeling of boredom can be very inter- 
esting if you look into it. 

Simply watch everything going on without attempt- 
ing to change it in any way, without judging it, without 
calling it good or bad. Just watch it. That is the essential 


process of meditation. 


95 


CHAPTER FOUR 


THE PRACTICE OF 
MEDITATION 


HAT WE CALL MEDITATION Or contemplation — for 
want of a better word — is really supposed to 
be fun. I have some difficulty in conveying this idea 
because most people take anything to do with reli- 
gion seriously — and you must understand that I am 
not a serious person. I may be sincere, but never seri- 
ous, because I don’t think the universe is serious. 
And the trouble comes into the world largely 
because various beings take themselves seriously, in- 
stead of playfully. After all, you must become serious 
if you think that something is desperately important, 
but you will only think that something is desperately 
important if you are afraid of losing it. In one way, 
however, if you fear losing something, it isn’t really 
worth having. There are people who live in dread, 


97 


AN INTRDUCTION TO MEDITATION 


and then drag on living because they are afraid to die. 
They will probably teach their children to do the same, 
and their children will in turn teach their own children 
to live that way. And so it goes on and on. 

But let me ask you, if you were God, would you be 
serious? Would you want people to treat you as if you 
were serious? Would you want to be prayed to? Think of 
all the awful things that people say in their prayers. 
Would you want to listen to that all the time? Would you 
encourage it? No, not if you were God. 

In the same way, meditation is different from the 
sort of things that people are supposed to take serious- 
ly. It doesn’t have any purpose, and when you talk 
about practicing meditation, it’s not like practicing 
tennis or playing the piano, which one does in order to 
attain a certain perfection. You practice music to become 
better at it, maybe even with the idea that you may 
someday go on stage and perform. But you don’t prac- 
tice meditation that way, because if you do, you are not 
meditating. 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


The only way you can talk about practice in the con- 
text of meditation is to use the word practice in the 
same way as when somebody says that they practice 
medicine. That is their way of life, their vocation, and 
they do it nearly every day. Perhaps they do it the same 


98 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


way, day after day — and that’s fine for meditation too, 
because in meditation there is no right way and there is 
no idea of time. 

In practicing and learning things, time is usually of 
the essence. We try to do it as fast as possible, and even 
find a faster way of learning how to do things. In med- 
itation a faster way of learning is of no importance what- 
soever, because one’s focus is always on the present. 
And although growth may occur in the process, it is 
growth in the same way that a plant grows. 


THE PERFECT PROCESS OF GROWTH 


Once upon a time in China, there was a farming 
family, and they were having dinner. The oldest son 
came in late, and they asked him, “Why are you late for 
dinner?” 

“Oh,” he said, “I’ve been helping the wheat to 
grow.” 

They came out the next morning and all the wheat 
was dead. It turned out that the son had pulled each 
stalk up a little bit, to help it grow. 

The point is that growth always occurs in a being as 
it does in a plant, and it is perfect at every step. No 
progress is involved in the transformation of an acorn 
into an oak, because the acorn is a perfect acorn, and 
the sapling is a perfect sapling, and the big oak tree is 
a perfect oak, which again produces perfect acorns. At 


99 


AN INTRDUCTION TO MEDITATION 


every stage perfection is there, and it cannot be other- 
wise. 

Practicing meditation is exactly the same. We should 
not talk about beginners as distinct from experts, and 
we should develop, if we can, a new vocabulary 
because it is very difficult in the context of our compet- 
itive world to speak about things like this. To bring 
across the idea of doing something that is not acquisi- 
tive — something you are not going to get anything out 
of — is difficult. And it’s even more difficult when there 
is no one to get anything. When “you” understand the 
art of contemplation, there is no experiencer separate 
from experience, and there is no one to get anything out 
of life, or therefore to get anything from meditation. 


REVERSED EFFORT 


We have a principle here of reversed effort, some- 
thing to understand as a background to anything said 
about techniques — because whenever we talk about 
techniques, we seem to be talking about the competi- 
tive, and about mastery. The idea of mastery of tech- 
nique is very important if you play a musical instrument, 
because technique is the key in the making of a satis- 
factory sound. But if you force the learning of tech- 
nique, or force the performance of it, everyone will hear 
it, and you will hear the forcing yourself. 

To be musical you have to address yourself to the 


100 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


playing of an instrument without hurrying, and without 
forcing anything. You will find there is a point then 
where the instrument seems to play itself, and when you 
get the peculiar feeling that the sound coming out of a 
flute or a violin string is happening of itself. Then you 
are playing the instrument properly. 

It’s the same when you sing: there comes a point 
when your voice takes over. This is the difference 
between perspiration and inspiration. 

You may say, as Christians do, that the act of wor- 
ship is inspired by the Holy Spirit. When monks are 
chanting, they believe that the Holy Spirit is chanting 
through them, and they are flutes for the Holy Spirit. 
This is a very precise and particular phenomenon 
because there is a way of resonating the breath and of 
harmonizing sound so that it comes of itself and you 
don’t do it. We attribute that way of producing sound to 
the “Holy Spirit,” but it is based on breath. 


~~ 


WATCHING BREATH 


Breath is a curious operation, because it can be 
experienced as both a voluntary doing and an involun- 
tary happening. You can do a breathing exercise and 
feel that “I am breathing” in just the same way as you 
can feel “I am walking.” Yet on the other hand, you 
breathe all the time when you are not thinking about it, 
and in that way it is involuntary. You must breathe — 


101 


AN INTRDUCTION TO MEDITATION 


and so it is the faculty through which we can realize the 
unity of the voluntary and involuntary systems. 

In Buddhism, this is called mindfulness of the 
breath, or watching breath. And watching breath is fun- 
damental in meditation because, like sound, it is easy to 
see the happening in it, as distinct from what we 
thought of as the doing of it. Breath happens, but the 
curious thing is that you can get with the breath, and in 
getting with it, extraordinary things can happen. 

Anyone who swims knows this, and anyone who 
sings knows that breathing is important. In archery, in 
any athletic discipline, the alignment of body and breath 
is critical. The synchronization of what you are doing 
with your breathing is the whole art. But powerful 
breath is not accomplished through muscle power. It is 
accomplished by gravity, by weight. 


A MEDITATION EXERCISE 


I would like you to sit upright, either in a comfort- 
able chair or on the floor on a cushion or pillow. The 
reason for sitting straight is so the part of your body in 
which the breathing is occurring is unencumbered. Also, 
when you sit upright on the floor you are slightly 
uncomfortable, and you won’t go to sleep, because in 
any peaceful and quiet state of mind it is very easy to 
go to sleep. 


Now in this position, simply become aware of your 


102 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


breathing, without trying to do anything about it at all. 
Let it happen, and watch it. 

At the same time, let your ears hear whatever they 
want to hear. In other words, let them hear in the same 
way you are letting your lungs breathe. 

Now beyond this, you can breathe out by letting the 
breath fall outward without pushing it, and as you get to 
the end of the out breath, let go with the same sort of 
feeling that you have when you let your body drop into 
a very comfortable bed — let it drop out and fall. Let the 
weight of the air do it. Don’t push, drop. Then after a 
while, the breath will return. But don’t pull it in, let it 
fall back in. The breath will drop in until you’ve had 
enough; then let it drop out again. 

It’s a good idea in this exercise to breathe in through 
the nostrils and out through the lips, allowing there to 
be a slight sensation of moving air on your lips so that 
you know you are breathing. Never force anything — 
just have the feeling of going this way and that way by 
Virtue of weight, and of gravity. 


ADDING SOUND 


Then, if you wish, as you let the breath fall outward, 
you can simply float a sound on it. First, you can just do 
this mentally. Think of a sound that pleases you, a note 
that seems agreeable to your voice. As you breathe out 
heavily, imagine that sound to yourself, whatever sound 


103 


AN INTRDUCTION TO MEDITATION 


you feel like. Now if you’ve got a humming sound in 
mind, on the next round of the out breath, hum it out 
loud, and keep it going. 

At first you may be a little short-winded and uneasy 
about something like this. As well as allowing the sound 
to hum and happen with the breath that is falling out, 
you can, as it were, simply request it to increase in vol- 
ume without forcing it. 

And when your sound ends, bring it in again quite 
softly, and then allow the volume to rise. You will get 
an almost continuous sound, and if you do this in a 
group, the sounds will run together. 

Try it now, if you wish, picking your own note. 

Try it again, once more. 

Now ask it to increase its volume. Listen a moment. 
What we are working into is the completely liberated, 
yet soft and gentle, act of letting sound happen through 
us without the slightest sense of strain, so that you are 
not singing it, but it is singing with your voice. 

Don’t premeditate a tune, but let it come, so that it’s 
almost as if you were talking nonsense. Let it play gently 
with your voice. You are simply preoccupied with it, like 
easy humming to yourself. 


Ammmm.... 


Or, Abbb.... 
Or, Oooommmm.... 


104 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


When you are thus absorbed in sound, where are 
you? 

You are in a state of consciousness that is, even at 
first, at least a primitive form of samadhi; that is to say, 
we are happily absorbed in what we are doing, and we 
have forgotten about ourselves. You can’t very well do 
that and still worry or think about anything serious. 

Notice that there is a special way of doing it. We 
can get wild with it and do a kind of Native American 
chant or one of the more vigorous and forceful Tibetan 
Buddhist chants, but that form of chanting can be strain- 
ing, unless you’re in a large group and can soar on the 
group’s energy. If you keep it down to a soft tone, you 
will find the floating feeling of the voice. If you feel any 
sound that is uncomfortable, you can instantly avoid it. 
Slip down if you are going too high, or slip up if you 
are getting too low. If your voice tends to change, fol- 
low its change, so that you are just going along with it. 


THE DIVINE ELEMENT 


This is why, from ancient times, people have dis- 
covered humming and singing, and everybody used to 
sing while they worked. But you'll notice that today very 
few people sing at all; you have to make a point of it. 
People are afraid of their voices — that is, their melod- 
ic voices as distinct from the spoken voice. I know an 
enormous number of people who never sing at all. 


105 


AN INTRDUCTION TO MEDITATION 


In India to this day when the scriptures — the 
Upanishads and the Sutras — are read, they are invari- 
ably chanted, because as soon as you bring a note into 
it an extra dimension is added to the voice. That is the 
divine element, which is symbolically the singing sound 
of the universe. 

This is a form of what I would call free mantra 
chanting, which isn’t used much. But as you do it, it will 
give you a very good idea of what the meditative state 
is. It isn’t just letting things going on around you hap- 
pen, it is inside you as well. In free mantra, as distinct 
from prescribed mantra, each spontaneous chant has a 
different feeling to it. 

The Tibetan monks go down to an extraordinarily 
deep sound — they go as deep as one can get. There is 
a reason for this, but it is very difficult to explain 
because you have to do it to understand it. But when 
you get as deep down into sound as you can go, you 
are going to an extreme of the vibration, and you feel 
naturally that what is deep is part of the underpinnings, 
the foundation. When monks go into that deep sound, 
they are literally exploring the depths of sound, going 
into it deeply. They will get down somewhere on an 
Om, and take it to what feels like the center of the earth. 

When you try the meditation we have just been 
through with sound, you might sometimes find that 
you hear your voice go wrong, but you always get a 


106 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


sensuous feeling of the breath, and of course it is very 
enjoyable to breathe. You will find this enjoyment will 
help in the quality of the sound you produce — although 
we have to get away from some of our musical preju- 
dices when we do this. You can make up your own non- 
sensical mantras, and there are lots of traditional mantras 
as well. But to make one up, just absorb yourself in a 
vibration that gets you going and then play with it. 

Play with the sound you are making, and when you 
stop you will still feel the pulse going through you. 
These sounds are easy to run along with. 


DEEP LISTENING 


Some people think that to spend a lot of time gently 
humming nonsense to yourself is a waste of time. But 
ask yourself, What are you going to do with the time that 
you save? 

With all this, the first thing we have to understand is 
what I call deep listening. Very few people ever really 
listen, because instead of receiving the sound, they 
make comments on it all the time. They are thinking 
about it, and so the sound is never fully heard. You just 
have to let it take over, let it take you over completely, 
and then you get into the samadhi state of becoming it. 

This also means that you abandon your socially 
nervous personality. One of the reasons why people 
don’t sing is that they hear so many masters performing 


107 


AN INTRDUCTION TO MEDITATION 


on records that they are ashamed of their own voices. 
You may think there’s no point in singing unless you are 
good at it, but that is like saying there is no point in 
doing anything at all unless you are particularly gifted at 
it, which is ridiculous. Of course singing is very good for 
you, but we won't dwell on that because it brings too 
much purposiveness into it — having to fulfill a con- 
scious purpose and design. 


ANY SOUND FROM THE SOURCE 


Instead we are like children making noises because 
of the absorbing sound they produce. Children make all 
sorts of noises to explore the possibilities of what they 
can do with their voice. But you don’t see adults going 
around humming and burbling, even though it is 
tremendous fun. All of this is perfectly at home within 
meditation. 

Joshu Sasaki, a Zen master from Los Angeles, tells 
his students to stand up and laugh for five minutes every 
morning because that’s a better form of meditation than 
sitting for a long time getting sore legs. It embarrasses 
the hell out of some people to even try it, and instead 
when they see someone doing it they ask, “What are 
you laughing at? You know I don’t see any point in 
laughing unless there’s something funny.” 

I had a friend, a very fat friend, and he was a theo- 
logical student. He used to take the elevated train that 


108 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 


went from Evanston into Chicago and sit in the middle 
of the car where everybody could see him. He would 
sit there with a kind of vacant look and chuckle to him- 
self. And slowly he’d work it out, laughing louder and 
louder with all his flesh vibrating. By the time they got 
to Chicago, the whole car was inevitably hysterical with 
laughter. 

I tell you this story to illustrate that any sound you 
feel coming from the inside can be used as mantra med- 
itation, and the deeper the source, now matter how 


ridiculous, the better. 


109 


Po A BOT I 1 I 


STILL THE MIND 


(SHE A TPS a CE OR Beet EB 


CONTEMPLATIVE 
RITUAL 


OR A LONG TIME, the kind of religious celebrations 
F that we have conducted in the West have been 
filled with the spoken word and impossibly didactic. 
Almost all our religious observances are nothing but 
talk and consist of telling God what to do, as if He or 
She did not already know, and telling the people 
what to do, as if they were able or even willing to 
change. All of this is throwing the book at people, 
and telling them the Word, and I think we have had 
enough of it. 

The history of religion in the West is nearly equiv- 
alent to the history of the failure of preaching. By and 
large, preaching is a kind of moral violence that 
excites people’s sense of guilt, and there is no less 
creative sense than that. You cannot love and feel 


F13 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


guilty at the same time, any more than you can be afraid 
and angry at the same time. 


A SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE 


What seems to me to be lacking in our Western reli- 
gious observances is some sort of ritual that gives us an 
opportunity for spiritual experience. By a spiritual expe- 
rience I am referring to a transformation of the individ- 
ual consciousness so that, in one way or another, the 
individual is able to realize his oneness with the eternal 
energy behind this universe, which some people call 
God and others prefer not to name or to conceive. 

When Western people hear that an Asian practices 
meditation, they ask, “What do you meditate on?” But 
that question puzzles a Buddhist or a Hindu, because 
you do not meditate on anything, any more than you 
breathe on anything. You breathe, and in the same way, 
you meditate. The verb is in a way intransitive. 


Meditation is the act of allowing one’s thoughts to cease. 


CoMING INTO TOUCH WITH REALITY 


In the beginning of the Yoga Sutra, Patanjali 
described yoga — which means union — as sponta- 
neously stopping the agitation of thinking. Thinking is 
talking to yourself, or figuring to yourself, and it is habit- 


ual for most of us. If I talk all the time, however, I do 


114 


CONTEMPLATIVE RITUAL 


not hear what anyone else has to say. Equally, if I talk 
to myself all the time, I will not have anything to think 
about except thoughts. 

There is no interval between thoughts during which 
I can come into touch with reality — that is to say, the 
world my thoughts represent, in the way words repre- 
sent events, Or money represents wealth. If I am never 
silent in my head, I will find myself living in a world of 
total abstraction divorced from reality altogether. 

You may ask, “What is reality?” People have various 
theories about what it is, but it is important to remem- 
ber that they are all theories. Those who believe that 
reality is material are projecting upon the world a cer- 
tain philosophical theory about it, and those who say 
that it is mental, or spiritual, are doing likewise. 

Reality itself is neither mental nor spiritual, nor any 
other concept that we can have of it; reality is simply the 


present moment. 


You CANNOT MEDITATE 


Words are reality insofar as they are noises, but even 
that is saying too much. To meditate, you might think that 
you should attempt to suppress thought, but you don’t do 
that because you cannot meditate. Let me repeat that 
emphatically: you cannot meditate. You, your ego image, 
can only chatter, because when it stops, it isn’t there. 

When you are not thinking, you have no ego, 


115 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


because your ego is nothing more than a habitual con- 
cept. The thinker behind the thoughts and the feeler 
behind the feelings are only thoughts; each of these is 
an idea of some reference point to which all our expe- 
riences happen. That thought, however, cuts us off from 
what we experience and creates the illusion of a gap or 
gulf between the knower and the known. 

This in turn is responsible for the feeling of alien- 
ation we have from the world, and as a result we suffer 
from conflict and hatred. The spirit of domination arises 
from that basic division that has been constructed in 
thought, and modern societies are typically obsessed 
with this highly destructive illusion. 

When you come to an end of thought, you don’t 
know how to meditate, and you don’t know what to do 
with your mind, and nobody can tell you. But still, 
thinking comes to an end naturally, and you just watch. 

You don’t have to ask who watches because that 
question merely arises from the fact that in grammar 
every verb has to have a subject by rule — but that is 
not a rule of nature, it is a rule of grammar. In nature 
there can be watching without a separate watcher. 


AnD So You BEGIN TO MEDITATE 


When you realize that you have come to your wit’s 
end, you can begin meditation. Or meditation happens, 
and that happening is simply the watching of what is, of 


116 


CONTEMPLATIVE RITUAL 


all the information conveyed to you by your exterior 
and interior senses, and even the thoughts that keep 
chattering on about it all. 

You don’t try to stop those thoughts, you just let 
them run as if they were birds twittering outside, and 
they will eventually become tired and stop. 

But don’t worry about whether they do or don’t. Just 
simply watch whatever it is that you are feeling, think- 
ing, or experiencing — that’s it. Just watch it, and don’t 
go out of your way to put any names on it. This is 
really what meditation is. 

You are in meditation in an eternal present, and you 
are not expecting any result. You are not doing it to 
improve yourself, because you found that you can’t. 
Your ego can’t possibly improve you because it is what’s 
in need of improvement, and your ego can’t let go of 
itself because it is a complex of thoughts called “cling- 
ing to one’s self.” When it is finally understood that it is 
unable to achieve a transformation of consciousness, or 
the vivid sense of union of individual and cosmos, it just 
evaporates. 


ONE OF THE EASIEST Ways To ENTER IN 


One of the easiest ways to enter into the state of 
meditation, therefore, is listening to what is, and experi- 
encing the qualities of sound. 

Curiously enough, sound is a sense that bores us less 


117 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


easily than sight. When you hear it, just listen to the ran- 
dom sounds that you know are going on in the room, or 
in the street. Listen as if you were listening to music, 
without trying to identify its source, to name it, or to put 
any label on it at all. Just enjoy whatever sound may be 
going on, whether it is outside or in the area where you 
are sitting. That is part of the ritual: just listen. 


LETTING SOUND HAPPEN THROUGH US 


We can go on from that listening to making sound 
ourselves while also listening to it. But instead of mak- 
ing sound, we will get the knack of letting it happen 
through us. 

Once, a great choirmaster in England was rehearsing 
a choir in the presence of the archbishop of Canterbury, 
who was then William Temple, a great theologian. And 
this was a rather raw choir that didn’t really know much 
about singing. The master gave them a hymn to sing that 
they knew very well, and to impress the archbishop they 
sang it with gusto, and it sounded forced and terrible. 

Then the choirmaster asked them to sing a 
little-known hymn and had them go over it several times 
until everybody got the hang of it. “Now,” he said, “I 
want you to sing this hymn again, but there’s one very 
important thing: don’t try to sing it. You mustn’t try. You 
must think of the melody and let it sing itself.” And they 
sang it very well. 


118 


CONTEMPLATIVE RITUAL 


Afterward he turned to the archbishop and said, 
“Your Grace, that’s good theology, isn’t it?” And it obvi- 
ously was, since the archbishop told me the story. 


MANTRA 


In India we find the use of mantra — a mantra is 
what we would call a chant, where words and sounds 
are chanted not for their meaning but for their sound. 
Most mantras are not intended to be understood in a 
discursive and intellectual sense. Instead, you are asked 
only to go down into the sound, and the sound pene- 
trates you. You are able to settle right to the bottom of 
it, because when you are listening to sound, and when 
you are letting sound hum through you, it is one of the 
most obvious manifestations of the energy of the uni- 
verse. 

It is commonly said in India that sound is Brahman, 
sound is God, and perhaps that is the original meaning 
of saying, “In the beginning was the Word.” It did not 
mean that in the beginning was the chatter, or in the 
beginning was the commandment or the orders. It meant 
the vibration, the sound of the word. 

So concentrate purely on the sound, and you will 
find some mantras that play in your ears are so simple 
that you will be able to join in with them effortlessly, 
and please do so quite freely. 

It is a pity that the Roman Catholic Church, which 


119 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


used to have a mantric service, is dropping it and putting 
the Mass in the vernacular, and not particularly good ver- 
nacular at that, as far as the English translation is con- 
cerned. It has begun to sound terribly intellectual, and 
often there is somebody standing by the altar with a 
microphone to explain what’s going on, so that it is no 
longer possible to practice contemplative prayer at Mass. 
Instead you are hammered with information, with exulta- 
tion, with edification all the time, and the Catholic Church 
should realize that in giving up Latin it has lost its magic. 

Although we associate mantras with religion, they 
are not supposed to be understood, because religion is 
that which is past understanding. Understanding may 
lead up to it, but to express religion intellectually is to 
try to use the intellect for something it cannot do. It is 
comparable to picking up the telephone and dialing 
W-H-A-T I-S G-O-D, and expecting to get a useful ans- 
wer. Although the telephone is very useful otherwise, 
you cannot find out the mystery of the universe 
through talk — only through awareness. 

For that reason I have suggested that churches get 
rid of their pews, where everybody looks at the backs 
of each other’s necks, and that they spread their floors 
with rugs and cushions, so that instead of a sermon they 
have a ritual in which people can approach an ineffable 
spiritual experience rather than being forced into a par- 


ticular pattern of thinking. 


120 


CONTEMPLATIVE RITUAL 


In this spirit I have only given the slightest sugges- 
tion of how one uses the mantra, or the silence, for 
meditation. You all have your own way of doing things 
like that, so do it your own way. This technique is a 
vehicle, or a support for contemplation, and I suggest 
you simply sit quietly, and when you feel settled pro- 


ceed into contemplation. 


STILL THE MIND 


Sit quietly and be with your breath, your mind, and 
all your feelings. 

It doesn’t matter whether you are sitting cross- 
legged or on your knees with your legs folded under- 
neath you. The point is to settle into a posture that is 
stable and comfortable. You can cross your legs in front 
of you, or if you are limber you may wish to try the 
half-lotus or full-lotus position. You can sit on a cush- 
ion with your knees bent and legs on either side, or you 
can sit in a chair. The idea is to be comfortable and find 
a position that you can maintain effortlessly. 

As you settle in, remember that although stillness is 
emphasized in meditation, this does not mean that you 
should hold still in a rigid way. Becoming still physi- 
cally helps one to find stillness of mind, but if you need 
to move, get comfortable, so that you can settle even 
more deeply. 

Keep your back upright and your head erect, but let 


121 


AN INTRODUCTION TO MEDITATION 


your arms relax. Rest the left palm in the right palm, and 
put your thumbs together as if you were holding an egg. 
Your hands should be positioned at your belly with your 
thumbs just below the navel. 

If you are sitting cross-legged you may wish to rock 
back and forth for a moment to find your natural center. 
If you are sitting in a chair, plant your feet on the ground 
so that you are grounded. 

Your mouth should be closed, the eyes lowered 
slightly. 

When you have found a stable posture, allow your 
awareness to sink into your breath and to find the bottom 
of your breath. You are not trying to cultivate a particular 
kind of breath; just gently pay attention to your breath- 
ing. Allow the breath to come and go as it may. 

That’s all you need to do. Your body will become 
still, and your mind will naturally, at some point, 
become still as well. 

That is the essential process of meditation. 


If you wish, you can begin to hum when you feel 
comfortable with it. As your voice rises, begin to play 
with the sound. 

The play of sound will eventually settle into a pat- 
tern, and a mantra will spontaneously form. Go with it, 
and in this moment you are experiencing ritual in its 
richest form. 


122 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


Alan Watts was born in England in 1915. 
Beginning at age sixteen, when he wrote essays for 
the journal of the Buddhist Lodge in London, he 
developed a reputation over the next forty years as 
a foremost interpreter of Eastern philosophies for 
the West, eventually developing an audience of 
millions who were enriched through his books, 
tape recordings, radio and television appearances, 
and public lectures. He became widely recognized 
for his Zen writings and for The Book: On the Taboo 
Against Knowing Who You Are. 


In all, Watts wrote more than twenty-five books 
and recorded hundreds of lectures and seminars, all 
building toward a personal philosophy he shared 
with honesty and joy with his readers and listeners 
throughout the world. His overall works have pre- 
sented a model of individuality and self-expression 
that can be matched by few philosophers. 

Watts came to the United States in 1938, and 
earned a Master’s Degree in Theology from Seabury- 
Western Theological Seminary. He was Episcopal 
Chaplain at Northwestern University during 
World War II, and held fellowships from Harvard 
University and the Bollingen Foundation. He 
became professor and dean of the American 
Academy of Asian Studies in San Francisco and lec- 
tured and traveled widely. 

He died in 1973 at his home in northern 
California, survived by his second wife and seven 
children. A complete list of his books and tapes 
may be found at www.alanwatts.com. 


