“Pathbreaking.” —MARIA POPOVA, BRAIN PICKINGS 


MEANING 
HAPPINESS 


THE QUEST FOR FREEDOM OF THE 
SPIRIT IN MODERN PSYCHOLOGY AND 
THE WISDOM OF THE EAST 


ALAN WATTS 


Author of The Wisdom of Insecurity 


The 


ee 
HAPPINESS 


The 


owe 
HAPPINESS 


THE QUEST FOR FREEDOM 
OF THE SPIRIT IN MODERN PSYCHOLOGY 
AND THE WISDOM OF THE EAST 


ALAN WATTS 


Third Edition 
Foreword by Joan Watts 


UZTT\S 
New World Library 
Novato, California 


New World Library 


1 Rayparon Way 
Ks ‘California 94949 


7BR AWS 


Copyright © 1940, 1968 by Alan W. Watts 
Copyright © 2018 by Joan Watts and Anne Watts 


All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic, mechanical, or other—without written permission 
from the publisher, except by a reviewer, who may quote brief passages in a review. 


Text design by Tona Pearce Myers 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Names: Watts, Alan, 1915-1973, author. 

Title: The meaning of happiness : the quest for freedom of the spirit in modern psychology and the 
wisdom of the East / Alan Watts. 

Description: Novato : New World Library, 2018. | Originally published: New York : Harper & Brothers, 
c1940. | Includes bibliographical references and index. 

Identifiers: LCCN 2018019350| ISBN 9781608685400 (alk. paper) | ISBN 9781608685417 (ebook) 

Subjects: LCSH: Happiness. | Mysticism. 

Classification: LCC BJ1481 .W37 2018 | DDC 158—dc23 

LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2018019350 


First New World Library printing, August 2018 

ISBN 978-1-60868-540-0 

Ebook ISBN 978-1-60868-541-7 

Printed in Canada on 100% postconsumer-waste recycled paper 

Ey,,;World Library is proud to be a Gold Certified Environmentally Responsible 

ae Publisher certification awarded by Green Press Initiative. 
enpressinitiative.org 


OTS 


10987654321 


CONTENTS 


Foreword to the Third Edition 
Preface to the Second (1952) Edition 
Preface to Laymen and Specialists 
Introduction 


. War in the Soul 

. The Answer of Religion 
. The Way of Acceptance 
. The Return of the Gods 
. The Vicious Circle 

. The One in the Many 

. The Great Liberation 

. The Love of Life 


OAONaANABRWNHH 


Notes 
Bibliography 
Index 

About the Author 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


I was two years old in 1940 when The Meaning of Happiness was originally published. I 


don’t remember ever reading the book or having a copy of it until just recently. My 
father, Alan Watts, was all of twenty-four years old when he wrote it, and my mother, 
Eleanor (his first wife), to whom he dedicated it, was barely twenty. The copy I have 
now is the second edition, published by James Ladd Delkin in 1953, and, ironically, 
inscribed to Alan’s third wife, Mary Jane, in 1959. I often wondered about the title of 
the book and whether he developed his theory on happiness to understand the 
depression and resulting unhappiness Eleanor dealt with throughout her life. He 
mentioned in his autobiography, In My Own Way, that Eleanor was involved in reading 
the manuscript and encouraged him to be honest and to really think through what he 
meant. 

Alan, at the time, told his parents he was developing “a philosophy of acceptance” 
for a new book. The title then became The Anatomy of Acceptance, which the publisher, 
Harper, changed to The Meaning of Happiness. Reading it, I’ve tried to wrap my head 
around the fact that this man understood what he did about the human condition at 
the young age of twenty-four. He looks at happiness from every possible angle. His 
initial premise for the book was to address the question, “What do Eastern and Western 
psychology, taken together, have to say about the elusive and pressing subject of 
human happiness?” The concept of duality, a common theme in his writings, emerges 
here with the thesis that in order to experience happiness, one must suffer sadness and 
that such opposites eventually become complementary. 

Alan wrote in a letter to his parents in June 1940, just two months after the book 
came out, “When I finished that book, I thought it reasonably free from inadequacies, 
but now, each week shows me another hole in it. There are things left unsaid and I say 
to myself, ‘There are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamed of in your 
philosophy.’” 

At the time he wrote this book, Alan admits he was somewhat under the influence 
of Carl Jung, but then notes a sense of inadequacy—that he, Alan, had in fact described 
a psychological process without any metaphysical foundation. In retrospect, Alan felt 
that Jung’s refusal to relate his psychology to any one system of metaphysics became 
his own book’s profound weakness. 

Despite all that, my feeling is that The Meaning of Happiness is as timely in its 
philosophical premise as it was nearly eighty years ago. I leave subsequent 
interpretation to the reader. 

Joan Watts 
Livingston, Montana 
June 2018 


PREFACE TO THE SECOND (1952) EDITION 


This book first appeared in the spring of 1940, at the very moment when the Second 


World War broke loose in all its violence. Despite the fact that it was published at that 
most inauspicious time and the fact that its title gave it the outward appearance of a 
type of “inspirational literature” far removed from its inner content, The Meaning of 
Happiness has been “sold out” for many years—during which I have received repeated 
requests for its republication. 

I have hesitated to comply with this demand because in so many ways my ideas 
have gone far beyond the philosophy of a book written when I was only twenty-four 
years old. Yet this book and an even earlier book, The Spirit of Zen, remain the favorites 
of many readers. Setting aside, however, certain immaturities of style and organization, 
as well as of certain lines of development, the essential theme of this book is, for me, as 
valid and as important as ever. It has continued as the basic insight of all that I have 
written subsequently—books in which I have tried to express it in terms of a variety of 
differing philosophical and religious “languages.” 

This theme is concerned with the realization of “happiness” in the Aristotelian and 
Thomistic sense of man’s true end or destiny, in which sense happiness means union 
with God, or, in Oriental terms, harmony with the Tao, or moksha, or nirvana. The 
point on which I have insisted in many different ways is, in brief, that this special and 
supreme order of happiness is not a result to be attained through action, but a fact to 
be realized through knowledge. The sphere of action is to express it, not to gain it. 

The exposition of this theme involves a number of peculiar logical and 
psychological difficulties. From a rigorously logical point of view, the words in which 
this theme is stated mean exactly nothing. In the terms of the great Oriental 
philosophies, man’s unhappiness is rooted in the feeling of anxiety which attends his 
sense of being an isolated individual or ego, separate from “life” or “reality” as a 
whole. On the other hand, happiness—a sense of harmony, completion, and wholeness 
—comes with the realization that the feeling of isolation is an illusion. In fact, that 
which feels itself to be the separate, individual consciousness is identical with that 
universal and undivided Reality of which all things are manifestations. 

The Meaning of Happiness explains that the psychological equivalent of this doctrine 
is a state of mind called “total acceptance,” a yes-saying to everything that we 
experience, the unreserved acceptance of what we are, of what we feel and know at 
this and every moment. To say, as in the Vedanta, that “All is Brahman,” is to say that 
this whole universe is to be accepted. To put it in another way, at each moment we are 
what we experience, and there is no real possibility of being other than what we are. 
Wisdom therefore consists in accepting what we are, rather than in struggling 
fruitlessly to be something else, as if it were possible to run away from one’s own feet. 

But if you cannot run away from your feet, you cannot run after them either. If it is 
impossible to escape from reality, from what is now, it is equally impossible to accept 
or embrace it. You cannot kiss your own lips. Speaking logically, the idea of accepting 
one’s experience in its totality means nothing. For “yes” has meaning only in relation to 


“no,” so that if I say “yes” to everything the word ceases to have any content. To abolish 
all valleys is to get rid of all mountains. By the same logic, it is equally meaningless to 
say “All is Brahman,” for statements which are applied to all experiences whatsoever 
add nothing to our knowledge. When I have said that this whole universe is life, 
reality, Tao, or Brahman, I have said no more than that everything is everything! 

It is easy, then, to sympathize with the reviewer of this book who said, “The 
mountain has labored and brought forth a mouse.” Yet he was mistaken in one slight 
respect. There was no mouse. And in this tremendous trifle lies the real significance of 
the book—the meaning which was hidden between the lines because it could not be 
stated in the words. For between the lines is the paper, the seeming emptiness or 
nothing, on which the words are printed and which is quite essential to their being 
printed at all. In a rather similar way, Reality or Brahman is the essential basis of every 
thing and experience. If I say that paper underlies every word on this page, I might 
perhaps be understood as saying something like this: 


Paper underlies every word — on this page 
Paper Paper Paper Paper Paper Paper Paper 


which is neither sensible nor true. 

Just as the words cannot “utter” the paper beneath them, because the paper is not 
another word, so logic cannot express Reality. In logic, words mean nothing if they do 
not describe particular experiences. But just as the paper is not a word, Reality or 
Brahman is not a particular experience. The statement “All is Brahman” is indeed 
nonsense if “Brahman” is held, like most other words, to denote a special experience. 
Yet if Brahman is nothing that we can experience, why trouble to talk about it at all? 
Am I not saying a great many words about something of which I know nothing? 

Here is the whole point of the nonexistent mouse over which the mountain labored. 
I do not know Brahman just as I do not see sight. If I am Reality, I cannot grasp it. The 
life, the Tao, which is the experience of this and all moments I can neither escape nor 
accept. Every attempt to escape from life or to accept life is as much a vicious circle, as 
plain an absurdity as trying to know knowledge, to feel feeling, or to burn fire. 


It is only when you seek it that you lose it. 

You cannot take hold of it, nor can you get rid of it; 
While you can do neither, it goes on its own way. 

You remain silent and it speaks; you speak and it is silent. 


So what? 

So that is what millions of human beings make themselves perfectly miserable 
trying to do. The laboring of the mountain is the fantastic effort of man to grasp the 
mystery of life, to find God, to attain happiness, to lay hold on absolute, eternal Being. 
He clutches at his own hand. He seeks what he has never lost. He suffocates from 
holding his breath. 

This absurdity is only possible on the basis of the feeling that “I” am one thing and 
“life” or “reality” another, that the knower is separate from his knowledge, the known. 
This book suggests a total acceptance of experience by way of what is called in 
Buddhism upaya—a device for bringing about an awakening. The hope is that in trying 
to accept life totally one will discover, not in theory alone but in fact, that “whosoever 
would save his life shall lose it,” because one is attempting the impossible task of self- 
love. The psyche of the average man is in a perfect knot of tension through trying to 
lay a firm, permanent hold on the life which is its own essence. The attempt to “accept” 
life tightens this knot to the point where the very impossibility of the task reveals its 
absurdity. 


When this is realized in fact, and, I repeat, not in theory alone, there comes into 
being that state of liberation or release from self-tension which is the meaning of 
moksha and nirvana, and Tao—the creative power of life—flows forth freely, no longer 
blocked by the attempt to turn it back on itself. 

Written so long after the book itself, this is perhaps more of an epilogue than a 
preface, and the reader may do well to refer to it again after what follows it in the 
space of pages but precedes it in the course of time. 

Alan W. Watts 
The American Academy of Asian Studies 
San Francisco, 1952 


PREFACE TO LAYMEN AND SPECIALISTS 


Boots on happiness are generally speaking of two kinds. There are those which tell 


us how to become happy by changing our circumstances, and those which tell us how 
to become happy by changing ourselves. And then, if such books are not mere 
philosophy, both kinds proceed to give practical advice as to the ways and means in 
which happiness may be attained, describing a spiritual, psychological, or material 
technique to achieve the desired result. 

This book falls into neither of these two categories, its author believing that 
happiness of the profoundest kind is beyond the reach of any technique under the sun. 
Although he claims that this book is strictly practical, it does not name a single thing 
which one can do in order to become happy. Naturally it will be asked, “If there is 
nothing that one can do either to oneself or to one’s circumstances in order to become 
happy, is any purpose to be served in writing a book to state such a dismal 
conclusion?” But the conclusion is not dismal. To put it bluntly, it is possible in a 
certain sense to become happy without doing anything about it. We do not go quite so 
far as to say that, without knowing it, man is already more happy than he has ever 
dreamed. Obviously, this is not true, although it is very nearly true. For the object of 
this book is to prove to men and women something about themselves as they are now, 
which, if understood, at once creates the greatest happiness that man can know. By this 
is not meant a state of mere emotional and mental comfort or gaiety, but rather an 
inward experience of the spirit which persists through the deepest suffering. 

As this book is written primarily for laymen, the author hopes he will be forgiven 
for calling rather frequently on two departments of knowledge which are usually the 
special preserve of the learned, namely the philosophy of ancient Asia and certain 
aspects of modern psychology. He has therefore had to employ a number of special 
terms because the English language is not always equipped to express certain ideas in 
plain, straightforward words without lamentable confusion and misunderstanding. He 
trusts, therefore, that such terms are sufficiently explained, but asks it to be borne in 
mind that every human being speaks a different language and that sometimes it seems 
as if words were made to conceal thoughts. Now it is often that the specialist, the 
professional philosopher or psychologist, delights in the precise use of words, and 
sometimes he will find this book extremely irritating because it uses words whose 
meaning is quite clear to the “man in the street” but utterly obscure to the philosopher. 
For example we may take such words as “life,” “nature,” “love,” “fate,” or “soul.” These 
words have been used freely because they are living words, which, if read without 
hypercritical sophistry, can mean more than any number of special terms. Thus it will 
be seen that the author has tried to steer a middle course between the two obscurities 
of oversimplicity and overtechnicality. 

Some Orientalists and psychologists may complain that their researches have been 
grossly misused and misinterpreted in some of the conclusions which have been drawn 
from them. Various aspects of Christian theology may seem to have suffered in the 
same way, but, for those who wish to inquire more closely into original sources, notes 


giving “chapter and verse” have been provided at the end of the book. One thing more 
must be said for both laymen and specialists, and particularly for reviewers. Each 
chapter in this book is an introduction to the last, upon the subject of which the whole 
validity of the central theme depends and apart from which it should not be judged. 

In conclusion the author wishes to thank Dr. Charles G. Taylor of New York for his 
advice on preparing an important section of the manuscript, and also the Rev. Sokei-an 
Sasaki for allowing the author to consult his translation of an otherwise unavailable 
text. 

Alan W. Watts 
New York City 
January 1940 


Sometimes naked, sometimes mad, 
Now as a scholar, now as a fool, 
Thus they appear on earth— 

The free men! 

—Hindu poem 


INTRODUCTION 


During the last fifty years the mental life of Western civilization has been invaded by 


two forces which are having a profound though gradual influence on our attitude to 
life. One of these forces has emerged from the West itself, while the other has come 
from far distant lands. At first sight no one saw that these two influences had anything 
in common, but with the growth of experience it is becoming clear not only that they 
are, in spirit, closely bound together, but also that their effects reach far beyond the 
places where they are professionally studied. 

The first, a product of the West, is the form of scientific psychology associated with 
the names of Freud and Jung, which bases its research and practice on the idea of the 
unconscious mind and whose object is the purely practical one of healing the mentally 
sick. The second force is a product of the Orient, and is the wisdom of ancient India 
and China which has been revealed to us in its fullness only in comparatively recent 
years by the labors of scholars in Sanskrit, Pali, Chinese, and Japanese. At first it was 
thought that the wisdom they revealed was of little more than academic interest, and 
had the misérable vanité des savants had its way the treasures of Hindu, Buddhist, and 
Taoist thought would have remained as much a preserve for the merely erudite as 
Roman law and Egyptian hieroglyphics. It was soon recognized, however, that this 
treasure of spiritual literature was not only beautiful to read and consider; it was also 
seen to be of practical use. The ideas and precepts contained in it were not only as true 
for our own time and place as for the ancient East; they were also, if not entirely new 
to us, suggestive of new approaches and new ways of adjustment to problems very 
close to our hearts, and seemed to offer ways of amplifying the wisdom of the West. 

An inquiry into the relations between Oriental religion and the psychology of the 
unconscious might be of interest to those who specialize in these things, but the object 
of this book is much wider. For neither was originally evolved for the express benefit of 
specialists; their purpose was and is to assist mankind as a whole, and because there 
are many close likenesses in their method of inquiry they have come to similar 
conclusions—or perhaps it would be better to say “working hypotheses.” This form of 
psychology has taught that man’s conscious self and its various faculties of reason and 
emotion are the outward appearance of a hidden, mental universe in which the true 
origin of his thoughts and deeds is to be found. In other words, it would say that man’s 
true self goes a long way beyond his conscious “ego” or “I” which is the unknowing 
instrument of the unconscious, or of “nature-in-man.” When the ego is unaware of this 
condition it arrogates to itself powers and capabilities which set it in conflict with the 
unconscious, and from this conflict arise the greater part of our psychological troubles. 
But when we become conscious of the limitations of the ego and understand its relation 
to the unconscious, then there is some chance of true mental health. This is strikingly 
similar to many Oriental teachings if we can substitute for the term “unconscious” or 
“nature-in-man” such Oriental terms as “Tao,” “Brahman,” and the like, which mean 
the (to us) unknown self of both man and life, or nature. 

It will therefore be necessary to explore these similarities to some extent, but it is 


even more important to consider what the invasion of our civilization by these two 
forces can mean for ordinary men and women whose interest in such subjects is purely 
practical. For the number of people who have such an interest in either or both of these 
things is much greater than is generally realized. Moreover many religious cults of the 
present day are considerably influenced by Oriental ideas, especially the many forms of 
theosophy, occultism, and mysticism patronized by so many people whom the ordinary 
churches fail to satisfy. Therefore we have to ask just what contribution these two 
forces have to make to the happiness of the average human being who wishes to 
benefit from them without becoming a psychological or Oriental specialist. 

Many people have tried to answer this question from the standpoint of psychology 
alone or Oriental philosophy alone. But few attempts have been made to explore the 
possibilities from the standpoint of both. Why should this be done? Because there are 
certain elements in Oriental philosophy which are utterly unsuited to Western life and 
these elements are not easily seen unless brought to the attention by a critical method 
which only this psychology of the unconscious can provide. Furthermore, psychology 
has much to gain from the ancient East. In the West psychology is a new science; in the 
East it is very ancient, and in fact it is not correct to speak of Oriental philosophy at all, 
for in no sense is it philosophy as we understand it. Essentially it is neither speculative 
nor academic; it is experimental and practical, and is much closer to psychology than 
philosophy. 

But the need for a rapprochement between the two has for some time been 
recognized by the foremost living practitioner of this particular type of psychology—C. 
G. Jung of Zurich.1 


My experience in my practice [he writes] has been such as to reveal to me a quite new and 
unexpected approach to eastern wisdom. But it must be well understood that I did not have as a 
starting point a more or less adequate knowledge of Chinese philosophy. On the contrary, when I 
began my life-work in the practice of psychiatry and psychotherapy, I was completely ignorant of 
Chinese philosophy, and it is only later that my professional experiences have shown me that in 
my technique I had been unconsciously led along that secret way which for centuries has been 
the preoccupation of the best minds of the East. 


Because of this admission many of his contemporaries have charged Jung with 
mysticism and departure from strict scientific method. Such charges, however, are 
based on a very understandable ignorance of the true character of Oriental psychology 
and of those aspects of it with which Jung has been concerned. These aspects have 
little or no connection with metaphysical speculation and religious doctrine as such; 
nor have they a connection with certain sensational forms of occultism so attractive to 
those who lack discrimination. 

Our problem is therefore this: What do Eastern and Western psychology taken 
together have to say about the elusive and pressing subject of human happiness? For 
this subject is especially the province of psychology as distinct from what we usually 
understand as religion, or even philosophy. Often the purpose of religion is 
supernatural experience and philosophy is primarily interested in Truth, and their 
concern with happiness, in its profoundest sense, is indirect. This indeed is yet another 
reason why Oriental wisdom and the psychology of the unconscious have to be taken 
together. It is the only profitable way of considering the collective possibilities of 
psychology from the East and from the West. As we have seen, Oriental wisdom is 
psychology rather than philosophy and theology, and the schools of Freud and Jung are 
the only practical forms of Western psychology which have any relation to it. Unlike 
the older schools of psychology their object is not simply to observe, tabulate, and 
comment on the mental behavior of man. On the contrary, their method is empirical 
and its aim is to heal and give happiness of the deepest and most abiding kind. This too 
may be said of Oriental psychology, for the experience or state of mind at which it aims 


is a conscious harmony with life and nature both in external circumstances and in 
oneself. 

The discovery of this kind of happiness is perhaps the chief desire of man, though it 
is not always expressed quite in that way, for to many the word “happiness” has 
unfortunate associations. But I use it here because it is the only ordinary, everyday 
word we have to denote an oddly elusive and mysterious type of experience, the kind 
of experience that runs away from you the moment you begin to look for it. That 
highly intensified form of happiness which is spiritual experience behaves in just the 
same way; it is like trying to catch soap with wet fingers. Oriental psychology is 
particularly well experienced in this elusive art—need one call to mind the popular 
Chinese proverb, “Softly, softly, catchee monkey”?—and it seems necessary that in 
considering a problem which occupies so many of our thoughts we should call upon the 
psychology of East and West alike. 

The elusiveness of all kinds of happiness is common knowledge, for have we not the 
saying, “Those who search for happiness never find it”? This is especially true of that 
complete kind of happiness which does not depend on external events, which belongs 
to the very nature of the individual and remains unaffected by suffering. It persists 
through both joy and sorrow, being a spiritual undertone which results from the 
positive and wholehearted acceptance of life in all its aspects. This acceptance, known 
under many names in the psychology of religion, comes to pass when the individual, 
the ego, surrenders the conceit of personal freedom and power, realizing that it 
depends absolutely on that inner, unknown universe which is nature in the human 
soul. It only exists as an ego to fulfill the purpose of that universe—a purpose which, in 
one sense, it cannot help serving, but which, in another sense, it does not appreciate 
when laboring under the conceit of personal freedom and self-sufficiency. When, 
however, that conceit is abandoned an altogether new and more powerful freedom is 
known—the freedom of union or harmony between man and life.2 But “freedom,” 
“union,” “harmony,” “life”’—these are vague terms, and the things they signify seem to 
be as elusive as the terms are vague. To them also applies the old truism that those 
who search for them do not find them. Such ideas are the commonplaces of popular 
philosophy and psychology, but in this instance the commonplace is but the familiar 
entrance to a largely unknown and labyrinthine territory of the spirit. Less than a hair’s 
breadth divides the self-evident from the subtle, and the danger is that in ignoring 
something that lies right at our feet we may trip over it through overmuch 
concentration upon remote parts of the horizon or the heavens. 

The very saying, “Those who search for happiness never find it,” raises a host of 
complications for it will be asked, “If happiness is not found by searching, how is it 
found?” to which might be added, “If happiness is found by not-searching, or by 
searching for something else, is not this merely an indirect way of searching for 
happiness, as it were by a trick or deceit? Surely the important thing is not the means 
employed, direct or indirect, but the motive for employing them.” There is still another 
preliminary question that might be asked on this point: “Would it not be true to say 
that one who does not search for happiness, either directly or indirectly, already has it? 
Therefore does not the saying that those who search for it do not find it amount to this: 
those who have it do not search for it; those who do not have it search for it, and thus 
cannot find it?” In other words, happiness is something which you either have or 
haven’t, and if you haven’t there is nothing you can do about it except wait for the 
Grace of God which is something quite outside your control. 

Whatever the precise answers to these questions it is generally agreed that 
happiness cannot be had by any form of direct striving. Like your shadow, the more 
you chase it, the more it runs away. It is not surprising therefore that in both ancient 
religions and modern psychology man is advised to relax his self-assertive efforts and 


acquire a certain passivity of soul, encouraging thereby a state of receptivity or 
acceptance, which Christianity would describe as easing up the tumult of self-will in 
order that it may give place to the will of God. It is as if man were to empty his soul in 
order that the gifts of the spirit might pour in, on the principle that nature abhors a 
vacuum. But whether it is called the giving up of self, submitting to the will of God, 
accepting life, releasing the tension of striving for happiness or letting oneself go with 
the stream of life, the essential principle is one of relaxation. 

“Relaxation” is a word often heard nowadays—advertisers; teachers of dancing, 
music, swimming, physical culture, riding, drama, and business efficiency; doctors; 
psychologists; and preachers all use it in their varying subjects, its popularity being 
increased by the nervous tension of modern life. It may be used to mean anything from 
reading a mystery story or the secret of a ballerina’s art to the way of life of a sage 
whose soul is in perfect harmony with the universe. For, like “happiness,” it is a word 
of many meanings and is used quite as casually, and this is not the only similarity 
between the two. Relaxation is something just as elusive as happiness; it is something 
which no amount of self-assertive striving can obtain, for as it is in a certain sense the 
absence of effort, any effort to achieve it is self-defeating. 

These two words have many other equivalents, some of them much more high- 
sounding, and in writing and conversation men have exalted them to the skies and 
dragged them in the mud. There need, however, be no apology for using them, for they 
belong to common, everyday speech and even if countless associations make their 
meaning confused, confusion is worse confounded by introducing a new, exotic jargon 
when familiar and accepted words already exist. Even if they call too strongly to mind 
trite little mottoes on greeting cards or advertisements for someone’s cigarettes or 
patent medicine, such associations can be overshadowed by the knowledge that these 
same things, under perhaps different names, have been the chief preoccupation of the 
greatest minds on earth. Other words have had a like fortune, notably the word “love,” 
which men have made to mean everything from brute lust to God Himself. Such words 
may drop loosely from our tongues as if the things which they signify were as common 
as hats and houses; in a few senses they are, but in others they are things which, 
however common in our dreams, are little known and seldom found in reality. Often 
they seem quite close to us, as if we should come upon them round the next bend of 
the road, but this is their special peculiarity. In this they are like a carrot dangled 
before a donkey’s nose from a stick attached to his collar: if he chases it, it runs ahead 
of him; if he stands still, it remains where it is, so near and yet so far. 

The fact that happiness is associated with relaxation does not mean that it is 
impossible to be happy in the midst of strenuous effort, for to be truly effective great 
effort must, as it were, revolve upon a steady, unmoving center. The problem before us 
is how to find such a center of relaxed balance and poise in man’s individual life—a 
center whose happiness is unshaken by the whirl that goes on around it, which creates 
happiness because of itself and not because of external events, and this in spite of the 
fact that it may experience those events in all their aspects and extremes from the 
highest bliss to the deepest agony. 

If, therefore, as both Oriental and Western psychology suggest, the most profound 
happiness is to be found in a conscious union or harmony between the individual and 
the unknown Self, the unconscious, inner universe, it is clear that the problem has a 
number of peculiar difficulties. These arise for two principal reasons: first, that 
twentieth-century, civilized man is so centered in his own limited self-consciousness 
that he is quite unaware of its origin, of the directing forces that lie beneath it; and 
second, that the real problem is not to bring about a state of affairs which does not as 
yet exist, but to realize something which is already happening—‘“as it was in the 
beginning, is now and ever shall be.” For although civilized man appears to live only 


from his self-conscious center, although he appears divorced from nature, from a 
spiritual point of view this is a mere conceit. In other words, at this very moment we 
have that union and harmony in spite of ourselves; we create spiritual problems simply 
through not being aware of it, and that lack of understanding causes and in turn is 
caused by the delusion of self-sufficiency. As Christianity would say, the Grace of God 
is always being freely offered; the problem is to get man to accept it and give up the 
conceit that he can save himself by the power of his ego, which is like trying to pick 
himself up by his own belt. This appears to be a vicious circle, the more so for people 
who cannot believe in the Christian God, having been deprived of their belief by 
science and rationality, which are essentially powers of self-consciousness. Both 
Oriental and Western psychology, however, state the problem in a rather different way. 
They say that if the ego can be made to look into itself, it will see that its own true 
nature is deeper than itself, that it derives its faculties and its consciousness from a 
source beyond individual personality. In other words, the ego is not really a self at all; 
it is simply a function of that inner universe. In much the same way, speech is a 
function of the human being, and it is possible that one given only the sense of hearing 
might think that the voice is the man. But in order to fulfill its function the ego must be 
self-conscious—a faculty at once valuable and dangerous, for if the ego is deceived by 
that faculty it falls into the vicious circle of trying to find happiness by its own power. 

Vicious circles create ever-increasing complications when we attempt to unravel 
them in their own terms. Therefore in these days people are blinded to the spiritual 
problem by seeking its answer in the very complex, and even the psychology of the 
unconscious has not fully delivered itself from the thralldom of complications. But the 
breaking of the circle is simple if only we can adapt our minds to real simplicity, as 
distinct from triteness; for this the ego must yield its pride and be humble enough to 
see something lowly, something which the psychology of Asia has been teaching men 
to see for thousands of years. 

In an altogether odd and apparently mysterious way the whole question of 
happiness in this sense is far from straightforward. It is unusually complicated because 
in fact it is unusually simple; its solution lies so close to us and is so self-evident that 
we have the greatest difficulty in seeing it, and we must complicate it in order to bring 
it into focus and be able to discuss it at all. This may seem a terrible paradox, but it is 
said that a paradox is only a truth standing on its head to attract attention. For there 
are certain truths which have to be stood on their heads before they can be noticed at 
all; in the ordinary way they are so simple that we fail to perceive them. Our own faces 
are an example of this. Nothing could be more obvious and self-evident than a man’s 
own face; but oddly enough he cannot see it at all unless he introduces the 
complication of a mirror, which shows it to him reversed. The image he sees is his face 
and yet is not his face, and this is a form of paradox. And here is the reason for all our 
vagueness and uncertainty concerning the things of the spirit, for if our eyes cannot see 
themselves, how much less can that something which looks through the eyes see itself. 

Therefore we have to find some way of overcoming the difficulty, some way of 
understanding the most obvious thing in the world, a thing which is ordinarily 
overlooked because our thoughts and feelings are moving in much more complicated 
channels. To see it they have to be brought down to a level of humility, not fearful and 
kowtowing, but having the most direct and childlike openness of mind—“for He hath 
put down the mighty from their seat, and hath exalted the humble and meek.” It is not 
surprising, therefore, that these deepest truths of the spirit are often missed by people 
of the most brilliant and penetrating intellect. This is not to say, however, that they 
will be any more readily understood by mere lack of intellect. Such insight comes 
neither with brilliance nor dullness of the mind, for the one is deluded with its own 
proud glittering and the other just fails to register. To understand such tremendous 


simplicity one has just to open the eyes of the mind and see; there is no secret about it, 
for it stands before us in open daylight, as large as life. In the words of the Chinese 
sage Tao-wu, “If you want to see, see directly into it; but when you try to think about 
it, it is altogether missed.” 

Therefore when it is said that those who search for happiness never find it perhaps 
the truth is that there is no need to search for it. Like our own eyes, it may be going 
along with us all the time; only when we turn round to try to see it we make fools of 
ourselves. Thus a Chinese poem says:3 


It is so clear that it takes long to see. 

You must know that the fire which you are seeking 

Is the fire in your own lantern. 

And that your rice has been cooked from the very beginning. 


The 


ee 
HAPPINESS 


1. WAR IN THE SOUL 


Aimost everyone knows the story of the goose that laid the golden eggs. A man and 


his wife had a mysterious goose that from time to time favored them by laying a golden 
egg. When this had been going on for some weeks they began to think it rather 
tiresome of the goose to part with its gold so gradually, for they imagined that it 
carried a store of such eggs inside itself. Not having the sense to weigh the creature 
first and find out if it was much heavier than a goose should be, they decided to kill it 
and cut it open. As might be expected, they found only one ordinary, dead goose, void 
of gold eggs and unable to produce any more. 

There were once scientists, too, who were similarly disappointed when they 
searched the human anatomy to find an organ that might be described as the soul; 
there are still scholars who analyze Beethoven down to the last semiquaver and 
Shakespeare to the last pronoun to find the secret of their genius, and there are also 
theologians who do much the same thing with the words of the Bible to discover the 
nature of God. And it is yet the hope of even the most advanced science that the 
universe will yield up its mysteries, its last mighty secret, to those who dissect its 
tiniest fragments, learning more and more about less and less. This is known as not 
being able to see the wood for the trees. It is by no means an error peculiar to scientists 
and scholars, for the fable of the golden eggs is an ancient tale of human nature. 

We have a saying about the virtue of being able to “see life whole,” for all meaning 
is in wholeness. There could be no golden eggs without the goose, and however 
tiresome, slow, and stupid the goose might be, he resembled life in that he was an 
interplay of opposites: he was slow, but his eggs were gold, and if you cut him to pieces 
to gather the gold and discard the slowness you were left with nothing but a corpse. 
This will also happen if you carve up the human body to find the mysterious source of 
its vitality or if you separate the flower of a plant from its muddy roots. Something 
very similar happens in a much more important way when men love life and hate 
death or cling to youth and reject old age, which is like expecting a mountain to have 
only one slope—that which goes up, whereas to be a mountain it must go up and 
down. For the meaning is in the whole, and not only the meaning but the very 
existence of the thing. Indeed, we are only aware of life and life is only able to manifest 
itself because it is divided into innumerable pairs of opposites: we know motion by 
contrast with stillness, long by short, light by darkness, heat by cold, and joy by 
sorrow. 

Therefore to see life whole is to understand these opposing qualities as essential to 
its existence, without trying to interfere, without dissecting the body of the universe so 
that its pleasant portions may be preserved and its unpleasant cast away. This is what 
the philosophic Hindu understands when, looking at the most terrible things, he can 
say, “Sarvam kalvidam Brahman”—“This, too, is Brahman,” that divine Being of whose 
Self each single thing is a changing aspect. And to him this Brahman is not merely the 
whole universe any more than seeing life whole is seeing the whole of life; in this sense 
Brahman is rather the wholeness, even the holiness, of life which can be destroyed only 


in the fantasy world of our own minds. Therefore those who attempt to destroy it carry, 
as it were, corpses in their thoughts which corrupt and poison their souls. In the life to 
which they cling in horror of death, the pleasure in fear of pain, the wealth in fear of 
poverty, and the youth in fear of age, they hold only to the world’s dismembered limbs. 
Yet though they may not know it the dismembering and the consequent suffering exist 
only in themselves; they think they can take the whole apart, but it is a poor illusion. 
Its only result is that for all their clinging their life, pleasure, wealth, and youth have 
the taint of unhappiness because, having cut them off to possess them forever, they are 
no more alive. Thus it is not surprising that some few “wise ones” having come to grief 
in this way cry out that pleasure and wealth are sins wherein no happiness is to be 
found. But fire is not evil because it burns your fingers if you try to catch hold of it; it 
is only dangerous. 


The Problem of Opposites 


We call such things as life and death “opposites,” but this is not altogether a 
satisfactory name seeing that it implies a state of opposition and hence of conflict. But 
life and death are in conflict only in the mind which creates a war between them out of 
its own desires and fears. In fact life and death are not opposed but complementary, 
being the two essential factors of a greater life that is made up of living and dying just 
as melody is produced by the sounding and silencing of individual notes. Life feeds on 
death, its very movement is only possible and apparent because of the continuous birth 
and death of cells, the absorption of nourishment and the discarding of waste, which in 
its turn provides a fertile soil from which new life can spring. For vitality is a cycle 
whose completion requires both upward movement and downward movement just as 
light cannot manifest itself without the whole motion of the light wave from start to 
finish; if these waves could be divided into half or quarter waves the light would 
disappear. So also in the biological realm we have two opposite yet complementary 
sexes, male and female; beings are divided in this way in order to reproduce 
themselves, and the meaning of man and woman is the child without which there 
would be no point in having two sexes at all. Thus they are the two legs upon which 
our life stands, and when one is cut away the whole collapses. 

These so-called opposites present man with a difficult problem, for there is a 
longing in his heart for eternity and victory over death, a longing which is misdirected 
because in life as he knows it he himself is one of those opposites and thus is 
apparently set against something over which he can never triumph. For the foundation 
of our life as we know it is the opposition between ourselves and the universe, between 
that which is “I” and that which is not “I.” Here again are two things which are 
complementary rather than opposed, for it is obvious that the self cannot exist without 
the universe and that the universe cannot exist without the multitude of selves and 
entities of which it is composed. But from the point of view of suffering, struggling man 
this fact, however obvious, is purely abstract. Moreover, the existence of the universe 
depends apparently only on the impersonal multitude of selves of which there is an 
inexhaustible supply; it does not depend on any particular self. Indeed, nature seems 
astonishingly callous and wasteful in its treatment of individual selves, and it is 
therefore not surprising that man should rebel when treated with the same callous 
disregard for individuality as is the insect. It even seems that here there is an actual 
conflict which does not exist solely in the mind, for with one hand nature lavishes the 
most amazing skill on the creation of individuals and even on their preservation, while 
with the other it treats them as if they were no more than the dust from which they 
rose. But if one or the other of nature’s hands were tied the world would either choke 
itself from overabundance of life or be altogether depopulated. Nevertheless, from the 


individual point of view the process is wasteful and callous. Man might assist nature to 
a greater economy by regulating the reproduction of his own kind and by adapting 
himself to nature instead of trying to fight it. But this requires a concerted social effort 
that might take thousands of years to accomplish, and hence is of little consequence to 
individuals living in the turmoil of the twentieth century. 

However, scientific measures for the removal of suffering are here beside the point, 
for it is doubtful whether the resulting increase of comfort would be welcomed if it 
were sufficient to upset the balance of the opposites. Just as too much light blinds the 
eyes, too much pleasure numbs the senses; to be apparent it needs contrast. But the 
problem of man’s conflict with the universe remains. We can present any number of 
straightforward, rational solutions, justifying the existence of these uncomfortable 
opposites and the unfortunate but necessary operations of natural law. It is the easiest 
thing in the world to philosophize, telling man how glad he should be that he suffers, 
seeing that otherwise he would be unable to feel joy. But when it comes to the point 
such talk is found to be remote and abstract, leaving the heart unconvinced even if the 
head is satisfied. 

For here we are touching the very root of man’s unhappiness, and to these regions 
the sweetly reasonable voice of pure philosophy does not penetrate. Whatever may be 
said about the need for basing one’s attitude to life on a universal as distinct from a 
personal point of view, the difficulty is that in the ordinary way man does not feel 
universal. His center is himself and his consciousness peeps out through windows in a 
wall of flesh; he does not feel his consciousness as existing in things outside of himself, 
seeing through others’ eyes or moving with others’ limbs. And the world outside that 
wall is threatening, so much so that he does everything possible to fortify himself 
against it, surrounding himself with a barricade of possessions and illusions to hide 
himself from the world and the world from him. Within this fortress he strives to guard 
and preserve the thing he calls his life, but he might as well try to imprison sunlight in 
a room by pulling down the blind or trap wind by shutting the door. To enjoy wind you 
must let it blow past you and feel it against bare flesh; the same is true of time, for the 
moment has always gone before it can be seized, and the same is true of life which not 
even this wall of flesh can hold forever. To feel and understand it you must let it blow 
past you like the wind as it moves across the earth from void to void. But this is 
intolerable. It means tearing down the barricade, giving up every security, opening 
windows both sides of the room so that the draft sweeps through, knocks down the 
vases, scatters our papers, and upsets the furniture. This is too great a price to pay for 
having the dust and cobwebs blown out of our souls. Besides, we shall catch cold and 
sit shivering and sneezing till we go crazy. 


From thy nest every rafter 

Will rot, and thine eagle-home 
Leave thee naked to laughter 

Till leaves fall and cold winds come. 


So we keep the windows closed and shuttered until we die from suffocation, 
overwhelmed by stagnant air. 


The Fear of Fear 


This is a malady as old as life, born of what Keyserling2 calls “Original Fear” whose 
outward aspect psychologists term the “pleasure-pain principle.” For as the snail and 
the tortoise withdraw into their shells, man retires into his castle of illusion. But it is 
curious that whereas the snail and the tortoise often come out of their shells, man 
hardly ever comes out of his castle, because he seems to have a much more acute sense 


of his personal identity, of his distinction from the rest of the universe. The greater the 
sense of distinction, the greater the tension between the two and the more the pairs of 
opposites war together in the soul. This tension we call unhappiness, but it is not 
suggested that it will be overcome by the abolition of “Original Fear,” which is in itself 
a most valuable instinct. If we liked pain as much as pleasure we might shortly become 
extinct, for it is only this original fear of pain which urges us to self-preservation. Here 
again we have a pair of opposites, love and fear or like and dislike, mutually essential 
components of the faculty of feeling, for who does not fear neither loves nor feels. But 
note the term original fear. Man’s difficulty is that his fear is seldom original; it is once 
or many times removed from originality, being not just simple fear but the fear of 
being afraid. 

There are two kinds of tension, creative and destructive, the first as when a string is 
tensed to produce music and the second as when it is tensed to be broken. Between the 
opposites there must also be tension if they are to produce life. Of their nature they 
must move in opposite directions, and yet they must be held together by a relationship 
and a meaning. By centrifugal force the earth speeds away from the sun; by gravity it is 
drawn toward it, and hence it moves around it in a circle and is neither frozen nor 
burned. Thus the movement of the opposites away from each other is original fear, 
while the tie that binds them is original love. The result is creative tension. But man is 
not just afraid; he fears the tension caused by his original fear so that his fear is 
increased. The tension is also increased, growing all the more frightening until it 
becomes destructive instead of creative. The tie is stretched to breaking point, whereat 
the opposites tend to shoot apart into utter isolation. Thus when the tension of original 
fear is accepted man can swing happily upon his orbit; but should he try to escape from 
that fear he simply adds one fear to another and one tension to another, which is a 
process that may go on forever. Like a fly caught in a spider’s web, the more he 
struggles, the more he becomes involved. 

In this way the tension of the opposites is turned by man into destructive conflict. 
Clinging to one and fleeing from the other he simply incites the one he flees to assert 
itself the more. To hate death and change is trying to make life deathless and 
changeless, and this is a rigid, moribund, living death. Hence the saying, “Cowards die 
a thousand deaths, but the valiant die but once.” For in holding to pleasure in fear of 
pain man starts the tension, but the real trouble begins when he tries to get rid not only 
of the pain but of the tension as well, giving himself two enemies instead of one. That 
pain should arouse fear is as natural as that fire should arouse warmth. But let it stay 
there, for if we run from our fear it becomes panic, and this is the entrance to a 
bottomless abyss of self-deception and misery. Man does not like to admit to himself 
that he is afraid, for this weakens his self-esteem and shakes his faith in the security of 
his ego. To accept fear would be like accepting death, so he runs from it, and this is the 
great unhappiness. Sometimes it is expressed in sheer unbridled terror, but more often 
it is a half-concealed, gnawing anxiety moving in vicious circles to an ever-greater 
intensity. It would have been better to say in the first place, “I am afraid, but not 
ashamed.” 

Therefore in struggling with the opposites man perpetually deceives himself. The 
prizes he tries to pluck away from life and keep solely for his personal use turn moldy 
because he has severed them from their roots, and nothing that is isolated can live, 
since the two most important characteristics of life are circulation and change. On the 
other hand, the troubles which he tries to avoid are the only things which make him 
aware of his blessings, and if he would love the latter he must fear the former. But he is 
afraid of fear. These two things make him respectively frustrated and worried, driving 
him more and more into an attitude of isolation, of separateness from and hostility 
toward the rest of life, standing huddled and miserable between the devil of 


circumstances and the deep sea of his own unpredictable and unruly emotions. And in 
this isolation his spirit perishes. 


Man and Nature 


Man is as much attached to nature as a tree, and though he walks freely on two legs 
and is not rooted in the soil, he is by no means a self-sufficient, self-moving, and self- 
directing entity. For his life he depends absolutely on the same factors as the tree, the 
worm, and the fly, on the universal powers of nature, life, God, or whatever it may be. 
From some mysterious source life flows through him unceasingly; it does not just go in 
at birth and come out at death—he is the channel for an ever-moving stream, a stream 
that carries the blood through his veins, that moves his lungs and brings him air to 
breathe, that raises his food from the earth and bears the light of the sun to his face. If 
we look into a single cell of his body we find the universe, for sun, moon, and stars are 
ceaselessly maintaining it; we find it again if we plumb into the depths of his mind, for 
there are all the archaic urges of primeval life, both human and animal, and could we 
look deeper we might find kinship with the plants and rocks. For man is a meeting 
place for the interplay of forces from all quarters of the universe, swept through him in 
a stream which is the power behind all his thoughts and actions, which is indeed more 
truly man’s self than his body or mind, its instruments. This was known to almost all 
the ancient peoples of the world whose sages taught that all the actions of man were as 
much expressions of nature’s unceasing movement as the sun and the wind—a fact that 
would be obvious to anyone not born and bred in a place where there was little more 
to see than human handiwork. 

The isolation of the human soul from nature is, generally speaking, a phenomenon 
of civilization. This isolation is more apparent than real, because the more nature is 
held back by brick, concrete, and machines, the more it reasserts itself in the human 
mind, usually as an unwanted, violent, and troublesome visitor. But actually the 
creations of man, his art, his literature, his buildings, differ only in quality, not in kind, 
from such creations of nature as birds’ nests and honeycombs. Man’s creations are 
infinitely more numerous and ingenious, but this very ingenuity, together with his fear, 
aggravates his feeling of isolation, persuading him that he is a creator in his own right, 
separate from nature. For once again it would go against his self-esteem to have to 
admit that his superb faculty of reason and all its works do not make him the master of 
nature rather than its servant. Bewitched by his power of reason and urged on through 
fright of his fear man seeks his freedom in isolation from and not union with nature 
—“whose service is perfect freedom.” 

Man’s struggle for mastery is magnificent and tragic; but it does not work. And the 
difficulty is not so much in what he does as in what he thinks. If he were to seek union 
instead of isolation this would not involve what is generally called “getting back to 
nature”; he would not have to give up his machines and cities and retire to the forests 
and live in wigwams. He would only have to change his attitude, for the penalties he 
pays for his isolation are only indirectly on the physical plane. They originate from and 
are most severe in his mind. 

What are these penalties? We give them the broad name of unhappiness, and 
though this is not something peculiar to civilization, civilization offers us an extreme 
case especially in the world of today. Of course, it is not possible for us to know 
whether we are any less happy than savages, nor whether we suffer less. All men suffer, 
now as well as in ancient times, but not all are unhappy, for unhappiness is a reaction 
to suffering, not suffering itself. Therefore, generally speaking, the primitive was 
unhappy from his conflict with the external forces of nature. But the unhappiness of 
civilized man is chiefly the result of conflict with natural forces inside himself and 


inside human society, forces that are all the more dangerous and violent because they 
come in unrecognized and unwanted at the back door. 


The Importance of Conflict 


The meaning of civilization is nowhere better explained than in the parable of the 
Prodigal Son.3 


A certain man had two sons. And the younger of them said to his father, Father, give me the 
portion of goods that falleth to me. And he divided unto them his living....The younger son 
gathered all together, and took his journey into a far country, and there wasted his substance in 
riotous living. And when he had spent all there arose a mighty famine in that land; and he began 
to be in want....And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat: and 
no man gave unto him. And when he came to himself he said,...I will arise and go to my father, 
and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more 
worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants. And he arose and came to his 
father....And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and 
am no more worthy to be called thy son. But the father said to his servants, Bring forth the best 
robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet: and bring hither the 
fatted calf, and kill it; and let us eat and be merry....Now his elder son was in the field: and as he 
came and drew nigh to the house, he heard music and dancing. And he called one of the servants 
and asked what these things meant....And he was angry, and would not go in: therefore came his 
father out, and intreated him. And he answering said to his father, Lo, these many years do I 
serve thee...and yet thou never gavest me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends: but as 
soon as this thy son was come, which hath devoured thy living with harlots, thou hast killed for 
him the fatted calf. And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. 
It was meet that we should make merry...for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and 
was lost, and is found. 


Civilized man is the prodigal, and the primitive is the elder son who always stayed 
at home—unconsciously in harmony with nature, living more by instinct than intellect 
and without the civilized man’s acute self-consciousness. The primitive differs from us 
in somewhat the same way as the child differs from the adult. The child has no 
psychological problems of its own, and even if it has they are only latent and do not 
manifest themselves until later life. Its inner affairs are managed partly by nature and 
partly by its parents; not until the sense of self-consciousness is fully developed does it 
feel that sense of responsibility which arises when we become aware of our power to 
direct and control our own affairs. But when man attains that state of self- 
consciousness he becomes a Prodigal; he feels isolated and lonely, and more 
particularly in his “low” moments is certain that the universe is against him. 
Superficially his whole culture is a violation of nature; he becomes utterly dependent 
on his machines and perishes when left to fend for himself against the elements. But 
soon comes the “famine.” In our own day war and economic disorganization are the 
“famine”; there is no actual scarcity of wealth; men starve only because of human 
stupidity. In time there are some who “come to themselves,” realizing that in some way 
or other we must return to nature and experience in full consciousness the harmony 
which the primitive has by unconscious instinct. 

But it is not often realized that the apparent departure from nature which we have 
in civilization is an absolutely essential stage in man’s development. Without it we 
should remain like the elder son in the parable, jealous and unappreciative. For only 
those who have sinned can understand and appreciate the bliss of redemption. Perhaps, 
therefore, this wandering away from nature is not so unnatural after all, for it seems 
that our task is not to go back to nature but forward. The Hindus represent the 
evolution of man as a circle. Starting at the top he falls, instinctively and 
unconsciously, to the bottom, at which point they say he enters the extreme of 
materiality and self-consciousness, the age of Kali Yuga. From thereon he must climb up 


the second half of the circle and so return in full consciousness to the point from which 
he began. But truly to be united with nature again, he must first experience that 
absolute division between himself and the universe (or life). 

At this point, however, two things must be remembered: first, that civilized man’s 
division from nature is only apparent, and it would seem that this very appearance is 
part of a natural scheme of evolution, something into which we have grown by instinct 
as the caterpillar grows into a chrysalis; second, that although the return journey is 
done in consciousness, it is not done by consciousness, by the efforts of the self- 
conscious ego. This part of the journey is again as natural as the development of 
chrysalis into butterfly, and any attempt to force this growth egotistically is like trying 
to open the chrysalis with tweezers. It only results in keeping us back in the state of 
acute opposition between ourselves and life. 

Here again we meet with the familiar proverb that those who search for happiness 
do not find it, because they are trying to manufacture it by the very means which 
defeat it. Therefore the first step on the homeward journey is to understand that we 
have never actually been cut off from nature at all, that our present acute conflict with 
life is necessary, is part of a natural purpose and that self-consciousness is not a denial 
but a fulfillment of natural law. In other words, we have to accept that conflict, 
because the ego can no more extract itself from it than a tooth can pull itself out of 
your jaw. The second step arises naturally from the first: by accepting the conflict 
between itself and life as part of the nature of life, the ego begins to feel itself in 
harmony with the “dark” side of nature. For the conflict becomes unhappiness only 
through our desire to escape from it, which adds one tension to another. But when it is 
accepted we make a paradoxical discovery, namely that by accepting the ego and the 
conflict which it involves we also accept and become united with that which stands 
behind the ego and takes on self-conscious form, that is, with nature. (See diagram on 
the next page.) 


THE SAGE 


“| don't like this!” 


To 


increased 
conflict 


THE SAVAGE 


The Historical Background 


It is important to consider this problem in relation to its historical background and to 
discover some of the ways in which the modern divorcement from nature developed. 
What is said here is true, in the main, only for Western peoples rooted in the European 
and Christian tradition, which is to say, for the white races. The Oriental has a different 
problem, at least in its preliminary stages. Of course, it is impossible to say just exactly 


when the modern conflict began, but an obvious and convenient starting point may be 
found in Catholic philosophy of the Middle Ages, although its seeds may be noticed 
even earlier in late Roman times. Christianity differs from many other religions in 
according the existence of an immortal soul only to man. The rest of creation exists 
principally for man’s convenience, for no other living creature is of any special 
significance in the divine plan. This view was never shared by the Hindus or the 
Chinese, and a Buddhist scripture says that in time even trees and grass shall become 
Buddhas. But in early Christian thought and practice there was, with few exceptions, an 
utter lack of concern for anything beyond the salvation of man. It was not surprising, 
therefore, that Christianity took on an increasingly human or anthropomorphic 
conception of God. His nature was made to correspond more and more with human 
reason while the “merely animal,” the “irrational” in nature, was more and more 
identified with the Devil, so that Christianity saw in the beauties of nature little more 
than a snare for the unwary soul, an essentially sinful world, doomed in the end to 
perish and give way to a supernatural Paradise. 

But the thinkers of the Renaissance did not seem to share this idea, for apparently 
they were concerned far more with the human and natural than with the spiritual and 
supernatural. They were the forerunners of the natural sciences. Among them were 
such men as Leonardo da Vinci and Sir Francis Bacon, men who, as the latter boasted, 
“took all knowledge for their province.” But their preoccupation was still with man, 
and with the rational aspect of man as distinct from the divine on the one hand, and 
the bestial on the other. Certainly they found a new interest in the world of animals, 
trees, flowers, rocks, stars, and mountains, but only to discover therein analogies of the 
human being; they knew almost nothing of the Chinese and Japanese feeling for nature 
as nature. In their belief “the proper study of mankind was man.” And in this, for 
instance, we find the principal difference between Dante and Shakespeare, the former 
concerned with man in the supernatural world, the latter with man in his own human 
world, for “what a peece of worke is man, how noble in reason, how infinit in faculties, 
in form and moving, how expresse and admirable in action, how like an Angell in 
apprehension, how like a God!” 

The faith of Humanism in the capacity of human reason to solve all problems and 
subdue all nature made possible the astounding advance of rational science in our 
epoch, for mathematics and machinery are constructed in the very image of human 
intellect, sharing its rigid and inevitable logic. But by making a god of this faculty man 
tends to become machinelike, for reason is essentially the mechanical aspect of the 
mind. Its laws of logic are as predetermined as the motions of a steam engine, for a 
given cause can have only one effect and in this principle the universe is reduced to a 
machine whose every event has been fated from all eternity. Having discovered the 
potentialities of his reason man became obsessed with it, and the mechanical 
Weltanschauung of nineteenth-century science, the Utopia of machines conceived by 
Wells, and the social anthill of Marx were logical results. 

Similar changes came to pass in religion. It is particularly significant that the 
rediscovery of reason should have been accompanied by the birth of Puritan morality 
and Calvinistic Protestantism with its doctrine of determinism as reactions against 
“Popish superstition.” With the confessional gone and the dark side of life rigidly 
suppressed, man’s unmoral nature was denied and rejected by religion as forcibly as his 
irrational nature was thrown down by science. This is not to say, however, that 
Protestantism was essentially a rational system; it was not, and consequently came 
increasingly into conflict with science as the years went by. But the conflict was 
concerned rather with matters of theory than with those of practice, for though 
Protestantism was not doctrinally rational in the strictest sense of the word, it was 
rational in its psychology. Its beliefs were based to a great extent upon literal 


interpretation of the Bible, but its morality was founded mainly on the spirit of Jewish 
law as set forward in the Old Testament, and it is curious that though doctrinally both 
Lutheranism and Methodism are anything but legalistic, their standards of morality 
follow the rigid Puritan tradition. A similar inconsistency may be noted in Calvinism, 
for belief in predestination, in the doctrine that each man is irrevocably damned or 
saved from the beginning of the world, might easily encourage moral laxity, seeing that 
nothing that man can do can affect his ultimate fate. But the result was the very 
opposite, and nowhere were there more uncompromising moralists than the Calvinists. 

Such morality is rational in that it is an attempt to force mankind to conform in 
thought and action to a rigid and idealistic law. This may be giving a rather wide 
meaning to the term “rational,” but in essentials there is little difference between 
attempts to force man to be moral and attempts to make him reasonable. There may be 
differences between the moral ideal and the rational ideal, but as they were conceived 
in the Puritan and Humanist traditions they were ideals contrary to nature in that they 
ignored that aspect of man’s being which corresponds to “nature red in tooth and 
claw.” Indeed, prior to the twentieth-century rationalist and Puritan ideals had 
numerous points in common, especially among the Anglo-Saxon peoples. For the ideals 
of progress, of the rational society of liberty, equality, and fraternity, of pure 
communism, were not originated in the eighteenth century by the rationalistic 
philosophers of France. As important forces they first came to light in Puritan England 
of the seventeenth century.4 

Yet these ideals, especially the purely rationalistic, held within themselves the seeds 
of their own decay. It is interesting to note that, so far as science was concerned, in 
spite of its exaltation of human reason there arose, as in religion, an inconsistency 
between its doctrine and its psychology and practice. It removed man from nature and 
made him its master by giving him machines and by overestimating the potentialities 
of his reason; yet in theory it showed his essential connection with and subservience to 
nature. Man was evolved from animals and was not a special creation of the Deity; 
furthermore, he might think himself free, but the universal law of causality made it 
obvious that his every thought and deed was predetermined and that he was as helpless 
a tool in nature’s hands as a drifting cloud. But determinism is a doctrine which self- 
assertive man has never taken seriously (as witness the Calvinists); it convinces his 
head but not his heart, and in practice he has to temper it with what Vaihinger calls 
the philosophy of “as if,” for he behaves as if he were free. But in the glorification of 
human reason there was an appeal to his pride, and reason had something to show for 
itself in steam engines, factories, medicine, electric power, airplanes, and radio. But the 
god of reason had some serious reverses, one of the most important of which came out 
of science itself, as a result of the uncomfortable and searching inquiries of a certain 
Sigmund Freud into matters connected with the other aspect of scientific discovery— 
the inseparability of man and nature. 


Freud, Original Sin, and the Unconscious 


The rationalists of the nineteenth century were essentially optimists, and it was not 
surprising that they had no more taste for Freud than for the Church’s doctrine of 
original sin. Their faith in the ideal of progress and the certain triumph of reason was 
not at all in harmony with Freud’s contention that man’s highest aspirations had their 
origin in unconscious forces of a very different character, forces to which he gave such 
unpleasant names as “incest wishes,” “castration complexes,” “mother or father 
fixations,” and other phrases of bluntly sexual type. Nor did rationalism take kindly to 
so irrational an idea as that man’s unconscious goal might be to reenter the womb and 
revert to a condition of protected irresponsibility, floating blissfully in a warm, sleepy 


darkness. But Freud’s teaching was original sin in a new garb, for it showed the 
unregenerate Adam behind a thin shell of reason, and if man’s highest aspirations were 
just “rationalizations” of these dark, unconscious forces, did not this go to prove a 
fundamental doctrine of the Church? Did it not show that man’s efforts to save himself 
by exercise of his unaided will and reason are fruitless? For Humanism and rationalism 
had altogether neglected a mysterious factor called the Grace of God, believing that the 
human mind was sufficiently powerful to work out its own salvation. And by the mind 
they understood merely that aspect of the soul known as intellect. 

Now we have seen that intellect is the thinking machine; a power drives that 
machine, but whatever the character of that power the machine can only interpret it in 
a mechanical way. Therefore when it has to accept an irrational impulse it rationalizes 
it in the course of putting it into effect. When the unregenerate Adam desires blood just 
for the sake of blood, the reasoning machine has to find a reasonable purpose for 
shedding blood, however specious. And it finds it because in many ways the intellect 
has the most intricately subtle power of adaptation and an almost infinite capacity for 
self-deception. For it is of immense importance to the self-esteem of the ego that 
rationalizations should be convincing; otherwise man must admit his failure to stand 
above nature. 

Nevertheless, Freudian doctrine aroused little sympathy until after the Great War 
when it achieved sudden success, primarily through the ability of its method of 
psychological healing to cure cases of shell shock. But the outburst of the unregenerate 
Adam in the war itself made Freud’s ideas much more acceptable, though it is 
surprising how many intelligent people even today will refuse to admit that they have 
such a thing as an unconscious mind. They regard it as quite an impertinence for 
anyone to suggest that they do not always know why they want what they want and do 
what they do. Yet they are quite ready to admit that they do not know why their 
bodies produce such mysterious things as cancers and that they are quite unaware of 
what is going on in their kidneys, hearts, and bowels. Thus if there are unconscious 
realms and activities in the body, it seems reasonable to suggest, if only by analogy, 
that there is an unconscious aspect of the mind.5 


The Contribution of Jung 


Analogy might suggest even more than this. The physical body has intimate 
connections with the entire material universe, most of which are equally unconscious, 
and might it not be supposed that the unconscious mind extends its roots far beyond 
the individual, having begun long before he was conceived in the womb? With much 
more than analogy to support this idea, Freud’s pupil C. G. Jung propounded a theory 
of the unconscious which came close to the fringes of mysticism.6 For to him the 
unconscious mind is personal only on its surface; essentially it is collective, racial, and 
perhaps universal, for Jung found that in their dreams modern men and women 
spontaneously produced myths and symbols thousands of years old of which they had 
no conscious knowledge. Thus the infantile sex life of the individual was a 
comparatively unimportant factor in the unconscious, and Freud’s analysis was found 
to be just the first important step into this undiscovered realm. 

The significance of the idea of the unconscious is twofold, for it reveals a natural 
universe on the inside of man as well as on the outside. It also raises important 
questions as to the character of man’s real self. I have already suggested that this self 
lies much deeper than conscious reason and intellect, deeper even than man’s 
individuality which appears more and more to be an instrument animated by natural 
and universal forces. Now that we find the roots of the soul descending far below the 
personal level, we can understand why Jung describes the ego (which we ordinarily 


regard as our central self) as a complex of the unconscious. That is to say, it is a device 
employed by the unconscious mind to achieve certain results; in the same way the 
apparently self-contained human body is a device employed by nature to achieve 
certain results. But it must not be thought that this employment of a device is 
necessarily purposive in the same way that the reasoned actions of human beings are, 
for human purpose may be only a rationalization of natural impulse, as reason can only 
operate in terms of purpose. 

To us these ideas are very new. But I said that they bordered on mysticism because 
in fact they would have been well understood by many of the ancient peoples of the 
world. Thus to the Hindus man’s self was identified with his individual person only 
because of his limited vision; they knew that if this vision could be enlarged, he would 
discover that his true self was Brahman. In other words, man’s ego is a trick or device 
(maya)7 to assist the functions of life, for if life is to manifest itself it must do so in the 
form of separate things. Life as such is one and has no form; nobody has ever seen life 
without a form. Thus, according to the Vedic teaching of the Hindus, Brahman is one 
and has in itself no form, and hence Brahman as such cannot do anything, cannot 
express itself. Action and expression can only be achieved when Brahman manifests 
itself in these devices or forms, and therefore they say that actions are done by the 
forms and not by Brahman. 

Parallel teachings may be found in other ancient civilizations, notably the Egyptian 
and Chinese. Thus in the Shabaka inscription of ancient Egypt we find:s 


Ptah lived as the governor in every body, and as the tongue in every mouth of all the gods, all 
cattle, all reptiles and everything else....Thus every kind of work and every handicraft, and 
everything done with the arms, and every motion of the legs, and every action of all the limbs 
take place through his command, which...giveth value to everything. 


And the Chinese sage Chuang Tzu writing about 200 BC says:9 


Your body is the delegated image of Tao. Your life is not your own. It is the delegated harmony 
of Tao. Your individuality is not your own. It is the delegated adaptability of Tao....You move, 
but know not how. You are at rest, but know not why....These are the operations of the laws of 
Tao. 


Such illustrations might be multiplied indefinitely, and there is every reason to believe 
that this was not just speculative philosophy. These ancient sages wrote not what they 
thought but what they felt, and the intuitive and poetic quality of their wisdom is 
emphasized by the fact that they simply stated what they felt and seldom, if ever, 
argued the point. 

But modern man demands that his reason be convinced and expects his philosophy 
to be argued like a proposition in geometry. Among thinking people this is a heritage 
some five hundred years old at least and neither Freud nor wars and crises will make 
him doubt the supremacy of reason in a mere thirty years. But this heritage has left 
him in an awkward position having slain his faith in the psychologically satisfying 
doctrines of the Church, for there is no doubt that those who can really believe in a 
loving God, in the redemptive power of His Christ, and in the efficacy of confession, 
penance, and absolution, are essentially happy people. They feel themselves to lie in 
the everlasting arms of a Father whose demands on them are not too exacting because, 
having taken on human flesh Himself, He knows its frailties and because, having 
understood all, He can forgive all. For this and other reasons the Catholic Church is a 
master in the art of relieving man of his responsibilities, and where its priests do not 
indulge in petty politics and mild terrorism its people are among the happiest on earth. 
For they are able to trust life, knowing that however much it may pain them its master 
will never let them down. 


The New Religions 


But what of those whose reason will not allow them to believe these things? What do 
they do when the pains of life become too much? The majority, I suppose, try to forget 
them, and civilization offers countless ways of escape—movies, sports, magazines, 
mystery novels, high-speed travel, and the more time-honored remedies of wine, 
women, and song, all of which while being instructive, entertaining, and relatively 
harmless do not really solve the problem. For underlying all and the unescapable, 
wearing threats of economic insecurity and war, the tense, nerve-wracking struggle of 
business, the social and economic barriers to normal sex life coupled with the saddest 
misunderstanding of the art of marriage, the frustration of trying to make oneself a 
place in a huge, unwieldy community that cares nothing for you—one might compile 
quite a long list. And to know that the escapes do not work one has just to look at 
faces, especially when people think they are not being watched. 

Then there are those who, being fundamentally religious and yet skeptical of 
orthodox Christianity, resort to the various new religions with which modern society 
abounds—Christian Science, Theosophy, Spiritualism, Buchmanism, Rosicrucianism, 
not to mention those unnamed cults which revolve around such personalities as 
Krishnamurti, Ouspensky, Meher Baba, Alice Bailey, the Ballards, Gurdjieff, Crowley, 
and a thousand other lesser teachers whose followers are comparatively few but often 
influential.10 In the same category must be included those who have found a substitute 
for religion in one of the many schools of the new psychology, some of which are 
almost semireligious in a certain sense of the word. But this category is especially 
interesting because although the man in the street may have little or no knowledge of 
such things, they are becoming increasingly popular among the intelligentsia, and in 
small, unobtrusive ways their influence slowly extends to society as a whole. It has 
often been observed that members of this category and also of the churches are 
predominantly women approaching or past the middle of life—a class which seems to 
constitute a special problem in the modern world. Many were deprived of their 
husbands in the Great War, others have lost them somewhat early in life for American 
men in particular are apt to die young through business worries and nervous strain. 
Others still are those who have failed to marry at all or who have made unsuccessful 
marriages. Thus it is often concluded that their interest in these matters is simply the 
result of sexual frustration. But while this may well be a contributory cause in some 
cases, it should be remembered that people naturally acquire an interest in religion in 
the latter half of life, having accomplished their mundane duties, and that women are 
more inclined to religious feeling than men. Perceiving this as a natural phenomenon 
the Hindus divided life into two main stages. In the first man’s duties consisted of Artha 
and Kama, the fulfillment of the duties of citizenship and the fulfillment of the senses— 
making a position in the world and establishing a family on the one hand, and the life 
of love, sex, and aesthetics on the other. When these were completed came the stage of 
Dharma or devotion to religion. 

Apart from the definite adherents of these new religious and “religio-psychological” 
groups there are innumerable “seekers” who find no one creed fully satisfying, and who 
drift from group to group, seeking they know not what unless it is that magical 
knowledge which will solve all problems and set their souls free from fear. Sometimes 
they think they have almost found it in this or that “ism,” but what a strange place to 
look for the secret of life! Surely it is more likely that this secret will be found in life 
itself and not in doctrines and ideas about life? 


Some look for Truth in creeds and forms and rules; 
Some search for doubts and dogmas in the schools, 
But from behind the Veil a Voice proclaims, 


“Your road lies neither here nor there, O fools!” 


For the peculiar thing is that both what we are trying to escape and what we are trying 
to find are inside ourselves. This, as we have seen, is almost more true of modern man 
than of the primitive, for our difficulty is what to do with ourselves rather than the 
external world. 

Thus, at the risk of repeating a truism, it is obvious that unless we can come face to 
face with the difficulty in ourselves, everything to which we look for salvation is 
nothing more than an extra curtain with which to hide that difficulty from our eyes. 
Whether salvation is sought in mere forgetting or in a definite attempt to find salvation 
either through religion, philosophy, or psychological healing the same principle 
applies. Psychological healing in particular has been devised for the very purpose of 
enabling man to face himself, to accept nature in himself with all its primeval desires 
and fears. Oddly enough, however, many of the most fervent devotees of psychology 
are outstanding examples of its failure to help them. It does not attempt to offer 
comforting doctrines about this world or the hereafter like many forms of religion and 
philosophy, nor does it hold out promises of power and success. It digs ruthlessly into 
the secret places of the heart and drags out man’s most carefully guarded mysteries, 
and yet one has met accredited and fully qualified practitioners of this science who 
appear to be anything but reconciled to themselves or to life. For it seems that even the 
acceptance of life can be used as a means to escape it. 


The Instrument of Freedom 


But this is not surprising. The seekers for forgetfulness, salvation, and health of the 
mind alike want happiness, and therefore among these classes one cannot expect to 
find happy people. Those who are happy are interested in religion mainly as a means of 
expressing their gratitude to life and God and of enabling others to see as they do; they 
are not looking for personal salvation, for they do not think about such things. But how 
can they enable others to see as they do if it is true that while those who have 
happiness do not search for it, those who have not cannot find it by seeking? 

We have examined something of the meaning of unhappiness, of the war between 
the opposites in the human soul, of the fear of fear, of man’s consequent isolation from 
nature, and of the way in which this isolation has been intensified in the growth of 
civilization. We have also shown how man is intimately and inseparably connected 
with the material and mental universe, and that if he tries to cut himself off from it he 
must perish. In fact, however, he can only cut himself off in imagination, otherwise he 
would cease to exist, but we have yet to decide whether this elusive thing called 
happiness would result from acceptance of the fact of man’s union with the rest of life. 
But if this is true we have to discover how such an acceptance may be made, whether it 
is possible for man to turn in his flight into isolation and overcome the panic which 
makes him try to swim against the current instead of with it. In the psychological realm 
this swimming against the current is called repression, the reaction of proud, conscious 
reason to the fears and desires of nature in man. This raises the further question of 
whether acceptance of nature involves just a return to the amorality of the beast, being 
simply a matter of throwing up all responsibility, following one’s whims, and drifting 
about on the tide of life like a fallen leaf. To return to our analogy: life is the current 
into which man is thrown, and though he struggles against it, it carries him along 
despite all his efforts, with the result that his efforts achieve nothing but his own 
unhappiness. Should he then just turn about and drift? But nature gave him the 
faculties of reason and conscious individuality, and if he is to drift he might as well 
have been without them. It is more likely that he has them to give expression to 


immeasurably greater possibilities of nature than the animal can express by instinct, for 
while the animal is nature’s whistle, man is its organ. 

Even so, man does not like to be put down to the place of an instrument, however 
grand that instrument may be, for an instrument is an instrument, and an organ does 
what it is made to do as subserviently and blindly as a whistle. But this is not the only 
consideration. It may be that man has a wrong idea of what his self is. In the words of 
the Hindu sage Patanjali, “Ignorance is the identification of the Seer with the 
instruments of seeing.”11 Certainly man as instrument is an obedient tool whether he 
likes it or not, but it may be that there is something in man which is more than the 
instrument, more than his reason and individuality which are part of that instrument 
and which he mistakenly believes to be his true self. And while as an instrument he is 
bound, as this he is free, and his problem is to become aware of it. Finding it, he will 
understand that in fleeing from death, fear, and sorrow he is making himself a slave, 
for he will realize the mysterious truth that in fact he is free both to live and to die, to 
love and to fear, to rejoice and to be sad, and that in none of these things is there any 
shame. But man rejects his freedom to do them, imagining that death, fear, and sorrow 
are the causes of his unhappiness. The real cause is that he does not let himself be free 
to accept them, for he does not understand that he who is free to love is not really free 
unless he is also free to fear, and this is the freedom of happiness. 


2. THE ANSWER OF RELIGION 


The oldest answers in the world to the problem of happiness are found in religion, 


for the kind of happiness we are considering belongs to the deepest realms of the 
human spirit. But this should not lead us to suppose that it is something remote from 
familiar experience, something to be sought out in supernatural spheres far beyond the 
world which we know through our five senses. The world of the spirit is so often 
understood in an almost materialistic way, as a locality infinite in space containing 
things that are eternal in terms of time.1 It is thought to be a world corresponding in 
form and substance to our own, save that its forms and substances are constructed of 
spirit instead of matter, and its operations governed by different laws, for nothing 
changes—all things are everlasting. To understand the world of the spirit in this way is 
to make it wholly different from the world in which we live, and when religion is 
concerned with this kind of spiritualism a great gulf appears between the world of the 
spirit and the world of everyday experience, contact with the former being possible 
only in a disembodied condition, as after death, or in a state of consciousness where we 
acquire a new set of senses, spiritual senses that can perceive things to which material 
vision is not attuned. 

This view of spirituality is so common in religion that many people believe 
salvation to lie utterly beyond our present life, being something for which earthly 
existence is only a preparation and which will be inherited either when we have passed 
beyond the grave or when, even though still living, our thoughts have ascended to a 
higher sphere so that we are in this world but not of it. It is probable, however, that 
this idea has arisen because so much religious teaching is presented in the form of 
allegory; spiritual truths are presented in terms of time and space for purposes of 
simplification. Heaven and hell are removed in time to the life after death and in place 
to a different world order; eternity is represented as unending time, which is not 
eternity but everlastingness. This kind of simplification may have its uses, but in many 
ways it is an unnecessary complication for the conception has greater value if we think 
of heaven and hell as here and now, and of eternity as the timeless, eternal Now. 


Religion as a Denial of Life 


However, this is one of the main trends of thought in religion as generally understood, 
besides which there is yet another believing that spiritual happiness is attainable on 
earth but in a somewhat utopian and materialistic way. Both of these trends exist in 
Christianity, some holding that “on this earth we have no continuing home, therefore 
we seek one to come,” and others working for the establishment of the “kingdom of 
heaven on earth.” The Christian holding the former opinion feels that he can never be 
at home in this world which he regards as a kind of anteroom to the life hereafter, a 
place of trial and temptation where God tests the fitness of His children to enter His 
kingdom. At the same time he will thank his Lord for all the blessings of this earth, for 
the pleasures which give him joy as well as for the pains which give opportunities to 


learn wisdom. Yet he is not content with those pleasures, and because they are so 
fleeting he regards them as mere hints of the glories of paradise which shall endure 
forever and ever. 

But in modern Christianity especially there is another element which existed in 
olden times, though in a different form. An article of the Apostles’ Creed is the belief in 
the resurrection of the body,2 the belief that the world to come is not only a spiritual 
state but also a condition of life where the physical world has been recreated by 
spiritual power. It is said that God will create a new heaven and a new earth, and that 
“the kingdom of this world shall become the Kingdom of Our Lord and of His Christ.” 
The modern Christian is apt to regard this teaching in rather a different way, for 
whereas his ancestors viewed it as something which would happen only at the last day 
when all the dead would rise from their graves, the modern view is rather that the 
kingdom of heaven on earth is something which man may create by the Grace of God 
here and now. Hence the increasing interest of the churches in idealistic politics. 
Morality becomes something to be practiced, not only to ensure salvation in the world 
to come, but to improve the lot of mankind in the world as it is. For Christianity has 
become linked to the idea of progress, and the churches are the foremost advocates of 
peace, of social service, and of political and economic justice. 

But both among Christians and among followers of other religions there are those 
who feel that such ideals are rather naive, either because they seem impossible of 
achievement or else because they do not seem very desirable. Spiritual happiness, as 
they understand it, has little to do with either material well-being or everlasting glory 
in a paradise of heavenly music and streets of pure gold. But they share the same 
suspicion of the world as it is, believing the highest illumination of the spirit 
unattainable in the flesh or under the particular limitations of the senses which compel 
us to view life as a transient alternation of pleasure and pain. 

For many centuries there has been a tendency of this kind in the religions of the 
East, of which the most notable example is Hinayana Buddhism—the type of Buddhism 
with which the West is most familiar. The Hinayana takes the most gloomy view of the 
world of any religion, and seeks escape from it by the quickest possible means to a 
state which is not exactly complete annihilation, but a kind of vague, infinite 
consciousness from which all personality, all sense of individual identity, and all 
diversity of form have been removed. In this state there is no pain because there is no 
pleasure, and no death because there is no longer anyone to die. The gist of its teaching 
is that when you realize that your personal self does not exist, then you are free of 
suffering, for suffering can arise only when there is a person to suffer. The same may be 
said of pleasure, with the result that the Hinayana ideal is a state of tastelessness which 
is held to be the highest attainable bliss. 

A similar ideal might be found by a casual examination of the teachings of Hindu 
Vedanta as expressed in the Upanishads. For it seems as if the supreme aspiration of 
the Hindu yogi is to become merged into the infinite Brahman, the one reality of which 
all diverse forms are illusory expressions. In common with the Hinayana Buddhist, he 
finds the world unsatisfying because of the impermanence of its glories. Therefore he 
fights against all those things in himself which move him to seek happiness in the 
pleasures of the world, learning to see the changing forms of life as a web of delusion 
hiding the face of God. To him all things are God; mountains, trees, rivers, men, and 
beasts only seem to be what they are because of the limitations of his own senses. Once 
those limitations are overcome, the world of diverse form vanishes and there remains 
only the vast and void infinitude of Brahman in whom is eternal rest and bliss. 

Such ideas are frequent in Eastern thought, although they do not represent its 
deepest meaning. To most of us they are abstract and incomprehensible. Nevertheless, 
countless religious people maintain that the end and aim of our life here on earth is an 


eternal condition whose characteristics may be described in one of the following ways. 
First, a state beyond death wherein the beauties of life are greatly magnified and all its 
pains and limitations overcome. Second, a state in this life wherein earthly pains and 
limitations have been overcome by the exercise of human reason and skill, inspired by 
the Grace of God. Third, a state attainable either in the body or out of it where human 
consciousness has been raised above the limits imposed upon it by the personal self and 
its five senses, wherein all diversity of form, all pairs of opposites, have been merged 
into the infinite and formless divine essence from which they originally came. 


Abolishing the Universe 


All these three have certain elements in common. There is a distaste for the world as it 
is, implying that the wrong is not so much in the external world as in one’s own 
imperfect self, which is either doomed to live in this world on account of those 
imperfections or else which sees that world falsely, being deluded by imperfect senses. 
There is also the hope for an eternal state in which good things are made permanent or 
abolished altogether along with the evil. And, most significant of all, there is the 
implication that one of these religious states is the ultimate purpose of our earthly 
existence, from which it must follow that appropriate religious activities are 
fundamentally the only worthwhile pursuits for mankind. All other pursuits must 
therefore be considered subordinate and ephemeral, and in this view art, literature, 
music, politics, science, drama, exploration, and sport become vain and empty unless 
they are regarded simply as means of keeping body and soul together in reasonable 
comfort, or unless they are used for specifically religious purposes. Apart from these 
two uses they become simply the trimmings of life, the mere gilt on the pill, mere 
“relaxations” to assuage in as harmless a manner as possible our carnal nature lest its 
sufferings become too great for us to bear. 

The direction of this kind of religion is even more apparent when we consider the 
various ways and means prescribed for attaining such ideals. Among civilized peoples 
there are two principal ways of approach to the religious ideal, both of which have 
various common elements. Both are founded on the idea that the search for spiritual 
happiness in worldly pleasures is a snare because those pleasures are impermanent; 
they do, perhaps, impart a certain happiness, but because that happiness is entirely 
dependent on external circumstances it disappears as soon as those circumstances 
change. But there is something in man which makes it exceedingly hard for him to 
avoid the pursuit of earthly pleasures, and this tendency religion attempts to vanquish 
by a strongly hostile attitude to them. Hence the general antipathy in religion to all 
that pertains to the senses, and especially to the most elementary and important of 
earthly pleasures which are to be found in the sexual functions. 

The first of the two ways of approach to the religious ideal is found mainly in 
Christianity. It is the way of mortification of the flesh in order that the eyes may be 
turned from the snares of the world to the eternal glories of the world beyond. By 
prayer, fasting, and acts of charity, by abstinence from fleshly delights, man may make 
himself fit to receive, feel, and rejoice in the Grace of God which senses deluded by 
earthly things cannot appreciate. If the senses are coarsened by carnal pleasures, man 
becomes incapable of entering either now or hereafter into that realm of supernatural 
glory to which the Grace of God belongs. By its light he is not illumined but burned 
because of his impurities, for only those things which have been refined of all evil can 
exist within it. 

The second way is similar in most respects, save that it is a way of self- 
development, wherein the individual relies not on God, but on his own power of 
willing. It is found in Buddhism and Vedanta, and consists of exercises in mortification 


and meditation whose object is similarly to refine the senses, to turn them away from 
the snares of the world, and finally to root out from the soul the sense of personal 
identity and self-sufficiency and its desire to find happiness in the forms of life. 

Obviously we are discussing some of the more extreme forms of religious theory 
and practice; generally speaking, their outward forms have been increasingly modified 
in the course of years. But there has been little change in the underlying philosophy, 
which amounts virtually to the complete denial of life as we understand it. For 
according to this kind of teaching the world of the senses has been made for the sole 
purpose of encompassing the human soul with a variety of snares. Even the “highest” 
delights of the senses such as are to be found in the arts are “trimmings,” and the less 
refined joys of eating and sex are just tolerated insofar as they are used only for the 
purpose of maintaining and reproducing life. Today the harsh attitude of religion to 
these things has been appreciably softened, but this softening is rather a concession to 
human nature than an attempt to alter the fundamental premises of religious doctrine. 
And a mere concession to human nature it will remain while so many types of religious 
philosophy regard the material and spiritual worlds as irreconcilably opposed. 

The problem is important because it affects the usefulness of religion to the greater 
part of mankind. The belief is still generally prevalent that those who wish to “go 
furthest” in religion must practice extremes of fasting and chastity and other forms of 
cumbersome discipline to acquire the necessary spiritual sensitivity for making contact 
with states of consciousness and mystical insight which less refined senses can no more 
experience than a jaded palate can taste the subtleties of a fine wine. But this refining 
and exaltation of consciousness by means of asceticism is obviously a vocation for the 
very few, for even if it were practicable for the majority it would not be altogether 
desirable to have the world converted into a vast Tibet. It would be wiser to heed the 
warning of Lucretius, “Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum,” or “Too much religion is 
apt to encourage evil.” 

But if the highest illumination of the spirit is only attainable by such means, of what 
use is religion to the ordinary run of mankind? It may encourage them to a greater 
morality; it may even teach them to love one another, though the course of history 
does not suggest that there has been much success in this. It may also give them a sense 
of the reality of a Father God to whom they can pray as “a very present help in time of 
trouble.” But this does not begin to exhaust the possibilities of religion because it 
comes nowhere near to the real essentials of religion; it scarcely touches what is called 
“religious experience,” without which doctrines, rites, and observances are the emptiest 
shells. It cannot be assumed that because most religious people are moral, moral people 
are therefore religious. As Wilde said, “When I am happy I am always good, but when I 
am good I am seldom happy,” and this becomes more true than ever if by happiness we 
mean the state that arises from religious experience. 


The Religious Experience 


Religious experience is something like artistic or musical inspiration, though 
“inspiration” is a word that through misuse has unfortunate associations; religious 
experience is not “uplift” or flighty emotionalism. Strictly speaking, a composer is 
inspired when melody emerges from the depths of his mind, how or why we do not 
know. To convey that melody to others he writes it down on paper, employing a 
technical knowledge which enables him to name the notes which he hears in his mind. 
This fact is important: his technical knowledge does not create the tune in his mind; it 
simply provides him with a complicated alphabet, and is no more the source of music 
than the literary alphabet and the rules of grammar are the sources of men’s ideas. If he 
is writing a symphony he will want to orchestrate his melody, but to do this he does 


not look up the books on harmony and orchestration to find out what combinations of 
notes he is advised by the rules to put together. He has heard the whole symphony in 
his mind with every instrument playing its independent part, and his knowledge of 
orchestration and harmony simply enables him to tell which is which. What music 
teachers call the “rules” of harmony are just observations on the harmonies most 
usually used by such people as Bach and Beethoven. Bach and Beethoven did not use 
them because they were in the rules but because they liked their sound, and if people’s 
tastes change so that they like other sounds then the old harmonic forms are replaced. 
It is necessary for a composer to study harmony in order that he may be able to 
identify chords which he hears in his mind, but he does not use his knowledge to 
construct chords unless he is a mere imitator of other people. In the same way, language 
is used not to create thoughts but to express them, and mastery of prose does not make 
a great thinker. 

The spiritual genius works in the same way as the musical genius. He has a wider 
scope because his technique of expression, his alphabet, is every possible human 
activity. For some reason there arises in his soul a feeling of the most profound 
happiness, not because of some special event, but because of the whole of life. This is 
not necessarily contentment or joy; it is rather that he feels himself completely united 
to the power that moves the universe, whatever that may be. This feeling he expresses 
in two ways, firstly by living a certain kind of life, and secondly by translating his 
feeling into the form of thoughts and words. 

People who have not had this feeling make observations on his actions and words, 
and from them formulate the “rules” of religious morality and theology. But this 
involves a strange distortion, for as a rule the observer goes about his work in the 
wrong way. When the mystic says, “I feel united with God,” the observer is interested 
primarily in the statement as a revelation of the existence of God, and goes on to 
consult the mystic’s other sayings to find out what kind of God this is and in what 
manner He behaves. He is interested only secondarily in the mystic’s feeling as a 
feeling, and it occurs to him only as an afterthought that it might be possible for 
himself to feel united with God. Whereat he proceeds to achieve this by trying to think 
in the same way as the mystic; that is to say, he takes the mystic’s ideas and substitutes 
them for his own. He also tries to behave in the same way, imitating the mystic’s 
actions. In other words, he tries to perform a kind of sympathetic magic, and in 
imitating the mystic’s external forms deceives himself and others into thinking that he 
is really like him. But the important thing about the mystic was his feeling, not his 
ideas and actions, for these were only reflections of the feeling, and a reflection 
existing without a light is a sham. Therefore just as great technical proficiency will not 
make a creative genius in music, morality, theology, and discipline will not make a 
genius in religion, for these things are results of religious experience, not causes, and 
by themselves can no more produce it than the tail can be made to wag the dog. 


The Spiritual Irrelevance of Occultism 


This is not the only example of confused thought in searching for religious experience. 
The other, which we have already mentioned, is the opposition made between the 
spiritual and the material. Much depends, of course, on the precise meaning given to 
the word “spirit,” but it should certainly not be confused with the word “psychic” and 
many things described as spiritual are clearly psychic. There is no definite rule as to 
how these words should be used, so to be explicit we have to make our own rules. And 
the spiritual, in the sense in which it is used here, is no more opposed to the material 
than white is opposed to long. The opposite of white is black, and of long, short; white 
things are no more necessarily short than material things are unspiritual. But we can 


say that the material and the psychic are opposed, if only in the sense that they are 
opposite ends of the same stick. Psychic things belong to the world explored by 
occultism and “psychic science”—telepathy, clairvoyance, mind reading, and all those 
phenomena which appear to require sixth or seventh senses whose development seems 
unquestionably to be assisted by ascetic practices. The so-called spiritual realms 
inhabited by departed souls, angels, elementals, and demons, and the source of beatific 
visions, would be most correctly described as psychic if we are to allow that such 
things have actual, objective existence. And this world is the logical opposite of the 
material world because it belongs in the same category; it contains forms and 
substances, even though its substance may be of a wholly different order from what we 
understand as matter. People who are in touch with this world, however, are not 
necessarily spiritual people; they may have unusual faculties of perception and be 
familiar with the beings and ways of a more glorious world than our own, but this is a 
matter of faculty and knowledge, not of spirituality. The technique of living employed by 
such people is more highly evolved than that of ordinary men, just as the technique of 
the opera is more complicated than that of pure drama. Opera involves not only acting 
but singing, playing music, and sometimes dancing, but this does not make it a greater 
art. 

Spirituality belongs in the same category as happiness and freedom, and strictly 
speaking there is no such thing as the spiritual world. If psychic people are to be 
believed, there is a psychic world, and because it is a world entry into it is simply an 
enlargement of experience. But experience as such never made anyone either free or 
happy, and insofar as freedom and happiness are concerned with experience the 
important thing is not experience itself but what is learned from it. Some people learn 
from experience and others do not; some learn much from a little, others learn little 
from much. “Without going out of my house,” said the Chinese sage Lao Tzu, “I know 
the whole universe.” For the spiritual is in no way divided from the material, nor from 
the psychic, nor from any other aspect of life. To find it, it is not necessary to go from 
one state of consciousness to another, from one set of senses to another, or from one 
world to another. Such journeying about in the fields of experience takes you neither 
toward it nor away from it. In the words of the Psalmist:3 


Whither shall I go from Thy spirit? Or whither shall I flee from Thy presence? 

If I ascend up into heaven, Thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold, Thou art there. 

If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea; even there shall 
Thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. 

If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night shall be light about me. 

Yea, the darkness hideth not from Thee; but the night shineth as the day: the darkness and the 
light are both alike to Thee. 


In fact the spiritual world, if we must use the term, is this world and all possible 
worlds, and spiritual experience is what we are experiencing at this moment and at any 
moment—if we look at it in the right way. 


Union with Life 


This is the difference between religious or spiritual experience and artistic inspiration; 
both are analogous, but the latter is particularized. The artist or musician has a special 
type of creative genius; he creates pictures or music, for his genius is a specialized gift. 
But the spiritual genius is not a specialist, for he does not just paint or compose 
creatively: he lives creatively, and his tools are not confined to brush, pen, or 
instrument; they are all things touched by his hand. This is not to say that when he 
takes up a brush he can paint like Leonardo or that when he takes hammer and chisel 
he can work like a master mason. Spiritual experience involves neither technical 


proficiency nor factual knowledge; it is no shortcut to things that must ordinarily be 
mastered by pains and practice. Nor is spiritual experience necessarily expressed in any 
particular mode of life; its presence in any given individual cannot be judged by 
measurement in accordance with certain standards. It can only be felt intuitively, for 
creative living is not always outwardly distinguishable from any other kind of living; in 
fact, spiritual people are often at pains to appear as normal as possible. At the same 
time, although spiritual people may do exactly the same things as others, one feels that 
their actions are in some way different. There is a story of a Buddhist sage who was 
about to speak to his disciples when he found that he wanted more light. He pointed to 
a curtain covering one of the windows and instantly two of the disciples went and 
rolled it up, whereat the sage remarked, “One of them is right, but the other is 
wrong. ”4 

In itself, spirituality is purely an inner experience; it has no necessary effect 
whatsoever on one’s outward behavior judged from the standards of efficiency and 
worldly wisdom. This is not to say, however, that it is something absolutely private and 
personal, finding no expression that others can see. For spirituality is a deep sense of 
inner freedom based on the realization that one’s self is in complete union and 
harmony with life, with God, with the Self of the universe or whatever that principle 
may be called. It is the realization that that union has existed from all time, even 
though one did not know it, and that nothing in all the world nor anything that oneself 
can do is able to destroy it. It is thus the sense that the whole might of the universe is 
at work in one’s every thought and action, however trivial and small. In fact this is true 
of all men and all things, but only the spiritual man really knows it and his realization 
gives a subtly different quality to his life; all that he does becomes strangely alive, for 
though its outward appearance is perhaps the same as before it acquires a new 
meaning. It is this which other people notice, but if he has the gift for teaching they 
will see it in other ways as well. By his words as well as his deeds and his personal 
“atmosphere” they will understand that this realization has awakened in him a 
tremendous love for life in all its aspects. 

Prose and the logic of philosophy cannot explain this love; one might as well try to 
describe a beautiful face by a mathematical account of its measurements and 
proportions. It is a mixture of the joy of freedom, a childlike sense of wonder, and the 
inner sensation of absolute harmony with life as in the rhythm of an eternal dance such 
as the Hindus portray in the interlocked figures of Shiva and his bride.5 In one sense 
you feel that your life is not lived by you at all; the power of the universe, fate and 
destiny, God Himself, are directing all your motions and all your responsibilities are 
blown to the winds. In another sense you feel free to move as you wish; you seem to be 
moving life with the same vast power with which life moves you, and your littlest acts 
become filled with gigantic possibilities. Indeed, physicists tell us that the stars are 
affected when we lift a single finger. The result of these two feelings is that you no 
longer distinguish between what you do to life and what life does to you; it is as if two 
dancers moved in such perfect accord that the distinction between lead and response 
vanished, as if the two became one and the same motion. By the whirling, ever- 
changing movement of this dance you are carried along without pause, but not like a 
drunken man in a torrent, for you as much as life are the source of the movement. And 
this is real freedom; it includes both freedom to move and to be moved; action and 
passivity are merged, and in spirituality as well as in marriage this is the fulfillment of 
love. 


The Spirituality of Everyday Life 


All this, however, does not take place in the ecstasy of trance, in some abstract state of 


consciousness where all shapes and substances have become merged into a single 
infinite essence. The spiritual man does not perform his ordinary activities as one in a 
dream, letting his surface thoughts and deeds run on mechanically. He can become just 
as much absorbed in the usual affairs of the world as anyone else, but in a certain way 
he sanctifies them for under his hands sharpening a pencil becomes as much a religious 
act as prayer or meditation. Indeed, he can afford to become absorbed in everyday 
affairs almost more than others, and he can do so with a certain zest and abandon for 
to him ordinary human thoughts and activities are as much included in the dance of 
the spirit as is anything else. This, indeed, is much of his secret, for he knows that 
spirituality does not consist in thinking always about the spiritual as such. His world is 
not divided into “watertight compartments” and his religion is not a special form of 
thought and activity, for the spiritual and the material are not separated. 

But because a man does not occupy himself with the ordinary pursuits of mankind, 
this is no indication that he lacks spiritual understanding. He is free to follow whatever 
occupation he pleases—monk, philosopher, lawyer, clerk, or tradesman, but from the 
spiritual point of view a priest is not necessarily more holy than a truck driver. 
Furthermore, to obtain spiritual experience it is not essential to “vex your mournful 
minds with pious pains,” to spend years in the study of theology, to retire from the 
world, to become a vegetarian and teetotaler, to practice mental acrobatics and seek 
out “higher realms” of consciousness, to abstain from sexuality, or to develop such 
peculiar gifts as “fourth-dimensional vision.” Certainly these things are necessary for 
the professional philosopher or for that particular type of scientist whose field of 
research is the psychic world. If we are going to find out how our present senses may 
be developed, how we can tap sources of nervous energy as yet unused, how we can 
understand time in terms of space and see past and future at once, how we can transfer 
thought, or how we can acquire the faculty of immovable concentration, then indeed 
we have to go in training even more rigorously than the professional athlete. To 
acquire psychic faculties you must practice just as much as if you wanted to hold the 
world’s record for sprinting or to be able to walk on hot coals without being burned. 


The Nonessentials of Religion 


Religion as we understand it includes many things which do not strictly belong to it, 
because in olden times it had to fulfill functions which have now been taken over by 
scientists, doctors, and lawyers. At one time the major preoccupation of so-called 
religion was the study and manipulation of the unknown and the unseen; as these 
things became known and seen they passed out of the hands of priests. But when 
priests were considered the wisest of all men they were expected to have answers to all 
the problems which others did not understand. They were expected to know the causes 
of disease, the behavior and influence of the stars, the origin of such natural 
phenomena as thunder, storms, and famines, not to mention the more remote questions 
of what happens after death and whether there are gods and angels. 

Many of these problems have now been taken over by science, though we are still 
ignorant of the life after death and still have no objective evidence of the existence of 
“supernatural” beings. Therefore the priests are still the authorities on such matters 
even though they remain legitimate objects of scientific inquiry and have no essential 
connection with religion. The day may come when science, physical or psychic, will be 
able to answer these questions, and some scientists imagine that there will then be no 
further need for religion, having no clear idea of what religion is. This is not exactly 
their fault, for religious people seldom understand the true function of religion and still 
waste thought and energy in a war with science based on wholly false premises. 

If it could be proved objectively and scientifically that there was a life after death 


and that supernatural beings do exist this would have about as much religious 
significance as the discovery of a new continent, of the existence of life on Mars, or of 
the uses of electricity. It would be neither more nor less than an addition to human 
experience and knowledge. It would not necessarily be an addition to human wisdom, 
and this is the province of religion. For wisdom is not factual knowledge nor mere 
quantity and range of experience, nor even facility in the use of knowledge and 
experience. Wisdom is a quality of the psychological or spiritual relationship between 
man and his experience. When that relationship is wise and harmonious man’s 
experiences set him free, but when it is unwise and discordant his experiences bind 
him. 

Religion alone can deal with that relationship, and this is its essential function. For 
what do we find left in religion when its quasi-scientific aspect is removed? There is the 
whole, vast problem of love or spiritual union which is contained in the question, 
“How can I learn to love life, whose source and essence we call God? How can I learn 
to be united with it in all its expressions, in living and dying, in love and fear, in the 
outer world of circumstances, and in the inner world of thought and feeling, so that in 
union with it I may find freedom?” Now science cannot teach any kind of love, not 
even the love between man and woman, for whoever learned to love his wife out of a 
psychological textbook on matrimony? Morality, which religion would teach as having 
supernatural sanctions, is just the expression of love; it follows it as a consequence and 
does not precede it as a cause. The will of God as expressed in morality is not a ukase 
which we should merely obey, for the purpose of His will is not that there should be 
morality, but that there should be love, and morality is just the “outward and visible 
sign of an inward and spiritual grace.” 

Insofar as religion has diverged from its main purpose into psychism, morality for 
its own sake, speculative theology, concern for the life after death, and attempts to 
awaken spirituality by imitating its expressions, it has also put itself out of touch with 
people who have no desire to be religious specialists. Those who cannot feel that man’s 
principal concern should lie outside this world, who feel that salvation has nothing to 
do with removal to another realm of experience or with mere obedience to a moral law 
—such people can find little assistance from religion as usually taught, and today they 
constitute a very large proportion of intelligent men and women. For the nineteenth- 
century conflict between religion and science was, for those whose eyes were open, a 
stripping off of nonessentials from religion, but unfortunately official religion seldom 
saw it in this way. It clung to supernaturalism, which, rightly or wrongly, rationalist 
science had discredited, and continued to make it the keystone of spirituality. 

But this kind of religion does not encourage the type of love upon which spirituality 
is founded. We have seen that its technique is imitative and thus unlikely to produce 
genuine, firsthand religious experience; we have also seen that its contempt of this 
world and its concentration on the life hereafter has little to do with the essentials of 
religion. This is not all, for not only has it little to do with such essentials; it is also a 
decided hindrance to spiritual growth because it encourages a “love” of God on a false 
basis. God is loved not because He has given us this world, but because He is said to 
have promised a much better world in the life after death. His gift to us of this world is 
therefore declined without thanks—an effrontery which is softened by describing this 
world as a place of trial for fitness to enter the world to come, on the principle that if 
you refuse God’s first gift, you will get His second. 


The “Higher Sensuality” 


But if God created this world only as a temporary place of trial, He seems to have taken 
a wholly unnecessary amount of trouble in its construction. He gave us senses which as 


yet we have hardly begun to develop to their full potentialities, and yet religion warns 
us against those senses as if they were given us simply as a sop to embellish life with 
such superficial trimmings as art, literature, music, and athletics so that in playing with 
them we may have a little relaxation from the more important task of fitting ourselves 
for the hereafter. But there is a way of looking at things whereby these “trimmings” 
become the main business of life, and religion the means to their fulfillment, on the 
principle that religion was made for life and not life for religion. For the contempt of 
the world of the senses is peculiarly like the fable of the sour grapes. Man burned his 
fingers at the game of pleasure, and instead of learning to play it aright was filled with 
fear and relegated pleasure to the realms of the Devil and his vanities, crying: 


The earthly hope men set their hearts upon 
Turns ashes, or it prospers, and anon, 

Like snow upon the Desert’s dusky face, 
Lighting a little hour or two, is gone. 


But the whole point about the beauties of the earth is that they would be intolerable if 
they did not change and vanish. A woman is not less beautiful and desirable because 
she grows old and white; if she had eternal youth she would be a monster, as many 
women are who refuse to accept the different beauties of old age and death. For the 
beauty of life is not in any one of its stages but in the whole movement from birth to 
death, and if this movement is in any way resisted or interrupted there come 
unhappiness, maladjustment, and neurotic disease. Those who look pitiful and hideous 
in their old age are only so because years rankle them, because they have not accepted 
the rhythm of their life and go forward to old age with regretful glances behind at lost 
glories. 

Certainly all pleasures are transient; otherwise we should cease to appreciate them, 
but if this be made the excuse for refusing to enjoy them, one must suspect that man’s 
ideas of happiness are horribly confused. The secret of the enjoyment of pleasure is to 
know when to stop. Man does not learn this secret easily, but to shun pleasure 
altogether is cowardly avoidance of a difficult task. For we have to learn the art of 
enjoying things because they are impermanent. We do this every time we listen to 
music. We do not seize hold of a particular chord or phrase and shout at the orchestra 
to go on playing it for the rest of the evening; on the contrary, however much we may 
like that particular moment of music, we know that its perpetuation would interrupt 
and kill the movement of melody. We understand that the beauty of a symphony is less 
in these musical moments than in the whole movement from beginning to end. If the 
symphony tries to go on too long, if at a certain point the composer exhausts his 
creative ability and tries to carry on just for the sake of filling in the required space of 
time, then we begin to fidget in our chairs, feeling that he has denied the natural 
rhythm, has broken the smooth curve from birth to death and that though a pretense at 
life is being made it is in fact a living death. 


The Problem of Pain 


But by itself this philosophy of “higher sensuality” is inadequate, for life is not like a 
musical masterpiece in certain respects. We may find all of a musical masterpiece 
beautiful; from the sensual point of view life is only beautiful in parts; it has also 
ugliness, pain, and horror, and hence the love for a God who will remove these things 
in the world to come. But this, too, is an avoidance of the problem. For the attitude of 
ordinary religion to both the pleasures and the pains of this world is negative. Pleasure 
is suspected, and in the everlasting life pain is not. 

But we must now ask whether it is not possible that greater heights of spirituality 


may be attained by a positive attitude to pleasure and pain in this world. If this is 
possible, it is clear that religion has no special concern with the life after death and 
that spirituality has nothing whatever to do with retiring from this world. No one can 
deny the existence of a life after death, but that it should be a more spiritual life than 
this one is a wholly unreasonable assumption. If it is true that we are physically 
reincarnated on this earth or another, the whole picture is changed. But if orthodox 
Christianity is right in its belief that we have only one material life, then the next life 
will be psychic because according to our definition there can be no such thing as a 
spiritual world, spirituality being a quality of life and not a kind of existence in the 
same category as the material and the psychic. 

Spirituality is therefore a way of living in whatever world one happens to be, and is 
in no way separable from the actual process of living in that world. In other words, 
there is no difference between religion and ordinary, everyday life; religious ideas and 
practices (which are no more religion itself than any other activities) exist solely to 
promote a positive and loving attitude toward ordinary life and what it stands for, 
namely, God. Unless one happens to be a religious specialist, which is not necessarily 
the same thing as a spiritual person, religious practices are not ends in themselves. 
They are means to a fuller and greater life in this world, involving a positive and 
constructive attitude to pleasure and pain alike, and thus an increasing ability to learn 
happiness and freedom from every possible kind of experience. In this sense, religion is 
union with life; whether that life is this present life of physical form, of thought and 
feeling with brain and soul, or whether it is a future life of purely psychic substance is 
beside the point. These are only different grades of existence; they are not different 
grades of spirituality, for the same spiritual laws apply in every grade of existence, and 
when one has learned union with one of them, one has discovered the secret of union 
with any of them. 

We have suggested that the secret of this union lies in a positive attitude toward the 
world in which we live. To repeat the question which religion has to answer, we want 
to discover how we can learn to be united with life in all its expressions, in living and 
dying, in love and fear, in the outer world of circumstance, and in the inner world of 
thought and feeling, so that in union with it we may find freedom and happiness. To be 
united with life in all its expressions may seem a large demand to make on oneself, for 
those expressions include disease, pain, death, madness, and all the horrors which man 
can devise, wittingly or unwittingly, for his fellow creatures. In fact the “nub” of the 
whole problem is the acceptance of the dark side of life, for this is the very occasion of 
our unhappiness. “Acceptance” may seem a weak word for a positive attitude of love, 
but it is used because the type of love in question is relaxed. It is positive but not 
aggressive; it grows in its own way and is not forced. Therefore we may say that it is 
not enough to tolerate the dark side of life; acceptance in this sense is much more than 
a “let it be” with a resigned shrug of the shoulders. Let us call it “creative acceptance,” 
though because this phrase smacks overmuch of philosophical jargon we will write the 
noun and only remember its qualifying adjective. This is perhaps wise in another way, 
for a truth oddly comes out of a play on words: to be genuine, acceptance must be 
unqualified. 


3. THE WAY OF ACCEPTANCE 


IF recent years men seem to have discovered a new virtue and a new vice in the 


human soul. The virtue is called “accepting life,” and the vice “escaping from life”— 
two phrases whose meaning, from a strictly philosophical point of view, is most 
doubtful. The phrases themselves were apparently brought into popularity and given 
special significance, however vague, by the new movement in psychology which began 
with Freud, being continued by Adler, Jung, and a thousand others. Of course, neither 
the virtue nor the vice is new, and psychologists were not the first to become aware of 
them. Carlyle spoke of them as the “Everlasting Yea” and the “Everlasting Nay,” and 
though modern psychology has perhaps investigated them with a newer and bolder 
thoroughness, they have been known throughout history under a hundred different 
names. 

But, save for some isolated instances, the idea of accepting life as understood in 
modern psychology has been noticeably absent from the philosophy and religion of the 
Western world. For centuries the symbol of Christian moral endeavor has been St. 
Michael and the Dragon—St. Michael standing triumphant on the dying body of a 
villainous clawed and winged serpent, his spear driven into its heart. That serpent was 
a symbol not only of greed, hatred, lust, and ignorance but of all that is involved in the 
trinity of “the world, the flesh, and the devil.” At the risk of quoting something that 
most people know by heart, it is interesting to turn in this connection to the fifth 
chapter of St. Matthew’s Gospel. 


But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, 
turn to him the other also....Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, 
and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies,...That ye may be the children of 
your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and 
sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. 


Christian psychology makes an interesting distinction between the man himself and 
the evil in him. In accordance with the above precepts the man himself, the immortal 
soul, is to be loved. But for that very love and for the eternal salvation of that soul, the 
evil in him is to be fought, hated, and slain without quarter. Yet it is questionable 
whether Jesus had just that idea in mind. Certainly he was referring to what one’s 
reaction should be to evil treatment from other people, but it is possible, even 
probable, that the words “resist not evil” carry more meaning than that. It is likely that 
he told men to love their enemies not only because their enemies were human, but also 
because love is the only wise reaction to evil of any kind, whether human, natural, or 
demonic. 

An earlier myth than that of St. Michael and the Dragon tells of an encounter with a 
monster who for every one head slashed off by the hero’s sword grew seven new heads. 
Indeed, the problem of evil is not quite so straightforward as the accepted technique of 
“morality by battle” would assume. Those desires, feelings, and impulses in the soul 
which are called evil seem to thrive on resistance because resistance belongs to their 


own nature, and, as the Buddha said, “Hatred ceases not by hatred alone; hatred ceases 
but by love.” This seems reasonable enough when applied to persons, but somehow we 
find it difficult to believe that the impulse of hate can only be overcome by loving it. 
But, as with fear, the hate of hatred is only adding one hate to another, and its results 
are as contrary as those of the war which was fought to end war. And yet, if you take a 
gun and shoot a murderer, the result seems to be clear and satisfactory: a dangerous 
person, who might have killed innocent and defenseless people, has ceased to exist. 
Should it not be equally satisfactory when by violence we remove evil from our minds? 
If it thereby ceases to exist why should we question the means used to remove it? 

Today this is not quite so much of a problem as it was to some of our ancestors, for 
now there is a general inclination to regard as evil only the more extreme vices with 
which the hearts of normal men are little troubled. Many things that the Puritan would 
have called deadly sins are now either “natural” or positively “healthy.” But the 
problem still exists because Satan has assumed a new form. He cannot terrify and 
ensnare us so thoroughly as of old with our own “fleshly desires,” so he has shifted the 
emphasis of evil to pain, disease, war, and insecurity—adversaries which we now fight 
and hate as much as our ancestors fought and hated incontinence, gambling, 
drunkenness, and irreligion. In one way Satan has the better of us, because whereas our 
ancestors recognized the evil as something existing inside themselves, something for 
which each man was personally responsible, we tend to externalize it and make nature 
or other people responsible. No one (unless a Christian Scientist) need shame himself 
because of pain and disease; war is the fault, conveniently enough, of Nazis, Fascists, or 
Communists, and insecurity of an economic system. 


The Uses of “Evil” 


Nevertheless, there is now among us a section of opinion which not only recognizes the 
internal origin of all kinds of evil, but which also believes that they are best controlled 
by a pacifist technique. Needless to say, the leaders of this section of opinion are the 
psychologists, for in their view any attempt to root out a thought or desire from the 
mind only results in “repressing” it. Repression in this sense is the forceful damming up 
of a psychological urge, which continues to pile up against the barrier until either the 
barrier breaks or the urge finds another way out. Psychologists do not believe that such 
urges can ever be wholly eliminated because they arise from an aspect of man’s being 
over which his conscious mind and reason have no real control. This aspect—the 
unconscious—is irrational nature in man, which centuries of civilization and moral 
discipline have made him forget or ignore. We know from ordinary, everyday 
experience of nature that natural forces are exceedingly difficult to check; they can 
only be redirected. You cannot simply remove the River Amazon, and if you dam it the 
pressure of water against the dam will constantly increase until the dam breaks or the 
river overflows its banks—unless you provide an outlet. This is true of almost every 
little stream as well as of great waterways. In the same way, everyone who has a 
garden knows that if you want a hedge to grow more vigorously, you must cut it back. 
Of course, if you tear it up by the roots it will certainly stop growing, but the human 
soul is not quite like a flower bed in that respect. 

We cannot exterminate our own evils any more than the earth can throw out its 
weeds. But weeds have not choked all those parts of the earth where nature has been 
left to her own devices; it is only when man interferes with nature that he begins to 
notice the inconvenient persistence of certain lowly plants to which he gives the name 
of “weeds.” Yet even the best-regulated gardens have to have their soil filled with 
manure and other “unpleasant” fertilizers, and what is true of the soil is also true of the 
human mind. Where the roses of virtue bloom in their glory there will certainly be a 


bed of manure; it will be kept in its place, to be sure, but it will certainly be there. This 
is not said in cynicism, because the “filthiness” of the soil in no way detracts from the 
beauty of the flower except in the imaginations of those who would like to see roses 
blooming in midair, whose oversensitive tastes are revolted by the realities of nature. 
However, the expert and enthusiastic gardener finds something almost pleasurable in 
manure; certainly he does not smear it all over the plants, but a soil well mixed with it 
he calls “good” and “rich”—not “foul” and “putrid.” 

This gives us a clue to what is meant by the acceptance of evil, which was never 
intended to be an excuse for unbridled license. It means that what morality calls evil is 
a natural urge that no one need fear if it is kept in its proper place—in the ground. In 
other words, if you find yourself thinking that you want to murder someone, to commit 
adultery, to rob a bank, or to beat your wife, don’t try to force the thought away. 
Forcing the thought away increases its power until it demands expression in action. On 
the other hand, there are times when people become obsessed with such thoughts, even 
if they have never tried to resist them. The thought takes hold of their imaginations 
with an apparently autonomous and irresistible power and drives them to the deed; 
this is precisely what the moralist fears. Yet Berdyaev writes in his Freedom and the 
Spirit:1 


Our attitude towards evil must be free from hatred, and has itself need to be enlightened in 
character....Satan rejoices when he succeeds in inspiring us with diabolical feelings to himself. It 
is he who wins when his own methods are turned against himself....A continual denunciation of 
evil and its agents merely encourages its growth in the world—a truth sufficiently revealed in the 
Gospels, but to which we remain persistently blind. 


These words are significant from a philosopher of the Catholic Church. For those 
Christians who have really studied the New Testament know as well as psychologists 
that evil is not overcome by violence; but apparently those who would inculcate 
morality by forceful, legalistic discipline have never troubled to read St. Paul. If there is 
any doubt about the words of Christ, there can be no two opinions about the following 
passage from the Epistle to the Romans:2 


For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins, which were by the law, did work in our 
members to bring forth fruit unto death....What shall we say then? Is the law sin? God forbid, 
Nay, I had not known sin, but by the law: for I had not known lust except the law had said, Thou 
shalt not covet. But sin, taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner of 
concupiscence. For without the law sin was dead. For I was alive without the law once: but when 
the commandment came, sin revived, and I died. 


What was St. Paul’s alternative? This is given perhaps most clearly in the Epistle to 
the Galatians. In his own mystical terminology it is that Christ must be born in the 
human soul so that the will of Christ shall supplant human will. Laws and rules will 
then be irrelevant because whatever the individual desires to do will be the desire of 
Christ. We have to discover just exactly what this means, but it will immediately be 
clear that as Christ means love it will involve a new attitude to evil.3 


St. Michael as the Dragon 


But there is an important point which is often overlooked. We described a certain 
attitude to evil as pacifistic, and a pacifist is often one who hates the hating of hatred— 
three hates instead of one!—a fact which explains the frequently violent intolerance of 
peace propagandists. For St. Michael is as much an integral part of the human soul as 
evil itself, and unless the St. Michael urge of impatience with evil and pain is accepted 
along with evil and pain, the acceptance is only one-sided.4 This is indeed a point on 
which the new psychology has to be careful lest in becoming reconciled with one devil 


it create another in the form of St. Michael himself. The phrase “acceptance of life” 
means precisely the acceptance of the whole of life, and should certainly not be 
understood as mere spiritual laissez faire. Thus the spiritual ideal is more than “a wise 
passiveness”—a partial attitude that excludes force and effort, that accepts old evils but 
creates a new one that is almost worse than the old because it is more subtle and 
complex. 

The difficulty of the whole psychology of acceptance is that unless it is understood 
in the right way it leads into a mental labyrinth whose fine nuances take us further and 
further from realities. There is no doubt that the technique of relaxation or acceptance 
“works” where an aggressive attitude would only create further trouble. Everyone who 
has practiced jujutsu has had a convincing, physical demonstration of the way in which 
force can be overcome by yielding, by arranging things so that his opponent defeats 
himself by his own effort. But there are two kinds of acceptance, one which is applied 
to particular things and the other which is applied to life in general. In exactly the 
same way there are the two kinds of happiness, one which is occasioned by particular 
things or events, and the other by the whole of life. The first type of acceptance is a 
question of technique and the second of spirituality; there are specific ways to achieve 
the former, but the latter is strangely elusive. 


Acceptance, Partial and Total 


Jujutsu is an example of the first kind of acceptance, being simply the exchange of one 
technique of fighting for another. It is therefore an exclusive technique just as the 
technique of psychology is exclusive in that it creates a new “evil” called escapism as 
the opposite of acceptance. Thus we have these two psychological states called 
“acceptance of life” and “escape from life,” but when they are opposed to one another 
in this way it is clear that “life” can have only a limited meaning. It means particular 
things in life—specific evils, desires, events, and situations, because when life is 
understood in its widest sense there is no possibility of escape from it. Everything is 
life, even escapism, and if the whole of life is to be accepted the desire to escape must 
not be made into a new devil. Therefore partial acceptance is what Oriental 
philosophers would describe as a dualistic as distinct from a nondualistic state of mind. 
For according to Hindu and Buddhist teachings the enlightened man attains a state of 
mind that is one with Brahman or Tathata,s the Reality of life which includes all 
possible things and apart from which nothing exists. This state is nondualistic because 
it is union with something to which nothing can be opposed, and in this sense it is 
complete and absolute acceptance of life, philosophically described as union with the 
principle that is the meaning, essence, and raison d’étre of the universe. In this state 
man is supremely happy because even though he may be involved in a conflict with 
pain and evil, even though he may feel the very human emotions of fear, anger, and 
love, he lives his life with a wholeheartedness and abandon born of the understanding 
that all things are fundamentally acceptable. For to him there is meaning and divinity 
in every aspect of the universe and in both the greatness and the littleness, the love and 
the fear, the joy and the sorrow, and the content and discontent of the human soul. For 
the Upanishads say:6 


The Soul is Brahman, the Eternal. It is made of consciousness and mind: It is made of life and 
vision. It is made of the earth and the waters: It is made of air and space. It is made of light and 
darkness: It is made of desire and peace. It is made of anger and love: It is made of virtue and 
vice. It is made of all that is near: It is made of all that is afar. It is made of all. 


But this total acceptance and love of life eludes us because in striving to attain it we 
are constantly at war with that which appears to go against it. The reason is that in 


trying to be united with life we are striving to achieve something that already exists; 
the result is that our very efforts to achieve it are hindrances in that they encourage the 
feeling that we are divorced from life and have to make ourselves one with it. But we 
cannot realize all at once that this union already exists because centuries of civilization 
have orphaned us from nature both in and around us, making us feel that we are self- 
contained, independent, and autonomous egos. The primitive does not feel this to the 
same extent, having what Levy-Briihl described as a participation mystique with nature, 
which is to say a union of which he is not fully aware because he has never been 
conscious of what it means to be separated from nature. That feeling of separation must 
come before union can have its full meaning for us. Thus in the parable of the Prodigal 
Son it is the returning prodigal for whom the fatted calf is slain—not the faithful son 
who had always stayed at home and had never been separated from his father. 

Thus if man is to realize again his fundamental unity and harmony with life he must 
proceed by the roundabout way of trying to get that which he already has until he 
convinces himself of his own folly. For it is only by trying to accept life as a whole that 
we can make ourselves aware that there was never any real need to try, and that 
spirituality is in fact a matter of “becoming what we are.” In trying actively to accept 
life we find that this is successful only in regard to particular things; we reconcile 
ourselves to the dark side of life only to find that we are not reconciled to our desire to 
escape from it, and this desire in itself is an aspect of that dark side. By this method 
something is always left out of the whole, with the result that our acceptance and 
therefore our happiness is still dependent on particular things, and we are just as far 
from including the whole as ever. For this reason a large number of psychological 
patients are never really cured. Specific neuroses of the more obvious kind are certainly 
overcome, but except in some rare cases the great happiness remains undiscovered. 
This is not at all surprising, for not only is total acceptance the most elusive thing in 
the world; it is also something against which intellect and reason rebel. 


The Three Stages of Morality 


It is argued that if the highest spirituality is simply a matter of accepting life as it is, 
and if this is something which we already have but do not realize, then its attainment 
will make no difference whatever to our lives. It may possibly make us inwardly happy, 
but if this is not expressed outwardly in different and better thoughts and actions, it is 
of no real value. Moreover, the idea of a supreme Reality or God that is manifested 
alike by all forms of life is amoral and dangerous, and is at variance with the important 
Christian doctrine that the world order is basically a moral order. But this view of 
spirituality is only inconsistent with a moral world order insofar as the morality in 
question is the invention of human intellect and wishful thinking. If, however, the 
foundation of morality is “to love your neighbor as yourself,” it cannot be said that 
total acceptance is inconsistent with a moral world order. For it involves acceptance of 
the virtues and vices of other people as much as of one’s own. More than this, although 
the idea suggests amorality, it seldom works out this way in practice—a paradox that 
will subsequently be clear when we consider total acceptance in detail.7 

But it should be noted that there is an important difference between those whose 
acceptance is partial and those whose acceptance is total. The ordinary moralist feels 
that he is not free to be anything but moral; in other words, he feels compelled to be 
moral—for a variety of reasons. It may be that he fears the wrath of God or the pangs 
of conscience; it may be that he has an egotistic sense of duty, thinking that his own 
and other people’s natures ought to conform with the dictates of his reason. But he is 
slavishly moral, and he fights his “lower nature” because he is either too afraid or too 
proud to do anything else. As to those whose acceptance is partial, they do not feel free 


to fight their lower nature; they think that they ought to accept it because anything 
else would be escaping from life. The result is that they make a compulsive discipline 
out of psychological relaxation and so “exchange King Stork for King Log.” But to 
accept totally is to be free to be moral, and he who follows a moral law in freedom does 
not suffer the consequences of repression in the same way as the slavish moralist. Part 
of the secret of this freedom is that he knows he is also free to be immoral, for St. 
Michael and the Dragon are given equal recognition. In practice, however, free people 
are seldom immoral because the Dragon no longer impresses them with his forbidden 
glamour; they find preoccupation with evil merely tedious for reasons which will later 
be apparent. To quote Berdyaev again:8 


The exaggeration of the power of temptation can hardly be a positive means of overcoming it.... 
As long as in our struggle against evil we regard it as strong and enticing, and at the same time 
both awe-inspiring and forbidden, we are not going to achieve any radical or final victory over 
it...it will remain invincible as long as it is so regarded....The attraction of evil is a lie and an 
illusion....Only the knowledge of its absolute emptiness and tedium can give us the victory over 
it. 


Christianity and Oriental Religion 


In Christianity the idea of total acceptance is somewhat hidden; it is only spoken of 
directly in some of the writings of the mystics, but it is soon discovered when we begin 
to make a thorough search into the symbolism of Christian doctrine. In the religions of 
the East, however, it is given particular emphasis; in fact, it is the fundamental 
principle of Vedantist, Buddhist, and Taoist philosophy. The chief difference between 
these Eastern religions and Christianity is that, on the surface at least, Christianity is 
concerned with belief in doctrines whereas the Eastern religions are concerned with 
states of mind. That is to say, Christianity tends to be a theological and ethical religion, 
while Buddhism, Taoism, and Vedanta are psychological religions. In Christianity the 
supreme attainment is reserved for the life after death and it is seldom described in 
more definite terms than “the bliss of the soul absorbed in the eternal contemplation of 
God.” Some Christians believe that the contemplation of God can be achieved while on 
earth, but to most people such phrases convey nothing more than a form of deep 
introspection in which the soul is confronted with a vision of boundless light and 
permeated by a feeling of infinite love. But how is this condition attained? Most 
Christian mystics agree that its intense forms arise spontaneously, at rare intervals, and 
without any apparent cause. 

Eastern religions have this condition of the soul as their very center and raison 
d’étre, although they do not describe it in quite the same terms as do the Christian 
mystics. For them it is not just an unusual phenomenon which happens to occur among 
some strangely gifted people called mystics; it is the very lifeblood of religion, and 
comes before doctrines, ethics, or any other aspect of the religious life. The avowed 
object of Vedanta, Buddhism, and Taoism alike is that man, while living on this earth, 
may attain a state of mind which is indicated as the understanding of his eternal union 
and identity with the “Self of the universe.” This is the object of Christianity also, but it 
is not stressed, its psychology is inadequately studied and the many possible ways to its 
attainment are only vaguely described. In the ordinary way the aim of Christianity is to 
make the person of Jesus as described in the Gospels as vivid a reality as possible so 
that the believer may love, follow, and serve Him as if He were a real friend standing 
always at his side. The psychology of Christian faith is therefore one of the personal 
devotion of the disciple to his Lord and Master, and this expands into mysticism when 
the believer feels a relation of love to the cosmic as well as to the personal Christ. In 
the ordinary way it is impossible to separate the psychology of Christian religion from 


a specific personality and specific beliefs concerning him, and thus it is not always easy 
for the Christian to recognize that a similar, if not identical, state of soul can be 
attained by one who has never heard of Jesus of Nazareth. 

This in no way invalidates the Christian experience. It only means that in 
Christianity there is no clear division between the psychology of spiritual experience 
and religious doctrine and history. The Christian belief that only one historical 
religious tradition is valid for man is a clear enough sign of this confusion; so much 
emphasis is placed on history and doctrine as the essentials of salvation that a 
psychology of religion independent of the person of Christ is not understood. In the 
three great Eastern religions this confusion does not exist, and from them we are able 
to form a much clearer idea of the essentials of religion, of the state of mind called 
spiritual experience as distinct from the “local color” of particular historical events. For 
if indeed this experience is attainable outside the Christian faith, apart from devotion 
to a particular personality, and even without reference to theology (as in certain forms 
of Buddhism), then Eastern religions have two important contributions to make to 
Western civilization. Firstly, they show the principles of an approach to spiritual 
experience on a purely psychological basis to those who have lost faith in the historical 
and theological tenets of Christianity; secondly, Christianity itself can be enriched and 
expanded in this sadly underdeveloped aspect of its experience, and perhaps led to a 
higher understanding of spirituality than even many of its own mystics have attained.9 


Eastern Wisdom and Modern Man 


The wisdom of the East is something from which we can learn but which we should be 
careful not to imitate. It is unwise for a Westerner to become “converted” to Buddhism 
or Hinduism as missionaries expect the “heathen” to become converted to Christianity, 
for there are aspects of the Eastern religions which would be decidedly harmful for us 
to adopt. We cannot escape our roots and traditions, which are different from those of 
Asiatic peoples, for we have a different function or Dharma to fulfill in the world. We 
have already said that acceptance is not necessarily a matter of mental or physical 
passivity, but we find a certain kind of passivity insisted upon in all the great religions 
of the East, for the Asiatic attitude to life has a decided element of quietism and laissez 
faire—an attitude which is encouraged by their religious technique. For them this 
attitude is right, but European and American psychology is active and assertive and it 
would not be right for us to deny this active urge. Therefore it is important for us in 
our study of Oriental religion to distinguish between principles and their application; 
the principles have universal value, but, generally speaking, their application has been 
worked out to accord only with Asiatic peoples and conditions. We have to discover 
our own way of applying those principles, and though in the end this may lead us to 
something like Oriental passivity it would be the greatest mistake to begin by imitating 
it. 

The outward forms of this passivity are seen in yoga meditation, a pacifism (ahimsa) 
extended even to animals, a total disregard for material progress and social service, and 
a lofty detachment from material concerns in general. It is often that in the applied 
philosophy of the East the world of form and action is illusion (maya) and does not 
merit the wise man’s attention; but this is applied philosophy and not a fundamental 
principle, according to which the universe cannot be absolutely divided into illusion 
and reality, seeing that the ultimate is nondual and includes all opposites. It is 
impossible for anyone not inured to it by tradition to regard the world as illusion by a 
mere decision of the will, for imitation of other people’s ideas is as false as imitation of 
their behavior. But Oriental introversion and Occidental extraversion are alike essential 
and equally important human functions, the one without the other being as sterile as 


man without woman. To grasp the essentials of Oriental wisdom we do not have to 
imitate its externals; it is neither necessary nor wise, as some theosophists and would- 
be Buddhists and yogis imagine, for us to go and sit at the feet of masters in India or 
Tibet, to assume the life of the homeless sanyassin, and to adopt the technique of 
Eastern meditation in order to attain spiritual freedom. Having attained that freedom, 
however, there is no reason why one should not study Eastern meditation as much as 
one pleases if one happens to be interested in it. But to look for actual salvation, 
happiness, or enlightenment in it is asking for trouble because it is almost impossible to 
avoid both imitation in itself and imitation of something that belongs to an alien 
tradition.10 


The Danger of the Inflated Ego 


Anyone who has studied either Hinduism, Buddhism, or Taoism will know that the 
object of these religions is to attain a realization of the union between man and the Self 
of the universe. In their scriptures they describe various psychological techniques by 
which this may be achieved, and many Western people who approach them from a 
practical standpoint simply follow the directions as given. The result is not very happy. 
Such people do not appreciate the vast difference between the psychology of modern 
man and the psychology of the ancient Chinese or Hindus. Their scriptures state very 
plainly that the true Self of man is God. Tat tvam asi is the Hindu formula, meaning, 
“That [Brahman or God] art thou.” This is also the theme of several forms of Western 
mysticism; in the words of Eckhart, “While I am here, He is in me; after this life, 1 am 
in Him. All things are therefore possible to me, if I am united to Him Who can do all 
things.” And again, “I have a capacity in my soul for taking in God entirely. I am sure 
as I live that nothing is so near to me as God. God is nearer to me than I am to myself; 
my existence depends on the nearness and presence of God. He is also near things of 
wood and stone, but they know it not. If a piece of wood became as aware of the 
nearness of God as an archangel is, the piece of wood would be as happy as an 
archangel.”11 But for the modern Westerner there is a danger in this knowledge; 
reading and practicing such ideas he is apt to make a God of his ego rather than an ego 
of his God. 

Until modern man has truly understood the meaning of his apparent divorce from 
nature, his acute sense of separateness and self-consciousness, he cannot possibly 
understand the teaching that his true Self is God. If he makes any attempt to impose 
this teaching upon himself, he is more than likely to suffer a spiritual inflation, a 
blowing up of his ego to the size of God, which is the very thing that Oriental 
philosophy does not desire. This happens because the unfortunate victim has not first 
accepted the division and the conflict. He has not allowed God to be an ego; he has 
denied the purpose of nature in evolving the sense of separateness, and until he has 
accepted it all his attempts to resolve the problem will be in terms of egoism. In other 
words, unless you accept all that the loneliness and isolation of self-consciousness 
involves every attempt to get away from it will be futile. The ego cannot abolish the 
pain of conflict between itself and the universe simply by trying to identify itself with 
the essence of that universe which is God. Paradoxically, it must realize its union with 
God by being an ego, for the very reason that that is what God Himself is doing in that 
particular human being. In fact modern man’s path to this wisdom is roundabout and 
not direct, and he must always bear in mind the saying, “Before you can unite, you 
must first divide.” 


The Importance of Gods and Demons 


There is still another reason why the wisdom of the East cannot be imitated. It has to 
be understood against the background of popular belief among Asiatic peoples. The 
wisdom of the East was taught among men who firmly believed in the existence of 
innumerable gods, demons, elemental spirits, and angels, who were familiar with all 
the potentialities of the human soul both for good and for evil, and whose personal and 
social lives were hardly regulated, even in theory, by what we should call reason. We, 
on the other hand, do not have anything to do with gods and demons; we do not 
believe that men’s souls can be possessed by autonomous devils except in certain cases 
of lunacy, to which we give the relatively harmless name of “obsession.” We think we 
are masters of our minds (or should be) and that such beliefs are outworn superstitions. 
In the universe of science everything happens for a reason and no room is left for the 
gods to interfere. 

What is the result? Simply that the demons, having been driven out of the external 
universe, return with a vengeance in our own souls and behave quite as irrationally. 
For in proving to ourselves that the universe is wholly explainable in terms of reason 
and logic, we ourselves become anything but reasonable and logical. We starve in the 
midst of unparalleled abundance and wage diabolical wars when everybody knows that 
nothing can be gained from war, when for years everyone has (consciously) been trying 
to avoid war—yes, even those who thought they could “get away with murder” without 
starting a war. Of course, the old-fashioned psychologist could give a perfectly logical 
and reasoned explanation of human irrationality, but we are not speaking in those 
terms. We are looking at the situation from a purely empirical standpoint and noting 
that the more men try to dominate life by conscious reason, the more irrational they 
become. We are not saying for a moment that the logical explanation of the universe 
given by science is untrue; we are simply noting with interest that such an explanation 
and such an age exist together, that in a time when science is unusually logical, men 
are unusually stupid. We are therefore entitled to assume a connection between these 
two phenomena, for the psychologist is not interested in the truth or untruth of 
scientific theories; he wants to know why those theories are acceptable to modern man. 
He is also rude enough to suggest that people believe in them not because the theories 
or the people are logical, but because the people want to be logical. 

In other words, the reasons for belief in a logical universe would have to be 
invented if they were not true. As Bernard Shaw says, belief is a matter of taste and is 
quite unaffected by the objective truth or falsity of that belief. Our belief in a logical 
universe is a matter of taste, even though it may be objectively true; we say we are 
reasonable men, but we accept the pronouncements of our scientists with a faith quite 
as groveling as the faith of peasants who believe unquestioningly those who say they 
have seen gods and demons. How many people could prove such common beliefs as 
that the earth revolves round the sun or that atoms are composed of electrons and 
protons? 

But who are the gods and demons whom we have tried to cast out of our lives? 
They are the forces of that unknown, inner universe of the unconscious, though today 
we give them the unromantic names of impulses, depressions, phobias, manias, and 
other constant reminders of the fact that our inner lives are not so much under our 
control or even under our surveillance as we should like to think. These forces are 
projected by other races than our own into deific and demonic forms which play an 
important part in everyday life, and those who were instructed in many of the ancient 
religions had to recognize the existence of those beings within themselves. But we are 
slow in recognizing them at all, much less in ourselves, and from that point of view we 
are in a worse psychological position even than the “heathen Chinese” who really 
believes in their external existence. For whether or not the “heathen Chinese” is aware 
of their true nature, he is nevertheless aware of irrational forces at work in his life, and 


even that much awareness gives him a certain release from them. Naturally there is a 
considerable difference in Asiatic lands between religion for serious students and 
religion for the masses, but in the former the gods and demons are still preserved 
though there is a difference of understanding. Western students of Oriental religion 
should never neglect the study of its iconography, especially in Hinduism and 
Buddhism, for there it will be found that almost every god, Buddha, and Bodhisattva 
has his demonic counterpart. The student may be surprised to find, however, that these 
demonic counterparts are not regarded as evil in our sense of the word although the 
forms in which they are painted and carved are diabolic in the extreme. 

I have before me a Japanese painting of the Buddhist divinity Nilambara-Vajrapani 
which might easily be a portrait of that monster the Dweller on the Threshold of 
Western mysticism.12 His body is black and he wears a tigerskin adorned with skulls; 
he has some eighteen heads wreathed with serpents, and upon each are three glaring 
eyes above snarling lips and bared teeth; serpents coil around each of his twenty-eight 
arms and in his hands he grasps swords and thunderbolts while other monsters grovel 
beneath his feet. Behind the whole figure is an aureole of writhing vermilion flame. In 
all his outward aspects he might be taken for an Oriental version of Satan himself, until 
one discovers that he is one of the guardians of the Law of Buddhism. Going to even 
more ancient sources one discovers the same idea, for Iamblichos, writing on the 
Egyptian Mysteries, says:13 


The race of demons...causes the otherwise invisible goodness of the gods to become visible in 
operation, becoming itself both assimilated to it, and accomplishing perfect works that are like it. 
For then what was before unutterable in it is made capable of being uttered. 


We, too, have a popular but perhaps neglected saying that God created the Devil for 
those who could not learn by love, and it cannot be by mere chance that his name is 
Lucifer, the light-bearer. But somehow the demons became identified with evil, and 
this seems to have been part of the necessary but repressive mission of Christianity. 
Christianity made the demonic light-bearer evil, but our modern age does not even 
allow the demons to be evil; it does not allow them to exist at all, and it is noticeable 
that in most forms of modernistic Christianity the subject of the Devil is either tactfully 
avoided or explained away. 


The Conscious Relationship 


From this it seems that before we can approach Oriental wisdom in any way 
resembling the Asiatic approach we must first become conscious again of the various 
demonic powers which our civilization has relegated to the unconscious. Furthermore, 
we shall have to learn the actual beneficence of those powers. They represent the dark 
side of life, being the earthy aspects of divine activity—the deep urges of the physical 
body, the storms of emotion, the principle of death and destruction, and all those 
irrational passions that the cult of reason will not tolerate. This is not to be confused, 
however, with such modern phenomena as Nazi psychology with its cult of blood and 
soil. Such cults are rationalization and logic run wild and denote possession by those 
powers, not in any sense a conscious relationship with them, for Nazi philosophy also 
includes the complete rationalization and regimentation of social and personal life—a 
very suggestive combination, and a warning. 

Thus at the present time modern man is unconsciously identified with his gods and 
demons, and while they remain unknown he cannot arrive at any conscious 
relationship to them; he cannot accept his “inner universe” until he knows what kind of 
things he has to accept, until he can see it objectively and break up the identification. 
In this present state the blind adoption of Oriental mysticism would simply perpetuate 


and aggravate his condition; in trying to identify himself with God he would become 
more and more possessed by the unconscious powers of his inner universe. This is not 
what Oriental mysticism means by “identification” with God, which is not unconscious 
possession but the result of fulfilling a conscious relationship between the ego and its 
inner and outer universes. In twentieth-century civilization such a relationship is rare 
indeed. 

Union through conscious relationship is illustrated in the accompanying diagram. 
The first circle represents the primitive, unconsciously lived by Nature, and with only a 
limited self-consciousness. The second represents modern, Western man, still 
unconsciously driven yet at the same time aware of the difference between himself and 
the natural, external universe. If he flees from that opposition along the line marked 
“escape” he simply continues to be driven and so possessed by unconscious forces. The 
third represents the principle of conscious union, of approaching God or Nature 
through accepting the difference between that and one’s own ego—or more correctly 
by accepting the tension caused by an apparent difference. The full union described in 
Oriental philosophy would be represented by a continuation of the third circle to the 
point where man coincides with Nature; this would be the same symbol as the familiar 
Oriental motif of the serpent biting its tail. Note that the first two are not complete 
circles; the circle is only completed when the opposition is accepted, and this 
completion is a symbol of the feeling of harmony in the midst of opposition. 


1. The Primitive 


| 
168 
1% 
Iga 
es 
io > 
a9 
2 
if 


Psychology versus Metaphysics 


If this problem has to be approached in the way described above, it will be asked 
whether Oriental philosophy has any value at all for us at the present time. We have 
already drawn attention to a certain “trickiness” in the problem of acceptance; it is 
precisely in dealing with this that the East is of value to us. We must learn, however, to 
concentrate on the psychology of Oriental religion as distinct from its metaphysics. In 


fact, it is very doubtful whether its metaphysics was ever intended to be taken as 
metaphysics. For Oriental philosophy is emphatically not philosophy in the Western 
sense of the word, having scarcely any relation to the intellectual search for objective, 
metaphysical truth which we find in Descartes, Berkeley, Hegel, and other Western 
metaphysicians. 

Thus the Oriental doctrine of the union of man and Brahman is the symbol of a 
psychological experience rather than a statement of objective fact, and it is almost 
impossible to study Oriental religion with profit unless one is always careful to inquire 
into the experience behind the doctrine. But of all the psychological techniques in 
Oriental religion the most important is that of acceptance (in Chinese wu-wei)—a 
technique which may be applied in a number of different directions. It is not for us to 
apply it exactly in their way; our method, as we have seen, has to be somewhat 
indirect, for we have to apply this technique to the opposition between ego and 
universe. Yet in so doing we shall arrive at the same result, though by a different route, 
and discover that wu-wei is more than technique; it is an actual spiritual experience, 
absolutely independent of metaphysics. Thus for the Oriental and Westerner both the 
experience and the technique are the same, but the approach, the direction in which 
the technique is applied, differs in each instance. Generally speaking, I would say that 
whereas the former accepts the universe, the latter must accept the ego and the conflict 
involved. But, as has been shown, this amounts in the end to the same thing because it 
will eventually be realized that the ego and its conflict are necessary aspects of 
universal life, of the Tao, Brahman, God, or whatever the ultimate reality may be 
called. 

One exception must be made to this statement. It is important to remember Jung’s 
warning that there are still among us people whose sense of self-consciousness is not 
yet fully developed, who still share the primitive’s participation mystique with nature. 
They are easily overwhelmed by unconscious forces, as in obsessions, and sometimes 
find it hard to distinguish between fantasy and real life. Such people must first 
experience the independence of the ego; otherwise they will find themselves hopelessly 
overwhelmed in any attempt to deal with their “gods and demons” by acceptance. 14 

In conclusion we may say that for Western man acceptance means this: “Live and 
let live.” We see the root of our unhappiness in the war between ourselves and the 
universe, a war in which we so often feel tiny, impotent, and alone. The forces of 
nature, death, change, and unreasoning passion, seem to be against our most cherished 
longings, and by no trick or deceit can we get rid of our helpless solitude or of the 
battle between desire and destiny. Acceptance for us is therefore to say, “Let it live” to 
the whole situation, to the ego and its desires, to life and destiny, and also to the war 
between them. This acceptance is made in the knowledge that the conflict and all its 
parties are aspects of a single living activity which employs a seeming discord to 
achieve the understanding of a harmony which in fact has never been and never can be 
broken. This is to fulfill the purpose of that conflict, a purpose which is denied when 
the ego strives to arrogate to itself identity with God—an identity achieved simply in 
being an ego and in being true to its self-conscious nature. This, however, cannot 
possibly be understood in any deep sense until the situation as it is now has been 
accepted, whereat it will develop in its own natural course into a new and different 
situation. But it is also necessary to understand the conflict, to become aware of its 
existence and character not only in external circumstances but also in the soul of man, 
and of the latter we are very ignorant. Therefore it seems wise to consult the wisdom of 
the East both in accepting and in understanding, in finding an appropriate way of life 
which, for reasons that will be apparent, psychology alone does not as yet supply. 


4. THE RETURN OF THE GODS 


Ties: powers of the human soul which the ancients called gods and demons are not 


deprived of their magic by changing their names. For they retain the same godlike and 
demonic characteristics, even though in fact they may not wear halos and wings or 
horns and spiked tails. In calling them gods and demons the ancients may have been 
fanciful, but at least they were aware of an important fact which we too often overlook, 
namely, that those powers have a life of their own which is altogether independent of 
our conscious desire and will. This is what we are so apt to forget when trying to deal 
with our moods—when, for instance, a powerful depression lays hold on us or when we 
are seized with a sudden, violent hatred. Such phenomena are not peculiar to 
individuals; whole nations or continents may be possessed in the same way, and a 
people may be led into war or other forms of political madness despite the strongest 
protests of conscious reason. Nowadays we say that such people have lost their self- 
control; the ancients would have said that they were possessed by devils, and between 
those two diagnoses there is all the difference in the world. For the former implies no 
more than a mere failure of conscious will, whereas the latter recognizes that many 
more factors than conscious will have to be taken into account in the ordering of 
human life. 


The Language of the Unconscious 


But, as we have already seen, there is a tendency among us to recognize our gods and 
demons again, a tendency represented by the growing popularity of the psychology of 
the unconscious. This new science has not only revealed the unconscious origin of such 
familiar states of mind as moods and phobias; it has also revealed gods and demons 
almost totally lost to consciousness, as for instance the Freudian Oedipus Complex and 
even more remote powers described by Jung as the anima, the animus, the Shadow, the 
Terrible Mother, the Wise Old Man, and the Mana-Personality.1 Their very names call 
to mind the myths and legends of the ancient world. These “unconscious contents” are 
various aspects of what we have described as man’s unknown, inner universe, and the 
aim of psychological science is to bring them to consciousness in order that we may 
define a conscious relationship to them instead of being their unwitting instruments. 
This science originally came into being to assist in the cure of psychotic and neurotic 
conditions, but subsequently many of its followers have seen in it the possibilities of 
greater development of personality for so-called “normal” people as well. In cases of 
lunacy and psychosis we see the conscious ego completely overwhelmed by forces that 
enter but slightly or not at all into normal consciousness. At any moment a sudden 
shock may sweep the ego off its feet and leave any one of us a prey to mental 
mechanisms which in the ordinary way the ego keeps in their place. For it seems as if 
the ego were the organizing faculty whose function is to “make sense” out of a 
collection of chaotic powers. But when it is unaware of those powers it is liable at any 
time to surreptitious invasion or even to “open aggression,” and at the same time there 


is always the dim awareness of conflict between ourselves and our demons. This 
awareness becomes more acute when we are in the throes of a mood, but for the sake 
of comfort we usually do our best to banish the sense of conflict and to forget that our 
souls contain subversive elements which must constantly be kept in order. 

But all attempts to ignore the internal conflict lead us into trouble. This may be 
clarified by a simple illustration, typical of many cases that come to the psychologist’s 
attention. A man finds himself unaccountably unhappy in his marriage and goes to a 
psychologist for advice. The psychologist asks him many questions about the situation, 
and discovers that the man is upset because there is a mysterious “something” which 
his wife fails to give him. Stimulated by discussing the problem with another person, 
he dreams the following night that he comes home from his office to find that his wife 
is out. He thinks he will take a bath while waiting for her to come back for dinner, but 
on going to the bathroom he finds the tub already filled with dirty, soapy water. He is 
just about to pull out the stopper when an octopus emerges and wraps its tentacles 
around his wrist. He wakes in terror. Questioned by the psychologist he remarks that 
his wife is often in the habit of taking a bath at the time he returns from work. Instead 
of her he finds the octopus, but does that mean that his marriage is unhappy because 
his wife is a vampire, is just out for his money, and will discard him when she has 
sucked him dry? On the contrary, the symbols of the unconscious which we meet in 
dreams refer to one’s own attitude to the situation, and in any case the man does not 
feel this to be at all true of his wife. The psychologist then asks him about his attitude 
to his mother, and discovers that he was very much attached to her and moreover that 
she was in the habit of protecting him as much as possible from responsibility—a 
protection which he secretly enjoyed. In fact, with his own connivance, his mother did 
not allow him to live his own life. Thereupon the psychologist suggests that the octopus 
represents his mother who virtually sucked away his manly virility, his capacity to face 
the world on his own feet. But why does he find the octopus where he would ordinarily 
find his wife? Perhaps this gives a clue to the mysterious “something” which he finds 
lacking in her, which he desires so much and the absence of which is making his 
marriage unhappy. Indeed it does, for the trouble is that his wife will not mother him 
and relieve him of responsibilities. He married her under the unconscious delusion that 
she would take the place of his mother, and the dream shows him his desire to return 
to maternal protection in the form of an octopus. 

Now the octopus, the spider, and the crab are familiar symbols for the “Terrible 
Mother,” which is the name given to an irrational desire to regress to an infantile 
condition, to return to the protected irresponsibility of the infant or to the comfortable, 
sleepy darkness of the womb. The desire appears under these terrible symbols because, 
from the conscious standpoint, it is a demon which denies the power of the ego and the 
rational ideal of progress to greater and greater heights of independence and self- 
direction. Thus there is always a conflict between the ego and this regressive desire, 
this principle of inertia and backsliding which the Hindus called tamas. If that conflict 
is repressed and left unrecognized, the desire tricks the ego into situations where the 
conflict will be continued and intensified in various disguises. Thus, in the above case, 
the conflict between husband and wife was the continuation of an unresolved conflict 
between the husband and his desire to slip back to infantile irresponsibility, to the 
protection of the mother. 


Neurosis and Genius 


That very desire may often lie behind religious feeling when people seek a substitute 
for the mother in God or in the Mother Church, but it would be absurd to suggest that 
such desires are the raison d’étre of religion. The suggestion is rather that genuine 


religion is difficult to achieve until these conflicts have been recognized, for religion 
becomes too easily an escape from the awareness of the war in the soul. This is why it 
is most important for us to be careful when our culture is being invaded by new and 
captivating religious forms from the Orient. If we are to make proper use of those 
forms it is essential that we use them for their correct purpose—to resolve the conflict, 
not to hide it—and this is more important than ever in an age which is particularly 
blind to its gods and demons. 

But now as to practical ways and means, how is this recognition of the inner conflict 
to be achieved, and how is it to be resolved? Should we turn from priest and 
philosopher to doctor and psychologist, should we watch our dreams and fantasies, 
learn the meaning of their symbols, and become intimately acquainted with the 
unconscious universe? In the present state of psychological practice I would hesitate 
very much to advise any great reliance upon its technique except in cases of a specific 
psychological difficulty or an insupportable neurosis. In dealing with such matters it is 
of the greatest use, but beyond this its technique is at present somewhat inadequate 
and unless supported by other factors, such as religion, might well do more harm than 
good. In any case, no competent psychologist will allow his patient to “indulge” in 
analysis as a substitute for actual life. 

From one point of view it is true that almost everyone suffers from some form of 
neurosis, however mild, but the cure of neurosis by itself is not generally desirable 
unless one of two other conditions is involved: first, that the neurosis is unbearable, 
and second, that the psychology can supply a source of creative energy to take the 
place of the neurosis. In fact, we have neurosis to thank for some of the greatest human 
genius, for the very motive of escape from conflict has provided a driving force for 
artistic and scientific accomplishments very worthwhile in themselves, and possession 
by unconscious forces is the secret of many a creative genius. It may indeed be possible 
to attribute the masterpieces of Leonardo da Vinci2 to unresolved problems of infantile 
sexuality, and maybe the sonnets of Shakespeare were the work of a homosexual. It is 
also possible that if they had been psychoanalyzed their names would never have been 
remembered, and some of us would prefer all manner of secret vices to cultural and 
spiritual impotence. Almost everyone can number among his friends people who have 
achieved greatness out of an “inferiority complex” or repressed sexuality; such 
greatness is not invariably beneficial, but who would see the world deprived of its great 
saints and its great sinners just for the sake of “normality”? It is true, of course, that in 
later years many of the world’s geniuses have been overtaken and ruined by the 
conflict they struggled so hard to escape; yet it should be remembered that we pay for 
the beauty of the rose with the rottenness of the manure. It is the old story of the pairs 
of opposites. 


Jung’s Analytical Psychology 


But, on the other hand, there have lived men of genius who in some way resolved this 
opposition, whose creative power had no roots in neurosis. Can the psychology of the 
unconscious reveal their secret? Does it offer any source of energy to take the place of 
the neurosis it cures? So far the most serious attempt to tackle this problem is the work 
of Jung. Others, partly allied to his school and partly independent, have contributed— 
notably Heyer and Prinzhorn in Germany, Assagioli in Italy, Hadfield, Graham Howe, 
and the Pastoral Psychologists in England, and Beatrice Hinkle in America.3 The system 
of Jung in particular deserves careful attention because it provides an important link 
with the psychology of the Orient. Generally speaking, we may say that his system of 
analytical psychology falls into two departments which, to some extent, overlap. One is 
the cure of neurosis and the other the re-creation of the individual. In many cases the 


one follows the other, so that a Jungian analysis is more than often not just the 
solution of a particular problem but a radical “overhauling” and remaking of the 
personality, and I have known cases where the analysis has been carried on for from 
ten to twenty years. This is not surprising, for radical changes in the spiritual life are 
not achieved in from ten to twenty months; often it is the work of a lifetime. 

There is no hard-and-fast technique for the re-creation of the individual on Jungian 
lines, but the process usually follows certain general principles.4 By various means, 
including attention to dreams and fantasies and discussion with the analyst, the 
symbols of the unconscious are brought to light and the individual endeavors to 
discover their meaning for himself and define his attitude to them. These symbols are 
the forms or “archetypes” under which the gods and demons appear, and as the 
individual comes to terms with them he brings about certain psychological changes in 
himself. There appears to be almost a hierarchy of these archetypes, for when one is 
consciously assimilated another appears, and the situations resulting from this 
assimilation are represented in key dreams. These key dreams differ from ordinary 
dreams in their obviously symbolic character, for the figures which appear bear the 
closest resemblance to archaic religious and mythological forms. Frequently the 
dreamer witnesses forms and symbols of which he has never had any conscious 
knowledge, and it is not uncommon for a series of key dreams to bear close 
resemblance to the stages of ancient initiation rites. 

But the process does not consist simply in watching over one’s dreams; it is 
fundamentally a question of the conscious assimilation and acceptance of hitherto 
unconscious processes, in spite of their seeming irrationality and independence of the 
ego. When this has been carried out successfully for some time, a fundamental change 
is said to take place in the psyche. This Jung describes as a shifting of the center of 
personality from the ego to the self, a term which, in his system, has the special 
meaning of the center of the whole psyche as distinct from the center of consciousness, 
which is the ego. He explains the self as a “virtual point” between the conscious and 
the unconscious which gives equal recognition to the demands of both. Dreams 
representing this situation usually appear in the form of the mandala, the magic circle, 
the golden flower, the rose at the center of the cross and similar figures representing 
wholeness, balance, and attainment of a spiritual center.5 


individuation 


INTUITION 


ONIN33S 


5 
w 
= 
= 
w 
- 
é 


SENSATION 


The Wheel on the Cross 


An interesting feature of these mandala is that the divisions of the circle or the 
petals of the flower are usually four or multiples of four. This is explained as a sign of 
the complete development of the individual in all his four faculties or functions— 
intuition, sensation, intellect, and feeling. Jung maintains that generally speaking only 
one, two, or three of these faculties are active; the dormant faculties are 
“contaminated” by the unconscious, which is to say identified with an archetypal form. 


(Of course, those who pay no attention to their dreams see no archetypal forms with 
which their dormant faculties can be identified. For them we may say that the faculty 
is just undeveloped and so unconscious.) Thus in dreams the inferior faculty is often 
personified by the anima figure in men, which is to say the female image (usually a 
goddess) in whose form the unconscious is liable to appear and make its 
pronouncements. In women its place is taken by the animus—a male figure. 

Naturally the unconscious is an unfamiliar realm and for most people the 
descriptive language of Jungian psychology is so much mysterious jargon. We read a 
lot about animus, anima, inferior functions, archetypes, mandala, key dreams, and so 
forth, and begin to wonder whether someone is not a little crazy. Of course, to 
understand these various “denizens of the deep” we have to have personal experience 
of them, and this is most effectively had in dreams and in the conscious assimilation of 
dream symbols. For in dreaming the conscious is a little sleepy and incompetent; it is 
not interfering so efficiently with other mental processes, and, as everyone knows, 
between sunset and dawn is the ghosts’ playtime. But does this mean that before 
ordinary men and women can achieve any genuine spiritual development they must 
take careful notes of all their dreams, learn the meaning of their symbols, and even go 
to an analyst for assistance? I know someone who has been instructed by her analyst to 
set her alarm clock to ring every hour during the night so that she can wake up and 
write her dreams in a notebook. Yet it is very easy to be unfair in this matter for the 
whole technique lends itself to caricature in the hands both of analysts and of hostile 
satirists. The only important question is not whether the process is a nuisance but 
whether it works. Does it make possible the re-creation of the individual? 


The Meaning of Individuation 


First of all, we must ask what, in plain language as distinct from jargon, it proposes to 
do. It proposes to adapt the individual to his inner universe, to the unconscious natural 
urges within himself in such a way that his entire being is made into a total, related 
organism with a conscious center of gravity and balance. It presupposes that the 
unconscious, being nature in man, is the source of vitality, and assumes that its creative 
power can be most effectively handled when the ego provides it with an unobstructed 
but nevertheless directed channel. Whereas the neurotic genius finds his energy in 
escape and the natural genius in “possession” by unconscious forces (“which is to 
madness close allied”), the integrated genius would supposedly be able to draw upon 
the unconscious life-sources quite freely and consciously. I do not know how this can 
be expressed more concretely, and I believe this language must remain an utter 
mystery to those who have no feeling whatever of an unconscious life within 
themselves. When your life is centered wholly in consciousness it is naturally 
impossible to understand the meaning of another kind of center. If you were aware 
only of your head, it would be impossible to have any feeling for your solar plexus. 

But there is, perhaps, one other way in which it may be related to ordinary, 
everyday experience. Many people feel at times that they have more than one soul; this 
is particularly true of children and primitives. Lafcadio Hearn describes a conversation 
on this subject with a Japanese peasant who tells him that a man may have as many as 
nine souls, the number varying in accordance with his spiritual perfection. The more 
souls the better, but it is important that however many souls you may be given you 
should keep them together. “Sometimes,” he says, “they may be separated. But if the 
souls of a man be separated, that man becomes mad. Mad people are those who have 
lost one of their souls.”6 This feeling of a multiplicity of souls seems to be a 
rudimentary awareness of the unconscious and more especially of the independent 
character of its forces. Children feel changes in their personality from day to day; in 


many cases one finds, for instance, the most remarkable changes in their handwriting, 
and it is marvelous to see how sincerely they can play at being other people and things. 
But as adults we are apt to forget our many souls, and in passing from adolescence to 
adulthood become more settled and centered in our mental behavior. I think the re- 
creation of the personality might fairly be described as becoming conscious again of 
our plurality, of our many souls, and having them all contribute to our being instead of 
one at a time. “Genius,” said Novalis, “is perhaps nothing more than the result of 
inward Plurality.” One is reminded, too, of the words of Shakespeare’s Richard II: 


My brain I’ll prove the female to my soul, 

My soul the father: and these two beget 

A generation of still-breeding thoughts, 

And these same thoughts people this little world, 
In humors like the people of this world, 

For no thought is contented. The better sort,— 
As thoughts of things divine,—are intermixed 
With scruples, and do set the word itself 

Against the word. 


The Danger of Bewitchment 


But now we are left with the question: Does this method of analytical psychology 
work? Have the symbols of spiritual attainment which may be experienced in dreams 
any relation to actual fact, to the individual’s deepest responses to life—in short, to his 
happiness? Actually this is not quite a fair question, because it is never just to judge a 
system by all the people who follow it. I have no doubt at all that it works, with the 
right people. The Chinese have a saying that “when the wrong man uses the right 
means, the right means work in the wrong way.”7 Jung himself is the first to admit the 
truth of this saying, for, in his own words, “when it comes to things like these, 
everything depends on the man and little or nothing on the method.” But the system of 
analytical psychology does not always seem to attract the right people, and this is often 
true of those who go into it with a view to becoming analysts. 

Fortunately, however, there are those in Jung’s school who are keenly aware of this 
danger, and it is well that they should watch it, not only for their own sake, but also 
because similar difficulties lie in the path of every other venture into the unconscious 
mind, and for that matter in the path of every human being who seeks adaptation to 
his inner universe. Jung has gone far more deeply into the nature of the unconscious 
than did Freud,s and his system is bound up with aspects of the human soul which 
have a peculiar magic. Indeed, he goes so deeply that to follow him, not in ideas alone 
but in experience, is an extremely serious undertaking which involves the gravest risks 
for those whose feet are not planted on solid earth. And here “fools rush in where 
angels fear to tread.” The deeper images and forces of the unconscious have a 
fascination, an irresistible glamour which casts a spell on those who are not, as we say, 
“plain tough.” I believe Jung himself to be very conscious of this danger, and were he a 
less competent man his work might have the most unfortunate results. For he is open to 
the same dangers of personal adulation and misuse of his discoveries that threaten the 
work of all great leaders in spiritual adventure. These dangers are somewhat intensified 
by the nature of analytical work, but nothing worthwhile was ever achieved without 
risk. As long as he and his immediate colleagues continue to insist, as they do, that 
analysis is no substitute for actual living, and that it certainly must not be indulged in 
for the sake of its powerful glamour, they will be doing all in their power to rid the 
system of its abuses. Every system, whether of psychology or religion, has its abusers, 
but analytical psychology contains particularly strong dynamite which it will always do 
well to guard. 


There are those who go a long way in the re-creative work of analytical psychology 
and yet have all spoiled by their inability to shake off the spell of the unconscious and 
its mystical figures. When this happens the process defeats its own purpose. It is 
intended to make the individual a free, genuine person in his own right; but under the 
spell he becomes utterly dependent on the system as such, goes in for the study of 
psychology in a big way, and generally wallows around in its captivating atmosphere. 
Certainly it provides glamour and mystery which seem rather lacking in the stark 
realities of ordinary life, but when the system becomes an end instead of a means it is a 
millstone about one’s neck instead of a liberator. At this point the analyst has to bring 
his patient back to earth with a bump. This fascination is a danger constantly besetting 
the professional teacher or practitioner of religion or psychology. The study of the 
unconscious for its own sake is only safe for those who can forget the subject 
completely without feeling that they are suffering any loss. A Chinese allegory of the 
spiritual life known as the Ten Oxherding Pictures represents the use of religion in the 
form of catching and herding an ox.9 But when the herdsman has caught it and ridden 
home on its back, he does not take it into his house with him; he puts it away and 
forgets it. The commentary to the picture reads: “When you know that what you need 
is not the snare or setnet but the hare or fish, it is like gold separated from the dross, it 
is like the moon rising out of the clouds.” The system, which carries you on its back for 
a while, is the ox, but if you can’t get rid of it you would have done better never to 
have gone after it, unless, of course, you are compelled to accept this thralldom as the 
lesser of two evils. Unfortunately the mysteries of analytical psychology so captivate 
certain types of people that they mistake such bewitchment for the feeling of a 
vocation to be a psychologist. 

As now practiced, psychology is no more a way of life than medicine and surgery. 
Physicians and surgeons have to know the structure of the body down to the last detail, 
but it is not necessary to have that knowledge to lead a healthy physical life. In the 
same way, the practicing psychologist has to know the psyche just as thoroughly; it 
does not follow that the same intimate knowledge is necessary for mental health. No 
sensible doctor who is not a shark advises the removal of a patient’s appendix, tonsils, 
adenoids, teeth, ovaries, and anything else that may occur to him just in case they 
might give trouble. Only a faddist goes to his doctor every day to discuss his insides 
and make sure that he is living in accordance with the rules of health. Nevertheless, 
both the doctor and the psychologist are in a position to make certain observations 
about healthy living, to lay down certain principles which do not involve constant 
preoccupation with the more intimate details of the internal organs. Therefore it seems 
most unwise to make any deliberate attempt to bring the deeper contents of the 
unconscious to light, unless for strictly scientific and professional reasons—which are 
not the same as spiritual reasons. For one’s degree of spirituality does not depend on 
how much of your unconscious you have assimilated; it depends on how ready you are 
to accept and assimilate it when it comes in its own time. Which is another way of 
repeating that knowledge and experience are not to be confused with wisdom. 


The Aims of Psychotherapy 


This is where the psychology of the West can take a lesson from the psychology of the 
East, which pays more attention to the way of acceptance and less to the things to be 
accepted. It is interested in creating a state of mind that will be prepared for all 
eventualities, all surprises from both the outer and from the inner universes. It does not 
go out of its way, looking for things to accept. Far too little emphasis is laid on this 
aspect of the work by ill-advised practitioners of the psychology of the unconscious, 
and as a result analysis can easily have a certain remoteness from life. Analysis is not 


something on which one can work only at night, in dreamland, and psychological 
health cannot be bought at ten dollars a visit every Thursday afternoon. A friend who 
called on me one evening suddenly announced that he had to go home early because 
his analyst had instructed him to “face a problem.” When the facing of problems and 
the acceptance of life is too studied, when it requires that you go home early, shut 
yourself in your room, and solemnly sit down, take the problem out of a drawer and 
face it, we begin to wonder what has become of a certain indispensable quality called 
humor. Analysis is not intended to be remote from life at all, but when overmuch 
emphasis is laid on the dream, on unconscious symbolism, unconscious drawing and 
painting, and on the life of fantasy in general there is a danger of dividing life into two 
halves and neglecting the relations between them, as if the whole process required 
nothing more than development in the dream and fantasy world. 

Many of these difficulties would be overcome by a clear understanding of the aims 
of psychological work by those who are unable to avail themselves of a wise analyst, 
and here again the view of such Oriental systems as Taoism and various forms of 
Buddhism is very suggestive. For here the object is not to reach any particular stage; it 
is to find the right attitude of mind in whatever stage one may happen to be. This, 
indeed, is a fundamental principle of those forms of Oriental psychology which we 
shall be considering. In the course of his evolution man will pass through an indefinite 
number of stages; he will climb to the crest of one hill to find his road leading on over 
the crest of another and another. No stage is final because the meaning of life is in its 
movement and not in the place to which it moves. We have a proverb that to travel 
well is better than to arrive, which comes close to the Oriental idea. Wisdom does not 
consist in arriving at a particular place, and no one need imagine that it is necessarily 
obtained by climbing a ladder whose rungs are the successive stages of psychological 
experience. That ladder has no end, and the entrance to enlightenment, wisdom, or 
spiritual freedom may be found on any one of its rungs. If you discover it, it does not 
mean that you will not have to go on climbing the ladder; you must go on climbing just 
as you must go on living. But enlightenment is found by accepting fully the place 
where you stand now. Modern man finds himself in the stage of human evolution 
where there is a maximum division between his ego and the universe; for him, 
enlightenment is the complete acceptance of that division. Psychological techniques 
may fail because people do not accept fully the various stages involved; they accept 
them with the sole object of reaching a certain goal, as for instance the state of 
“individuation” symbolized by the mandala. In such circumstances they may indeed 
reach that state, but without finding what they inwardly desire. As a result, some 
people who imagine that they have completed that phase of psychological work are 
often as unhappy as ever.10 

Mere exploration of the unconscious is no road to wisdom, for a fool may learn 
much and experience much but still be a fool. He becomes wise only when he has the 
humility to let himself be free to be a fool. As Chuang Tzu says, “He who knows he is a 
fool is not a great fool.” For the fool always gives himself away by his pride, by the 
delusion that greatness is to be measured by mere psychological bulk, and that by 
loading himself with new experiences he will become a sage. The psychology of the 
unconscious is his happy hunting ground. “After some five years of analysis,” he thinks, 
“if I work very hard and go through all the necessary stages, I shall become a real 
person, a genuine, free man.” Indeed, that five years’ work (the attainment of which 
will necessitate fooling the analyst too) may teach him something if it happens to show 
him that he is like the dunce who looked for fire with a lighted lantern. Sometimes the 
longest way round is the shortest way home. 

The way of acceptance and spiritual freedom is found not by going somewhere but 
in going, and the stage where its happiness can be known is now, at this very moment, 


at the very place where you happen to stand. It is in accepting fully your state of soul 
as it is now, not in trying to force yourself into some other state of soul which, out of 
pride, you imagine to be a superior and more advanced state. It is not a question of 
whether your present state is good or bad, neurotic or normal, elementary or advanced; 
it is a question of what it is. The point is not to accept it in order that you may pass on 
to a “higher” state, but to accept because acceptance in itself is that “higher” state, if 
such it may be called. By way of illustration, here is the story of how the Buddhist sage 
Hui-neng enlightened Chen Wei-ming who had chased him in order to steal the robe 
and begging bowl of the Buddha. Hui-neng had put them both down on a rock, and 
when Chen tried to lift them he found that they were immovable. At once Chen was 
terrified, and protested that he had not come for the robe and bowl, but for the wisdom 
they represented. “Since the object of your coming is for the Dharma,” said Hui-neng, 
“think not of good, think not of evil, but see what your true nature [literally, ‘original 
face’] is at this moment.” At this Chen was suddenly enlightened; breaking out into a 
sweat and saluting Hui-neng with tears of joy he asked, “Besides these secret words and 
hidden meanings which you have just given me, is there anything else which is secret?” 
Hui-neng replied, “In what I have shown you there is nothing secret. If you reflect and 
recognize your own true nature, the secret is within you.”11 


Practical Essentials 


At this time in human history the unconscious becomes a problem because the conflict 
between nature and the ego is at its height. But this does not mean that for modern 
man a full exploration of the unconscious is necessary for spiritual freedom. This 
freedom is attainable now, but the unveiling of the unconscious as a special 
undertaking is a matter of our future evolution and at the present time I do not feel 
that it should be taken up seriously until the second half of life—a point upon which 
Jung himself lays particular emphasis.12 It appears that at the middle of life certain 
people are ready to undertake a task which in terms of evolution will take them a stage 
beyond the present historical development of civilized man. But this is outside our 
scope, for here we are concerned with the present rather than the future. This is not to 
say that there can be no freedom of spirit for young people or for those unready to 
penetrate the deeper strata of the unconscious. Thus we have to bear in mind always 
the distinction between the attainment of freedom in regard to present conditions, and 
the future evolution of human consciousness and its faculties. Just because the 
unconscious has become a problem in present conditions, our more superficial gods 
and demons demand immediate attention if we are to be free. But, especially for those 
who have not reached the middle of life, any deeper exploration is out of time and is 
looking for a problem where none exists. 

For all practical purposes it seems important to concentrate less on exploring and 
unveiling the inner universe and more on the working relationship between that 
universe (as it now presents itself) and the conscious ego. The essentials are that the 
individual should know that an inner universe exists, that he should have some idea of 
its general character, and that he should be ready to assimilate and accept it as and 
when it makes itself felt. Only harm can result in most cases from digging up its 
contents for the sake of spiritual development. In other words, when your gods and 
demons present themselves in emotions, moods, and the like, recognize that they are 
gods and demons, that they have a life of their own, and that you cannot just will them 
out of the way with impunity. In ordinary conditions there is no need to make a special 
search for the powers of the unknown psyche; they will come of their own accord, and 
they will be enough of a problem then without looking for more. But when they do 
come they have to be received, for their power over us is proportionate to the power 


we use against them. 

We have mentioned three essentials in understanding and coming to terms with the 
inner universe: the knowledge of its existence, the understanding of its general 
character, and the capacity to accept it. These must be considered in more detail, and 
from the practical standpoint. Many people have no feeling at all of an unconscious 
mind, much less of an inner universe; others believe intellectually in its existence, but 
have no experience of it. It is important at the start not to have a misleading 
conception of it; the unconscious has, so far as we know, no definite location and is not 
strictly speaking a thing. It is rather a process. The internal universe is not actually 
located inside the human being; it is, as it were, the relationship between impersonal, 
natural forces and the unconscious processes of the mind. There is probably no real 
difference between the internal and external universes; it may be more correct to say 
that the same universe affects us in two different ways—physically and mentally. In 
both ways we are unconscious of the greater part of these influences. Thus, if we follow 
the physical body to its origins, we are led to the universe; the same is true when 
mental processes are traced to their source, and we find that the connection is both 
historical and immediate. It is historical as mental heredity, and immediate as mental 
vitality, for all life is ultimately derived from the mysterious, universal energy that 
vibrates in the electron. 

These, however, are metaphysical considerations, and the psychologist must think 
in terms of experience. Anyone who is at all aware of himself knows at least something 
of his many souls, of the deep instinctual and emotional urges which to some extent 
govern his life. It matters not whether we call them mental or physical; these are only 
words to describe mysteries whose behavior we know but of whose substance we are 
utterly ignorant. But our deep urges have undoubtedly a power of their own which, in 
the long run, is beyond conscious control. No one, for instance, can absolutely stifle the 
sexual instinct, and however much you may wish to economize by doing without food, 
your whole being will demand to eat by afflicting you with a savage hunger. It is, for 
instance, quite beyond our power to control the sex of an unborn child; this matter is 
wholly in the charge of unconscious factors, as are also the digestion of food and the 
circulation of the blood. In like manner there are aspects of our psychological life 
which function instinctively and beyond conscious control. 


The Technique of Acceptance 


If you sit still for a while, completely relaxed, and let your thoughts run on, let your 
mind think of whatever it likes, without interfering, without making suggestions, and 
without raising any kind of obstacle to the free flow of thought, you will soon discover 
that mental processes have a life of their own. They will call one another to the surface 
of consciousness by association, and if you raise no barriers, you will soon find yourself 
thinking all manner of things both fantastic and terrible which you ordinarily keep out 
of consciousness. Over a period of time this exercise will show you that you have in 
yourself the potentiality of countless different beings—the animal, the demon, the 
satyr, the thief, the murderer—so that in time you will be able to feel that no aspect of 
human life is strange to you—humani nihil a me alienum puto. In the ordinary way 
consciousness is forever interfering with the waters of the mind, which are dark and 
turbulent, concealing the depths. But when, for a while, you let them take care of 
themselves the mud settles and with growing clarity you see the foundations of life and 
all the denizens of the deep. You may see other things as well. “Two men looked into a 
pond. Said the one: ‘I see a quantity of mud, a shoe, and an old can.’ Said the other: ‘I 
see all these, but I also see the glorious reflection of the sky.” For the unconscious is 
not, as some imagine, a mental refuse-pit; it is simply unfettered nature, demonic and 


divine, painful and pleasant, hideous and lovely, cruel and compassionate, destructive 
and creative. It is the source of heroism, love, and inspiration as well as of fear, hatred, 
and crime. Indeed, it is as if we carried inside of us an exact duplicate of the world we 
see around us, for the world is a mirror of the soul, and the soul a mirror of the world. 
Therefore when you learn to feel the unconscious you begin to understand not only 
yourself but others as well, and when you look upon human crime and stupidity, you 
can say with real feeling, “There but for the Grace of God go I.” 

Beyond this it is irrelevant and useless to “prove” the existence of the unconscious. 
It can only be proved by personal experience, and as a mere conception it is almost 
valueless. The important thing is to have some feeling, however rudimentary, of its 
existence and of its potentialities for good and for evil. And, after all, to say that we 
have an unconscious is only another way of saying that mentally and physically we are 
children of nature and that our lives have roots which go beyond our ken. Sometimes it 
seems quite impossible that there are those who simply cannot grasp it. 

There remains now the question of the capacity to accept the unconscious, and this 
involves three things: firstly, the capacity to accept its “dark” aspect, secondly, the 
capacity to accept the independence of its “gods and demons” from the ego, and thirdly, 
the capacity to accept the conflict between some of those gods and demons and the ego. 
It need hardly be said that these capacities are not different; they are the same capacity 
working in three different but related directions. The process is best shown by a 
concrete illustration. Let us take, for example, a mood of acute depression. Three things 
may be said of it: firstly, that it is unpleasant in itself, secondly, that it comes without 
our consent and does not leave at our command, and thirdly, that we have some 
reaction to it, a reaction of impatience, disgust, of wishing to be rid of it—which is a 
factor distinct from and in addition to the feeling of depression itself. 

We may call this mood a demon out of the unconscious which has “possessed” us. 
The way of acceptance begins by giving it our attention. Instead of trying to forget 
about it and repress it we make up our minds to deal with it consciously, almost as 
man to man. Instead of allowing our servant at the door (the Freudian “censor”) to 
send it away, we invite it to come in and have a cup of tea. Yes, it would perhaps be 
better to offer it a Scotch and soda—and I mean this in all seriousness, because the idea 
is to encourage it, to invite it to be itself with a vengeance, really to be a depression. 
For this is accepting its independence of the ego, that is, allowing it to behave as it 
wills, or, as the Chinese say, to follow its own tao, because if we do not allow all other 
things their tao we cannot expect to have our own tao. In our own language we might 
say that to be in accord with nature is to allow everything to follow its own nature. As 
Lieh Tzu remarked, in explaining the secret of his mysterious capacity to ride on the 
wind, “I allowed my mind to think without restraint of whatever it pleased and my 
mouth to talk about whatever it pleased.” So here, we allow the depression to take 
whatever course it pleases; instead of denying it, we affirm it. This requires that we feel 
our way into its very heart and experience it to the full—one might almost call this a 
“higher masochism”—and though, to all common sense, it seems the most absurd thing 
to do, it results in the discovery that even the blackest mood has a profound meaning 
for us and is a blessing in disguise. It was not without reason that the Egyptians called 
the demons the mediators between gods and men. 

If, however, the conflict between the depression and the ego is particularly strong, 
we have first to deal with another mediatory demon in the shape of the conflict itself, 
the feeling of impatience, disgust, and wishing to be rid of it. Sometimes the actual 
depression is too tough a proposition to tackle directly, and so we have to allow the 
reactionary feeling of disgust to be itself and behave as it pleases. To this we give full 
rein in the same way, telling it to be as disgusted, impatient, and angry as it likes. This, 
of course, affords an immense psychological relief. For it means that the conscious ego 


has divested itself of the unnecessary and impertinent responsibility of thinking it 
essential to direct and interfere with all that goes on around it. It is this very sense of 
false responsibility which disturbs its peace of mind. This is particularly noticeable in 
cases of insomnia in which people are kept awake by such minor irritations as night 
noises, doors slamming, trains crossing bridges, cars changing gear, and people moving 
about the house. The sleepless one immediately assumes a responsibility for these 
noises in his very wish to interfere with them, and the tension of this responsibility 
keeps him awake. But if he can allow them to go ahead and clamor as much as they 
like, he will at once feel relieved, relaxed, and ready for sleep. In such matters it is well 
to follow the example of one of Edward Lear’s inimitable creations: 


There was a young lady whose bonnet 
Came untied when the birds sat upon it. 
But she said, “I don’t care, 
For the birds of the air 
Are welcome to sit on my bonnet.” 


A further illustration is found in the record of a conversation between a Chinese 
Buddhist teacher and his pupil, who asked the figurative question, “It is terribly hot, 
and how shall we escape the heat?” The teacher replied, “Go right down to the bottom 
of the furnace.” “But in the furnace,” persisted the somewhat baffled pupil, “how shall 
we escape the scorching fire?” “No further pains will harass you,” concluded the 
teacher. A story is told of a lunatic who used to hit himself on the head with a brick. 
When asked for an explanation of his peculiar behavior, he answered that it was such a 
pleasant feeling when he stopped. In the same way we might say that the spiritual 
raison d’étre of suffering is the enlightenment that follows from its acceptance. For the 
way of acceptance is applicable to demons from both worlds, from the unconscious in 
the form of depressions, phobias, and the like, and from external circumstances in the 
form of physical pain and irritation. In this sense acceptance is the philosopher’s stone 
that “turneth all to gold”; it means putting our consciousness in the very core of 
whatever pain falls upon us and allowing that pain to do its worst. As to our reaction to 
the pain the same principle applies, for we allow the demon that wishes to scream, 
protest, and swear all freedom to have its way. As often as not it does not need it, for 
the very act of granting it the freedom is in itself a relief. 


The Problems of Emotion 


Western students are often disconcerted in their study of Oriental psychology by the 
capacity of some of the “wise men of the East” for violent emotions. We have the 
impression that Oriental sages should be utterly calm and “controlled” under all 
circumstances. But this expectation is something which a certain puritanic element in 
the Western mind, a certain cold, intellectual desire for superhumanity and 
ultraefficiency, has projected into Oriental psychology. That statement is made with 
certain reservations, for the same element undoubtedly exists in some of the 
philosophies of India, notably in Hinayana Buddhism. It must be remembered, 
however, that in a tropical climate vital energies, though abundant, are not particularly 
forceful. Chinese Buddhism is more lively, and its history contains innumerable 
instances of the capacity of its initiates for displays of almost elemental emotion, 
particularly anger. One has only to look at the demonic aspects of some of the gods and 
Bodhisattvas in Tibetan, Chinese, and Japanese iconography. If anyone imagines 
Buddhism to be a religion of pure passivity, as we understand it, he should see some of 
the Chinese paintings of Achala! He might also do well to visit some of the living 
masters of Zen Buddhism. For the art of becoming reconciled to and at ease with those 


aspects of natural man which correspond to storm and thunder in the natural universe 
is to let them rage. Just as there is an incomparable beauty and majesty in thunder and 
lightning, so also there is something awe-inspiring in the abandoned and uninhibited 
anger of the sage, which is no mere loss of temper or petty irritability. We remember 
how Jesus cast the money changers out of the temple, and it was no cool tongue that 
scourged the Jews as a “generation of vipers” and the Pharisees as “whited sepulchres.” 
This is, indeed, lack of the wrong kind of self-control, for we have to judge it from a 
psychological and not from an intellectual-moral point of view. 

Acceptance may be both passive and violently active, and to the demon (or it may 
be god) of anger we say the same thing as to depression and pain, “Go ahead as much 
as you like, do your worst and make it a good worst.” No one completely identified 
with his anger could ever say that, for the capacity to accept always implies a certain 
differentiation between the ego and the visiting demon, and thus is never the same 
thing as blind “possession.” Only when there is possession can we call anger or passion 
in a certain sense immoral. But there may not always be an outward manifestation of 
the emotion, for here again we see that the very feeling of being free to be as angry as 
you like is generally sufficient release of itself. Sometimes, however, it is useful to 
produce an outward manifestation for the sake of effect! 


False Masculinity 


But here we have to face the prejudice that it is weak and effeminate to give so free a 
rein to the demons of emotion, for there is still a powerful element of Stoicism in our 
civilization, especially in the male mentality. Men are particularly averse to displaying 
any of the more “feminine” emotions, which, according to their version, include 
emotional reactions to pain and sorrow such as crying, screaming, and suffering “turns 
of the stomach” at unpleasant sights. Personally, I should be the last to condemn the 
male dislike of being “sissy,” although, when carried to extremes, this dislike produces 
an acute “constipation” of the feeling nature which is a common complaint among men 
in America. For among certain large sections of American manhood this dislike is 
extended to include all interest in religious, cultural, and aesthetic matters, and I know 
many whose avoidance of these things is the purest affectation. 

Inwardly this part of their being demands expression, and they deny it to their cost, 
for not only do they miss much that makes life more worth living; they also bring 
psychological ills upon themselves, the most serious of which is an abysmal failure to 
understand women. There is hardly another country in the world where there is so 
great a lack of real understanding between husbands and wives as in the United States. 
This is no mere empty generalization; thousands of women’s clubs and sewing circles 
testify to the fact, for there would be no need whatever for women to herd together in 
this way if their homelife were truly satisfactory. But the reason is an utterly false 
conception of manliness. When a man denies his feeling nature he not only drives his 
wife to seek “culture” in women’s clubs; he also drives her to seek sexual satisfaction in 
religion or in other men. Any primitive man would consider inability to give sexual 
satisfaction to his wife the greatest possible shame; but it is quite impossible to do this 
when one’s feeling nature is wholly repressed and when “manliness” demands that 
one’s breath smell constantly of whiskey and cigars, that one is able to make love only 
with phlegmatic grunts and to approach the sexual act with a directness and haste 
which cannot even be called bestial; it is simply thoughtless and futile, and as regards 
sexual relations is actually nothing more than masturbation. 

To be a man at all, man has to recognize the female element in himself, for a man is 
no man unless he is able to give woman what she demands and needs. And she needs 
not just a breadwinner and a male body; she needs above all things a companion who 


can to some extent feel as she feels. This requires that the man combine in himself 
masculine strength and feminine grace. In this respect modern man could solve many 
problems of domestic life by taking a lesson from the Hindu “book of marriage,” the 
Kama Sutra.13 The art of Kama, the use of the senses, is an essential part of the old- 
fashioned Hindu education, but we fail almost completely to teach young men anything 
that will be of use in married life, quite apart from the art of sexuality. We cannot be 
strict Stoics without being celibate. But the Stoic philosophy does not recognize that 
control of the emotions is in no sense being without emotions; controlling an 
automobile is not keeping it locked up in the garage. You cannot begin to control 
emotions unless you first let yourself be free to use them, and the difficulty of keeping 
them within reasonable bounds is increased by merely repressive control. For this 
reason there are thousands of supposedly well-educated people who behave worse than 
children when moved by powerful emotion, having no understanding and above all no 
love for the feminine in themselves. Small wonder, then, that modern man has to 
become reconciled to his unconscious under the form of the feminine anima! His 
psychological problem is primarily to make a successful marriage within himself—a 
marriage between ego and anima, between conscious reason and unconscious nature, in 
which there must be love, companionship, and understanding. Failure to realize this 
inner relationship is always reflected outwardly in the divided home where man is man 
and woman is woman “and never the twain shall meet.” They have separate friends, 
separate interests, separate bedrooms, and separate souls; this is not marriage; it is a 
business partnership for manufacturing children. 


Woman Unsatisfied 


The problem for modern woman is rather different. There is a powerful male element 
in her, and the danger is not that she may repress it but that she may be possessed by 
it. For the result of our current lack of relationship between the sexes is not, as one 
might expect, that men become increasingly manly and women increasingly womanly. 
Both tend to become neuter, but in different ways. When men have no real use for 
femininity women forget their arts; they cultivate one another’s company to the virtual 
exclusion of men, and this can only be done safely by those who have fulfilled their life 
with men and by children. The result is masculinity among women, feminism (a gross 
misnomer), a tendency to intellectualism, competition with men in business, and that 
hard-boiled bridge-playing, cocktail-drinking mentality which is only golf, whiskey, 
and cigars wearing skirts. Thus the drift in both sexes is to a false masculinity for which 
absence of feeling among men is very much to blame; and absence of feeling is simply 
the lack of recognizing one’s own gods and demons. When conscious reason is 
predominant all values become strictly “practical” and intellectual, while feeling is 
degraded to mere sensation. It would not be so bad, however, if this cult of the 
“practical” and intellectual were what it tries to be. But when women try to be 
practical in this new sense they lose their inborn reason which, in the past, has always 
kept men with their feet on the earth and made them realize their responsibilities to 
their homes and their children. 

Indeed, we call the unconscious irrational, but really it is so-called reason that is 
crazy. The fault is not with reason in itself but with the conscious, intellectual idea of 
what reason ought to be, namely a mathematical operation which excludes feeling and 
the demands of physical being. True woman understands these things; if she did not the 
children would never be fed (much less the husband) and the home would never be 
habitable—which may be proved by visiting the homes of those “practical” wives who 
go into business, socialism, cultural ideals, and other idealistic, theoretical, and 
nebulous matters. The curious thing is that such behavior never achieves the desired 


result, and it is not uncommon that real women converse far more intelligently about 
literature, music, the arts, politics, religion, and all cultural affairs than their home- 
neglecting sisters who go out to acquire these very things. They are so busy trying to be 
clever that they have no time simply to be clever. 


The Feminine Principle 


It is almost as if our civilization were suffering from an eclipse of the feminine 
principle, and it is no mere chance that this coincides with the extreme of self- 
consciousness. Traditionally, the dark side of life, the unknown, the mysterious was 
always female; its great symbol is water, the mysterious depth out of which life 
appears, and because of its passivity and depth, water has always been accounted 
feminine. Therefore for us the words of Lao Tzu have a special point: 14 


He who knows the masculine and yet keeps to the feminine Will become a channel drawing all 
the world towards it. 


And again: 


Man when living is soft and tender; when dead he is hard and tough. All animals and plants 
when living are tender and fragile; when dead they become withered and dry. Therefore it is 
said: the hard and tough are parts of death; the soft and tender are parts of life. This is the reason 
why the soldiers when they are too tough cannot carry the day; the tree when it is too tough will 
break. The position of the strong and great is low, and the position of the weak and tender is 
high. 


In other words, acceptance as a feminine technique reawakens our lost “better half” 
and makes us whole, for acceptance is the way of the tree that is weak and tender—like 
the willow. Under the weight of snow its boughs bend down and cast the snow off; but 
on the boughs of the knotted, rigid pine the snow piles up and up until they crack. This 
is called stooping to conquer. 


The best soldier is not soldierly; 

The best fighter is not ferocious; 

The best conqueror does not take part in war; 

The best employer of men keeps himself below them. 
This is called the virtue of not contending; 

This is called the ability of using men; 

This is called the supremacy of consorting with heaven. 


Every true woman knows the virtue of not contending by which she gets her own way, 
for 


The highest goodness is like water. Water is beneficent to all things but does not contend. It stays 
in places which others despise. Therefore it is near Tao. 


Cutting it, you can leave no wound because it always yields; grasping it, you cannot 
hold it because it always falls through your fingers. You can only hold it by making a 
cup of your hands. Now water is a symbol of life and a cup of acceptance and a sword 
of aggressiveness. The cup is also a feminine symbol, and of this Lao Tzu says: 


Clay is moulded into vessels 

And because of the space where nothing exists we are able to use them as vessels. 
Doors and windows are cut out in the walls of a house. 

And because they are empty spaces, we are able to use them. 


For acceptance is emptiness in the Buddhist sense of sunyata, which is sometimes 


likened to a crystal or a mirror. “The perfect man,” says Chuang Tzu, “employs his 
mind as a mirror. It grasps nothing; it refuses nothing; it receives, but does not keep.” 
So, too, a crystal takes into itself whatever lies around it. When you hold it up before a 
busy street, it holds the busy street; when you hold it up before the empty sky, it seems 
to hold nothing—but only because it is reflecting the emptiness of the sky. What is its 
own real nature? It is neither full nor void; it is beyond all opposites, and thus is a 
symbol of spiritual freedom. This reminds me of the conversation between the Buddhist 
sage Tozan and one of his disciples. Said the disciple, “Cold and heat alternately come 
and go, and how can one escape them?” Tozan answered, “Why not go where there is 
neither cold nor heat?” “Where,” persisted the disciple, “is the place where there is 
neither cold nor heat?” “When the cold season is here, we all feel cold. When the hot 
season is here we all feel hot.”15 


5. THE VICIOUS CIRCLE 


A curious feature of the quest for freedom is the appearance of a snag just as you 


think you are getting somewhere. The snag appears for the very reason that you think 
you are getting somewhere, for the essential point of spirituality, the point so difficult 
to grasp, is that it is not a question of going at all. You cannot get the freedom of the 
spirit by climbing up to it; it is not reached by any kind of ladder, for otherwise it 
would be possible to describe a specific technique by which wisdom and enlightenment 
can be “obtained” and the whole matter would be as apparently simple as buying a 
ticket and taking a train. But the steps and stages are not laid out in black and white, 
and there are no fixed rules and regulations the mere observance of which will achieve 
the desired result. It is very much like learning to love someone. You cannot look up a 
book of rules and find out how to love, although many such books have been written. 

Now the practice of any kind of technique is going somewhere, yes, even the 
technique of acceptance. If this is true, it will be asked why anyone should go to the 
trouble of talking about it at all; if even the technique of acceptance will not, of itself, 
achieve the desired object, why introduce it? Because, according to the proverb, the 
longest way round is the shortest way home. It seems to be necessary to try to discover 
the secret by going somewhere in order to learn that this can never be done. The path 
always takes you round in a circle, back to the place where you stand. It is the parable 
of the Prodigal Son over again, and the Buddhists describe it as the journey of a lunatic 
all over the world in search of his head, which he had never lost. There is no doubt at 
all that from one point of view the technique of acceptance actually works, but it is 
always partial. It is admirable for solving an immediate problem, in instances of pain, 
depression, and sorrow, but there is always something it leaves unsolved, for there 
remains a subtle, indefinable, and elusive inner discontent. 


The Longing for God 


This is truly a “divine discontent” for I believe it to be what the mystics describe as the 
yearning of the soul for God; as St. Augustine says, “Thou hast made us for Thyself, 
therefore we may not rest anywhere save in Thee.” By a hundred different techniques 
we can adjust the details of our lives and make ourselves happy in the superficial sense 
of having nothing specific to be unhappy about. But techniques can only deal with 
details, with separate parts; something different is required to transform one’s attitude 
to life as a whole, and to transform the whole of one’s life. Without this transformation 
the real unhappiness remains, expressing itself in all manner of disguises, finding 
innumerable substitutes for God which do not work because they are always partial 
things. They are, as it were, the parts of God, but not the whole of Him. Technique can 
find these parts; it can find acceptance, wealth, pleasure, experience, knowledge, and 
all the lesser gods and demons of the unknown realms of the soul. But even when all 
these many parts are brought together, there is still something which no technical trick 
or device can discover, and this is the whole which is greater than the sum of its parts. 


Those who have followed partial techniques know that in a life where there is 
nothing special to be unhappy about there is a kind of barrenness; it is like a wheel 
without a center, or a perfect lamp without a light. There is nothing to supply any 
creative fire. Everything is going just as it should go; the daily routine may be a little 
dull, but it is by no means unbearable. Certainly there are troubles, but nothing 
overwhelming. As for one’s own character, well, that is quite normal. There are no 
serious neurotic troubles and no moral defects. For the most part life is quite agreeable 
and if death comes at the end of it, that is a matter of course for which nature will 
prepare us; when the time comes to die we shall be tired and ready to go. That is not a 
happy life, even though it may be contented; it is simple vegetation. There is not that 
joyous response of the individual to the universe which is the essence of spirituality, 
which expresses itself in religious worship and adoration. I suppose there must have 
been times in everyone’s life when there has been such a response, even for a short 
moment. In those moments most of us like to be alone, for we are afraid to let others 
see us become so childish. After all, we are dignified adults and it would not do at all 
for Mr. Cornelius Pomp, president of Grand International Railways, Inc., to be seen 
dancing wildly around on a hilltop in the middle of the night for sheer joy at seeing the 
stars. But I have no doubt there was an occasion when Mr. Pomp, in the dim recesses of 
his being, felt very much like doing this but could not unbend. 

It is a symptom of our spiritual phlegmatism and torpidity that the dance is no 
longer a part of our ritual and that we worship in churches which, as often as not, 
resemble cattle pens where people sit in rows and pray by leaning forward in their 
seats and mumbling. Sometimes people try to get away from this stiffness by putting on 
short pants and running out to the woods for community dancing and the cultivation of 
response to nature, and there are other people who try to make their prayers sincere by 
groveling on their knees and whimpering. This is another case of trying to make the 
tail wag the dog. The first essential is to feel the joy; the response follows of its own 
accord, but you cannot get the joy by slavishly imitating the response. In fact we first 
have to feel as St. Francis felt in writing his Canticle to the Sun, which is perhaps the 
most superb expression of the joy of spiritual freedom that was ever written: 


Praise to my Lord for all His creatures; 
for our brother Sun who bringeth us day 
and light, and showeth Thee unto us. 


Praise to my Lord for our sister Moon 
and for the Stars hung bright and lovely in Heaven. 


Praise to my Lord for our brother Wind 
and for Air and Clouds, Calm and all Weather 
whereby Thou maintainest life in all beings. 


Praise to my Lord for our sister Water, 
useful and lowly, precious and clear. 


Praise to my Lord for our brother Fire, 
mighty and strong, by whom Thou makest 
for us light in darkness. 


Praise to my Lord for our mother Earth 
who doth uphold and teach us, and bringeth 
forth in many colors both fruit and flowers. 


Praise to my Lord for sister Death, 
from whom none can flee. Blessed are 


those who find themselves in Thy most 
Holy Will, for Death shall not harm them. 


Oh all ye creatures, praise and bless my 
Lord, and be thankful, and serve Him in 
great humility. 


The Ecstasy of Creation 


This hymn of happiness is more than a hymn of acceptance, for it includes not only sun 
and moon, fire and water, life and death; it includes also God, and those who find God 
are happy because they share in the ecstasy of creation. They, too, know the answer to 
that eternal question of philosophy, “Why does the universe exist?” They know that it 
exists for an almost childlike reason—for play, or what the Hindus called lila (which is 
nearly our own word “lilt”).1 Chesterton points out that when a child sees you do 
something wonderful, it asks you to do it again and again. So too he says that God 
made the earth and told it to move round the sun, and when it had moved round once 
He was pleased and said, “Do it again.” He has been saying it ever since. To some this 
may seem sentimental, to others irreverent, and to yet others absurd, for how can one 
say that all the cruelty, destruction, and anguish of life is play? And if it is play, is not 
God like a thoughtless child who picks a butterfly to pieces to watch it struggle? But for 
what other reason could it have been said that when the foundations of the earth were 
laid “the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy”? 2 

But those who ask this question about the cruelty of God’s play are expecting him 
who answers to make excuses for God, to “justify the ways of God to man,” and as Lao 
Tzu has tersely and aptly said, “Those who justify themselves do not convince.” Should 
we ask and expect the universe to conform with our standards of good behavior and 
doubt the existence of God in all things because He does not observe the ordinary 
standards of middle-class humanitarian morality? We think of God as a meek, kindly 
old gentleman, or else as an infinitely powerful but essentially nebulous spirit of pure 
love, by which we mean pure dotingness. But, as Edwin Arnold has written, —— 


It slayeth and it saveth, nowise moved 
Except unto the working out of doom; 

Its threads are Love and Life; and Death and Pain 
The shuttles of its loom. 


The dissertations on the so-called “Problem of Evil,” which has so much worried 
Christian theologians, are nothing more than an attempt to apologize for the Deity, and 
such attempts invariably indicate lack of faith. And faith in God, faith in life, faith in 
nature, is the important thing; that faith is the very key to freedom of the spirit. 


The Faith of Abandonment 


Faith is not blind belief, and it is certainly not mere intellectual assent to the 
proposition that God exists. Nor is it trusting that life will work out “all right” in spite of 
its tribulations. Faith is not hope. From one point of view faith is the most illogical 
thing in the world; it is trusting life because of its tribulations; it is the sense of love and 
wonder before the mystery of a God who is both Creator and Destroyer, love and 
terror, life and death, angel and demon, sage and fool, man and worm. There are those 
who ask why they should be expected to have faith of so unconditional a kind in a 
universe which takes with one hand what it gives with the other, and the answer 
suggests a story about Thomas Carlyle. There was a woman who wrote him a long 
dissertation which ended with the words, “In short, I accept the universe.” “My God!” 


said Carlyle. “She’d better!” For the truth is simply that without faith we are forever 
bashing our heads against an immovable wall. No self-deception, no trick of reason or 
science, no magic, no amount of self-reliance can make us independent of the universe 
and enable us to escape its destructive aspect. Pain is a fact and no amount of wishful 
theology can explain it away with promises and apologies for its existence in a universe 
whose God is supposed to be “love.” At the same time no amount of acceptance can 
make away with our fundamental horror of pain in its more extreme forms. But, even 
so, faith can never be real faith if it is halfhearted, if we think that it is merely a 
question of the “best policy,” of the best means to make an intolerable situation a little 
more bearable. 

God, life, and the universe keep their two aspects whatever we may try to think 
about them, and continue their play in all its love and all its cruelty. Faith means that 
we give ourselves to it absolutely and utterly, without making conditions of any kind, 
that we abandon ourselves to God without asking anything in return, save that our 
abandonment to Him may make us feel more keenly the lilt of His playing. This 
abandonment is the freedom of the spirit.3 That is the only promise which can be given 
for faith, but what a promise! It means that we share in the ecstasy of His creation and 
His destruction, and experience the mystery and the freedom of His power in all the 
aspects of life, in both the heights of pleasure and the depths of pain. It may seem 
illogical, but those who have once shared in this mystery have a gratitude that knows 
no bounds and are able to say again that God is Love, though with an altogether new 
meaning. 


The Man and the Means 


But we cannot make a technique of abandonment, for at once a snag arises. It is the 
same snag that stands between partial and total acceptance and may be described in a 
number of different ways. Fundamentally it is the old problem of lifting oneself up by 
one’s own belt and is perhaps most aptly put in the Chinese saying that “when the 
wrong man uses the right means, the right means work in the wrong way.” The “right 
means” are all forms of technique—acceptance, abandonment, and what you will; the 
“wrong man” is, generally speaking, oneself. We are “wrong” in the sense that we are 
unhappy, that we are without faith and have no freedom of spirit. The problem is 
therefore how the wrong man can become the right man when all the available means 
for so doing are bound to work in the wrong way. In other words, a man desires to 
change himself. Now a man is what he is, and his desires are according to his nature. If 
he is a “bad” man, his desires will be bad, even though one of them is that he shall 
become better. We discover this by asking why he wants to become better. The 
underlying motive for improvement is tainted because the man who entertains it is 
bad; he wants to become better out of self-interest, because in his pride he wishes to 
escape from the reproach of being bad. If this is pointed out to him, he will then ask 
whether he ought simply to accept his badness. And if we again ask him why he wants 
to accept his badness, we discover that he wants to accept it in order to escape from it. 
He is caught whichever way he turns because the means he adopts, his behavior, his 
ideas, his religion, are always his, and he will always use them according to his 
capacity and his nature. They are like so many different suits of clothes; he may wear 
rags, ermine, tweeds, or skins; he may walk, run, skip, or trot; he may whisper, shout, 
sing, or talk—but he himself remains the same since he is the cause and not the 
consequence of his actions. 

Let us put it in another way. Supposing that we decide to accept the dark side of 
life, the unconscious and the conflict between the unconscious and the ego, there is still 
one thing that by this means we do not accept—our desire to escape from it. Until that 


desire is accepted our acceptance is always an indirect attempt to escape. Here we meet 
the problem of St. Michael and the Dragon again. Christian morality taught us to 
overcome the dark side of life by fighting it; psychology would have us overcome it by 
acceptance, but in fact these are both ways of overcoming it, which means getting rid of 
it and escaping it. Thus the way of acceptance as distinct from the way of fighting is 
apt to make a new Dragon out of St. Michael. 


Infinite Regression 


There is also the problem of the relation between nature and the ego. If we accept the 
universe and subordinate ourselves to it, if, instead of trying to live life, we let life live 
us, we are accepting one aspect of life only to deny another—the aggressive, self- 
asserting ego in which life has manifested itself. Acceptance is indeed the feminine 
way, but it cannot be practiced at the expense of the masculine. It seems, therefore, 
that what we need is, as it were, a higher type of acceptance that includes both 
acceptance and escape, faith and suspicion, self-abandonment and egotism, surrender 
and aggressiveness, the Dragon and St. Michael. But even this does not quite solve the 
problem—indeed, it is as far from a solution as ever—because we are starting out upon 
an infinite regression. We are becoming hopelessly involved in a vicious circle, for as 
soon as we set up the notion of an acceptance which takes in both accepting and 
escaping we have two pairs of opposites instead of one. We begin with the opposition 
of acceptance; vs. escape; but we then get acceptanceg vs. acceptance 1-vs.-escape—a 
psychological monstrosity which can continue indefinitely. 

At first sight the problem of the vicious circle may seem purely mathematical and 
remote from experience. But in fact it is only a rather complicated way of expressing 
the fundamental conundrum that those who search for happiness do not find it. It is 
again the problem of the donkey with the carrot suspended before his nose from a stick 
that is fastened to his own collar. If he chases it, using the aggressive technique, he 
does not catch it; if he stands still, using the passive technique, he still does not catch 
it. What can he do? The poor creature is apparently quite helpless. Of course, it will be 
said that any attempt to answer such riddles is an easy way to go crazy. This is very 
true, and for just the same reasons it will be discovered that any attempt to discover 
happiness is also an easy way to go crazy, and the world today is a crazy place just 
because people are trying to do it. We are a collection of people running wildly round 
in circles in frantic pursuit of our own selves, and the picture is not particularly 
edifying. Yes, if we could see ourselves from a psychological standpoint we should 
think we had walked into bedlam. We should see men running away from their 
shadows, men trying to jump off the ground by tugging at their shoelaces, men trying 
to see their own eyes and kiss their own lips. It is like trying to mend a hole in one part 
of a handkerchief by taking a patch from another. For the trouble is that all our 
schemes, systems, and devices are partial. It is as if we ourselves were the hole in the 
handkerchief; we see some other part of the handkerchief and think how pleasant it 
would be to fill our emptiness by acquiring it. So we cut it out and fill ourselves, only 
to find that we are now the new hole—the invisible blind spot in the universe. 4 


The Squirrel Cage of Duality 


That which we call God can only be known intimately by total acceptance, because 
freedom by its very nature cannot be limited. Therefore we may say that when you 
consider yourself free to accept but not to escape, this is not freedom. But the human 
mind is so constructed that it cannot imagine total acceptance; our intellect is such that 
it must think in dualities—this and not that, that and not this. It is a seesaw; one end 


must be up and the other down; both ends cannot be up at the same time and down at 
the same time. Therefore freedom of the spirit demands the interference of some factor 
over and above the human intellect. For not only is the intellect unable to conceive of 
this totality, it is also unable to appreciate its value, arguing that in “abolishing” 
dualism you destroy all values, give sanction to the wildest libertinism, and in fact 
require nothing more of the spiritual man than that he should do as he likes. (Somehow 
we are reminded of St. Augustine’s precept, “Love, and do as you will.”) The same 
objection is raised to the Oriental idea of God as the Self of the universe, the One 
Reality and true self of all creatures, forms, activities, thoughts, and substances. It is 
argued that if everything is God, then God is nothing—on the principle of W. S. 
Gilbert’s line, “When everybody’s somebody, then no one’s anybody.” 

The Oriental philosophies of Vedanta, Taoism, and Mahayana Buddhism do not, 
however, involve this reductio ad absurdum, because to say that all things are God is not 
quite the same as saying that everything is one thing; in fact it is not even remotely the 
same. In their view God is not a thing, and they do not abolish all differences by 
reducing individual shapes and forms to a single, infinite formlessness. For God is not 
the One as distinct from the Many, nor unity as distinct from diversity.5 We cannot 
begin to understand the Oriental view of God until we can conceive of a “One” that can 
include both unity and diversity, which can at the same time be God and a speck of 
dust or a human being with equal reality. In this sense it might be said that the oneness 
of things is revealed in their multiplicity and diversity. Such paradoxes are inevitable 
when we try to approach nonduality from the intellectual point of view. This is true not 
only of intellect, for the way of acceptance which we have already described involves 
much more than mere thinking; nevertheless it is just as liable to be involved in this 
squirrel cage of duality. 

The problems of duality are clearly stated in the Christian faith, but they often pass 
unrecognized under the symbols in which they are contained. The story of the Fall, of 
the eating of the fruit of the Tree of Good and Evil, describes man’s involvement in the 
vicious circle—a condition in which, of his own power, he is able to do nothing good 
that is not vitiated by evil. In this condition it may be said that “all good deeds are 
done for the love of gain,” that is, with a purely self-interested motive, because 
“honesty is the best policy.” Every advance in morality is counterbalanced by the 
growth of repressed evil in the unconscious, for morality has to be imposed by law and 
wherever there is compulsion there is repression of instinctual urges. Indeed, the very 
formulation of the ideal of righteousness suggests and aggravates its opposite. Thus St. 
Paul says, “I had not known lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt not covet.” So, 
too, Lao Tzu remarks in the Tao Te Ching: 


When the great Tao is lost, spring forth benevolence and righteousness. 
When wisdom and sagacity arise, there are great hypocrites. 
When family relations are no longer harmonious, we have filial children and devoted parents. 
When a nation is in confusion and disorder, patriots are recognized. 
Where Tao is, equilibrium is. When Tao is lost, out come all the differences of things. 
[Trans. Ch’u Ta-kao] 


It is not surprising, therefore, that Christian doctrine follows St. Paul in saying that 
salvation for fallen man is unattainable by law alone, which is to say by technique. For 
this is not only a question of morality. So long as man attempts to save himself by the 
mere observance of moral, spiritual, or psychological law he is involved in the vicious 
circle of duality. 


The Acceptance of Grace 


The motivating power of the vicious circle is pride. In Christian terms we should say 
that man is not willing to be saved as he is; he feels that it is necessary for him to do 
something about it, to earn salvation by his own self-made spirituality and 
righteousness. The Grace of God is offered freely to all, but through pride man will not 
accept it. He cannot bear the thought that he is absolutely powerless to lift himself up 
and that the only chance of salvation is simply to accept something which is offered as 
freely to the saint as to the sinner. If nothing can be done to earn this Grace it seems to 
set all man’s self-imposed ideals at naught; he has to confess himself impotent, and this 
is more than he can bear. So the gift of Grace is tacitly ignored, and man goes on trying 
to manufacture it for himself. 

When it is said that man will not let himself be saved as he is, this is another way of 
saying that he will not accept himself as he is; subtly he gets around this simple act by 
making a technique out of acceptance, setting it up as something which he should do in 
order to be a “good boy.” And as soon as acceptance is made a question of doing and 
technique we have the vicious circle. True acceptance is not something to be attained; it 
is not an ideal to be sought after—a state of soul which can be possessed and acquired, 
which we can add to ourselves in order to increase our spiritual stature. If another 
paradox may be forgiven, true acceptance is accepting yourself as you are NOW, at this 
moment, before you have even begun to make yourself different by accepting yourself.7 
In other words, as soon as we try to make the ideal state of mind called “acceptance” 
something different from the state of mind which we have at this moment, this is the 
pride which makes it so difficult to accept what we are now, the barrier that stands 
between man and that which we call God or Tao. 

But when it is suggested that we should find union with God here and now at this 
very moment, everyone is outraged and begins to make excuses. “After all, how can we 
attain such sublime understanding at this moment? We are unprepared. We are not 
good enough. We shall have to do all kinds of things first. We must meditate and train 
ourselves in religious discipline, and then perhaps after many years we shall be fit and 
worthy to attain that greatest of all attainments.” But this is surely a peculiar form of 
blindness and false pride, masquerading as humility. We see God every time we open 
our eyes; we inhale Him at every breath; we use His strength in every movement of a 
finger; we think Him in every thought, although we may not think of Him, and we taste 
Him in every bite of food. This is an old story to those who have studied the wisdom of 
the East, but still the search goes on, a search for something we have never lost, 
something which is staring us right in the face, a search which the Buddhists 
sometimes describe as “hiding loot in one’s pocket and declaring oneself innocent.” It is 
difficult just because it is too easy, for man finds it so hard to climb down from his high 
horse and accept that which is, freely and unreservedly. Small wonder, then, that we 
are advised to become again as little children, who have an inconvenient way of 
drawing attention to obvious things which the adult mind cannot or will not see. For 
spiritual understanding is not a reward given to you for being a great person; you 
cannot acquire it any more than you can acquire the wind and the stars. But you can 
open your eyes and see it. 


The Dweller on the Threshold 


Now in this true acceptance of oneself there is a mystery, for, as the Pythagoreans say, 
“Know thyself, and thou wilt know the universe and the gods.” The mystery is that 
something so apparently simple and lowly as oneself as it is at this moment can contain 
so great a treasure. But that is the peculiarity of divine Grace; it is always found where 
it would least be expected, for, in the words of Lao Tzu, Tao “seeks, like water, the 
lowly level which men abhor.” And so it happens that the very thing we are forever 


struggling to get away from, to outgrow, to change, and to escape, is the very thing 
which holds the much desired secret. That is why there is a vicious circle, why our 
search for happiness is this frantic running around, pursuing in ignorance that which 
we are trying to flee. We are running away from our front in order to catch up with our 
back, with the result that, for us, happiness is always somewhere in the future, just 
round the corner perhaps, but always beyond. Ourselves and our situation as they are 
at this moment contain the whole secret, but when we try to accept them in the 
technical way we are still going on with the circular chase; we are trying to add to 
them the virtue of acceptance so that we do not have to face them as they are, without 
their acceptance and with all their shortcomings, their conflicts, their desires to escape, 
their impotence, and their sins. We catch a glimpse of them from time to time in all 
their nakedness and run from them as fast as we can go, trying to improve them, 
spiritualize them, and in a thousand other ways hide such terrible nudity. Naturally we 
deceive ourselves and begin to have fanciful pictures of ourselves as we are. But when 
these pictures are torn away we meet again the unedifying and fearful sight of our real 
selves, and it seems impossible that the great treasure can have anything to do with 
such a degraded state of affairs. 

From one point of view this sight of our true selves is the dreaded Dweller on the 
Threshold, the monster which all initiates into the divine mysteries have to face on the 
brink of their enlightenment. But the Dweller on the Threshold is the face of God seen 
from this side of the brink; you pass over the brink if you can call Him by His real 
name, though it needs a profound humility to utter it. For to accept the Grace of God as 
you are now, without any “improvements” and dressing up in more respectable clothes, 
is to realize that all the cherished ambitions of self-interest, all your efforts to make 
yourself great, are vain. You have to come down to the level of worms and dust which 
have not a particle of your cleverness and yet exist by the Grace of God. Most people 
know this from childhood, and yet never can be simple enough to recognize it, for 
“which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature?...Consider the 
lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: and yet I say unto 
you, that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. Wherefore, if 
God so clothe the grass of the field, which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the 
oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith?”s It would be well for 
those who struggle so hard in the squirrel cage of duality to be spiritual, to accept, to 
find wisdom, and to be happy to remember occasionally those words, “Which of you by 
taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature?” 


The Religious Problem of Modern Man 


But familiarity breeds contempt. Modern man is now seeking in all manner of new 
religions, in the psychology of the unconscious, and in the wisdom of Asia what has 
always been in the teaching of Christ and the symbolism of the Church. Yet we cannot 
blame him, so much has the Christian religion been dragged in the mud. Most of its 
teachers have long forgotten the meaning of its symbols, even if they ever knew them, 
and the events in the life of the spirit which they describe have been placed at the safe 
distance of bygone history. Moreover its Bible is such a vast collection of conflicting 
ideas that Christians, accepting all of it as the word of God, have often fallen into the 
absurdity of trying to incorporate the legalistic morality of the Jews9 into their own 
faith with the fantastic result that many forms of Protestantism are much more Jewish 
than Christian. They try to interpret the Sermon on the Mount in the same spirit as the 
Ten Commandments, whereas if they had ever read St. Paul they would realize their 
utter difference. (Curiously enough, there are times when even St. Paul seems unable to 
shake off his hereditary legalism and realize the full implications of his own faith.) But 


in Christianity this legalistic moralism has been carried to such extremes of 
sanctimonious gloom that for thousands the very word “religion” means little more 
than doing exactly what you don’t like. So often have the words “God” and “Christ” 
been said with a frown in the voice or with a type of intense seriousness in which there 
is no room for humor or beauty that they are apt to cause a deadness of heart instead 
of a thrill. There is hardly any other religion in the world with quite this depressive 
atmosphere, and even in Christianity it is confined mainly to Protestantism—to the 
spiritual descendants of Calvin, Luther, Knox, and Wesley. It is small wonder, therefore, 
that people of spirit turn to the more colorful faiths of Catholicism (if they wish to 
remain Christian), Buddhism, Hinduism, Theosophy, or, if they are of a more scientific 
mentality, to one of the many psychological systems of modern times. I even know 
those who acknowledge themselves pagans, sun worshippers, and polytheists. 

But Christianity is our traditional faith; it is in our blood and bones. Therefore it is 
possible and very desirable that the wisdom of Asia and the psychology of the 
unconscious will bring its treasures to light again and interpret them in a way that will 
give us an altogether new zest for it. Until I had studied the religions of the East for 
some years the teaching of Christ and the symbols of Christianity had no real meaning 
for me. But I do not mean to suggest that a study of Oriental faiths is essential for an 
understanding of Christianity. For my own part, I believe that my understanding would 
have been much the same had I read Eckhart, Augustine, 4 Kempis, Berdyaev, and 
others of their caliber instead of the sages of India and China. But there is an increasing 
interest in the wisdom of the East among us which will take its own course and to 
which many will turn before they ever understand Christianity as anything more than a 
set of inhibitions and outworn dogmas. Of all the new religions and ways of life that 
have been evolved in the West, Christianity is almost alone in understanding a way out 
of the vicious circle of dualism, but it is difficult to see how that way can appeal to 
thousands of thinking men and women unless they can approach Christianity with 
somewhat changed conceptions of God and the soul. For, as Jung so often points out, 
the difficulty for modern man with his rationalistic background is to believe in 
Christianity as a system of theology. As he writes in Modern Man in Search of a Soul: 


People no longer feel themselves to be redeemed by the death of Christ; they cannot believe— 
they cannot compel themselves to believe, however happy they may deem the man who has a 
belief. Sin has for them become something quite relative: what is evil for one is good for another. 
After all, why should not Buddha be in the right also? [p. 268] 


Indeed, we may say of modern man’s attitude to religion as a whole that he has 
little patience with doctrines that are beyond objective proof and that seem to him, 
perhaps arbitrarily, to be stretching his credulity. But if he can be shown that there is a 
psychological approach to Christianity almost independent of doctrine as such, in 
which doctrines are taken as symbols of spiritual experiences, this may perhaps be the 
foundation for a wholly new attitude to religion in the Western world. This is the point 
of view from which we shall approach the doctrines of the Orient—a point of view 
which many Easterners have adopted and among whom we must number the Buddha 
himself. He valued only immediate personal experiences and when questioned upon the 
ultimate mysteries of the universe answered only with “silence—and a finger pointing 
the way.” 


6. THE ONE IN THE MANY 


Artnougn that freedom of the spirit which is known through the total acceptance of 


life and of oneself can never be contained in any form of words and ideas, it is most 
clearly expressed in the ancient wisdom of Asia. In Hindu Vedanta, Mahayana 
Buddhism, and Taoism we find a view of life which comes as near as anything to a 
description of that inner experience which reveals, as the Japanese Buddhist Hakuin 
wrote, that 


This very earth is the Lotus Land of Purity, 
And this very body is the body of Buddha. 


The approach to this understanding began independently in both India and China; after 
a period of centuries the two streams merged and, to my own mind, achieved their 
fulfillment in China some twelve hundred years ago. In studying this wisdom it is 
important to follow its historical development, both to grasp the continuity of 
experience and to see how close a resemblance there is between the growth in history 
and the growth of that same experience in the mind of the individual. Bear always in 
mind that the doctrines of these ancient religions are the symbols of inward, personal 
experiences rather than attempts to describe metaphysical truth. The important thing is 
not whether the doctrine contains an objective statement of fact about the universe; it 
is to discover what inward experience, what state of mind or attitude to life would lead 
human beings to think in that way. For the wisdom of the East has a strictly practical 
aim which is not mere knowledge about the universe; it aims at a transformation of the 
individual and of his feeling for life through experience rather than belief. This 
experience is psychological or spiritual, not metaphysical, and except in certain 
specialized fields has no relation to occultism or to what we understand in the West as 
philosophy. (See above, ch. 2, pp. 46-48 and ch. 3, pp. 86-88.) 


Vedanta and the Upanishads 


Some eight hundred years before the birth of Christ the sages of India began to instruct 
their disciples with a number of collected sayings and parables known as the 
Upanishads. No one knows who first uttered them, though from time to time some of 
them are attributed to Yajnavalkya, of whom Geden writes, “If the name represents a 
real individuality, and is not merely a title under whose shelter many convergent 
thoughts and reasonings have found expression, Yajnavalkya may claim a place with 
the greatest thinkers of the world or of any age.” The Upanishads are the foundation of 
what was subsequently known as Vedanta, which is to say the “end” or fulfillment of 
the Vedas, the Vedas being the earliest of all Hindu scriptures. With matchless economy 
and beauty of language the Upanishads speak in a number of different ways of 
Brahman, the One Reality which is expressed in all the manifold forms, objects, 
activities, and living beings of the universe. Thus it is said in the Katha Upanishad:1 


As the wind, though one, takes on new forms in whatever it enters; the Spirit, though one, takes 
new forms in whatever that lives. He is within all, and is also outside....There is one Ruler, the 
Spirit that is in all things, who transforms His one form into many. Only the wise who see Him in 
their souls attain the joy eternal. 


And again: 


From His life comes the universe, and in His life the universe moves. In His majesty is the terror 
of thunder. Those who know this attain immortality. From fear of Him fire burns and from fear 
of Him the sun shines. From fear of Him the clouds and winds, and death itself, move on their 
way. 


And in the Mundaka Upanishad: 


From Him comes all life and mind and the senses of all life. From Him comes space and light, air 
and fire and water, and this earth that holds us all....From Him comes the sun, and the source of 
all fire is the sun. From him comes the moon, and from this comes the rain and all herbs that 
grow upon earth. And man comes from Him, and man unto woman gives seed: and thus an 
infinity of beings comes from the Spirit supreme. 


But what is the exact relation between Brahman and His creatures? Is it the same 
relation of Creator to creature that we find in the Christian and Islamic conceptions, or 
is it the pantheistic relation of participation, in which the creature is a part of God, 
where God is one with the universe? The answer is given in the Chandogya Upanishad: 


All this universe is in truth Brahman. He is the beginning and end and life of all. As such, in 
silence, give unto Him adoration....There is a Spirit that is mind and life, light and truth and vast 
spaces. He contains all works and desires and all perfumes and all tastes. He enfolds the whole 
universe, and in silence is loving to all. This is the Spirit that is in my heart, smaller than a grain 
of rice, or a grain of barley, or a grain of mustard-seed....This is the Spirit that is in my heart, 
greater than the earth, greater than the sky, greater than heaven itself, greater than all these 
worlds. 


At first it sounds almost like pure pantheism, but later in the same Upanishad the 
master says, “An invisible and subtle essence is the Spirit of the whole universe. That is 
Reality. That is Truth. Thou art That.” The master does not tell his disciple that he is a 
part of Brahman; he tells him that he is Brahman, and if we are to give this doctrine a 
label we must say that it is not pantheism but panentheism.2 In the same way St. 
Catherine of Genoa says, “My me is God, nor do I know my selfhood save in Him,” and 
again, “My Being is God, not by simple participation, but by a true transformation of 
my Being.”3 

Therefore the phrase “That art thou” (tat tvam asi) is the first, fundamental principle 
of Vedanta arising from the second, that all things without exception are Brahman, not 
by participation, for Brahman is one and indivisible. Hence Vedanta is also known as 
the system of Advaita (literally, “not two”) or nonduality, and nonduality in philosophy 
is the natural expression of total acceptance in psychology. Every object, being, and 
activity is Brahman in His (or Its) entirety, for Brahman alone is—the “One-without-a- 
second.” But, it will be asked, if Brahman is the only reality, why do things appear to 
be separate, why do we human beings feel that we are separate egos and how is it that 
we are ignorant of our identity with Brahman? This, according to Vedanta, is maya—a 
word grossly misunderstood by most Western interpreters of Hindu thought, who 
translate it simply as “illusion.” As we have already shown, the original meaning of 
maya was “trick” or “device,” and it is sometimes described as the creative power of 
Brahman. Woodroffe describes it thus in his Shakti and Shakta:4 


Maya is not rightly rendered Illusion. In the first place it is conceived as a real Power of Being 
and as such is one with Full Reality. The Full, free of all illusion, experiences the engendering of 


the finite centers and the centers themselves in and as Its own changeless partless Self....Even 
God cannot have man’s mode of knowledge and enjoyment without becoming man. He by and as 
His Power does become man and yet remains Himself. Man is Power in limited form as Avidya 
[ignorance]. The Lord is unlimited Power as Maya. [p. 44] 


In other words, if man has the experience of separateness, this experience also is 
Brahman since there is nothing other than Brahman. Maya is not illusion as against 
reality, for in the Vedantist conception there is nothing apart from Reality which may 
be set over against it. Thus we may say that while there is no actual separateness from 
Brahman, there is certainly an experience of separateness, and this experience is real 
even though it is incomplete and relative. Maya is therefore only translatable as 
“illusion” in regard to the actual existence of separateness from Brahman; but as the 
experience of separateness maya is creative power, for that experience is the device 
whereby Brahman manifests Himself as creatures who act on their own initiative. 

But does this imply that though we may have a real experience, say, of a tree anda 
mountain as separate things, those two are not there at all, that while the experience 
may be real it has no real object to be known as a tree and a mountain? Is our 
imagination simply conjuring up these forms by Brahman’s power out of a vast and 
formless infinitude of sameness and uniformity? Do the Vedantins imply that when we 
have ascended from the partial experience of maya to the total experience of Brahman, 
we are conscious only of this infinite oneness and have no longer any perception of 
trees and mountains? Although many texts would seem to answer these questions in 
the affirmative, I cannot see that this is a true interpretation of the Upanishads or of 
the fundamental principle of nonduality. For it is not at all consistent with that 
principle to identify Brahman with infinite unity as distinct from finite diversity, with 
formlessness as distinct from form. If Brahman is truly nondual, He cannot be the 
infinite as opposed to the finite. But when we say that a man, a mountain, or a tree is 
Brahman, we are not denying that it is a man, a mountain, or a tree. Conversely, if 
such objects are real, this does not involve their separateness from Brahman and in no 
way denies the statement that Brahman is the only reality. If by saying that man is 
Brahman we imply that he is not man, we fall straight into dualism because we are 
virtually saying that Brahman is not man! If this interpretation is incorrect, I err in 
good company, for, to quote Woodroffe again, 


the Vishvasara Tantra says: “What is here, is elsewhere. What is not here, is nowhere.” The 
unseen is the seen, which is not some alien disguise behind which it lurks. Experience of the seen 
is the experience of the unseen in time and space. The life of the individual is an expression of 
the same laws which govern the universe. Thus the Hindu knows, from his own daily rest, that 
the Power which projects the universe rests. His dreamless slumber when only Bliss is known, 
tells him, in some fashion, of the causal state of universal rest. From the mode of his awakening 
and other psychological processes he divines the nature of creative thinking. [Ibid., p. 36] 


The state of infinite formlessness only describes Brahman in His condition of rest 
(pralaya), and it does not follow from this that the enlightened sage, while living in this 
world, sees all the forms of life as a vain, empty illusion drifting like insubstantial 
smoke across the face of a void. Such world-denying philosophy does not represent the 
true meaning of Vedanta, for it is said in the Isa Upanishad: 
In darkness are they who worship only the world, but in greater darkness they who worship the 
infinite alone. He who accepts both saves himself from death by knowledge of the former and 


attains immortality by the knowledge of the latter. 


So much for the doctrine. We now have to see into the state of mind which 
underlies it, described in the Mandukya Upanishad as 


that which is not conscious of the subjective, nor that which is conscious of the objective nor that 


which is conscious of both, nor that which is simple consciousness, nor that which is a mass all 
sentiency, nor that which is all darkness. It is unseen, transcendent, unapprehensible, 
uninferable, unthinkable, indescribable, the sole essence of the consciousness of self, the negative 
of all illusion, the ever peaceful, all bliss, the One Unit;—this indeed is atman [the Self], it should 
be known. [Trans. M. N. Dvivedi] 


One has to be careful of these negative descriptions which so delight the Hindu mind 
and remember the Chinese saying that “between the All and the Void is only a 
difference of name.”5 For on the one hand the Upanishads say that Brahman is all, 
while on the other they apply the technique of “neti, neti”—“not this, not this’—to 
show that no individual thing is, as such, a sufficient description of Brahman. Therefore 
it cannot be said that the knowledge of Brahman is consciousness of the subjective, 
because this at once excludes consciousness of the objective and all other states of 
consciousness as well. In regard to these states Brahman is each and all, but none to the 
exclusion of others. In terms of psychology this is the complete acceptance of all 
possible states of mind and of all possible circumstances, for to say that all things are 
Brahman is another way of saying that all things are to be accepted—even 
nonacceptance, we must add if our nondualism is to be thorough. 

Thus there is nothing man can do to attain union with Brahman, for whether his 
state of mind is vidya (enlightenment) or avidya (ignorance) it is nevertheless Brahman. 
Any attempt to gain that union by doing, by making changes, is egoistic pride, being 
man’s attempt to achieve by his own power what already is by the power of Brahman. 
Such pride, to use a popular phrase, is only man’s own funeral; it does not affect 
Brahman. In this very moment all men are Brahman in spite of and because of 
themselves, and by no possible means can they make or break that union; man can 
only become conscious of it, not as metaphysical truth but as spiritual freedom, by 
seeing his own nature as it is and relaxing that contraction (sankocha) of egoistic pride 
which will not let his nature be as it is, and which is forever trying to get away from it 
by making a virtue of acceptance. Deliverance (kaivalya) or freedom is not the result of 
any course of action, whether mental or physical or moral; according to Vedanta it 
comes only by Knowledge in the special sense of gnana (Gk. yvw6étc) as the fruit of 
“meditation,” which is being rather than doing.6 

The Hindu mind was ever in search of “that One thing, knowing which, we shall 
know all.” Obviously, knowledge in this sense is not just factual information; the 
phrase is another way of saying that the whole cannot be known by the sum of its 
parts. Thus to know all is not to know about everything, for, as Woodroffe explains, it 
is not an experience of the whole but the experience whole.7 This becomes clearer 
when we understand the reasons for which the experience was originally sought. Our 
ordinary, partial experience is always limited: joy is conditioned by sorrow, pleasure by 
pain, life by death, and knowledge by ignorance. Therefore the Hindus conceived 
freedom as an experience which had no conditioning opposite and called it union with 
Brahman, the “One-without-a-second.” For man is always bound so long as he depends 
for his happiness on a partial experience; joy must always give way to sorrow, 
otherwise it can never be known as joy. But the “experience whole” has no opposite; all 
the pairs of opposites exist in it, and therefore it may be described as the total 
acceptance of experience as we know it now, at this and at every moment. There is no 
greater freedom than the freedom to be what you are now. To this experience of 
freedom the doctrine of Brahman is a key for those who have the wits to use it, for the 
East does not give out its wisdom in plain statements for all and sundry to use or abuse 
as they please. It gives hints and makes everyone work hard to unravel their meaning 
on the principle of “cast not your pearls before swine.” 


Early Buddhism 


But inevitably there came a time when the experience was obscured by the doctrine, 
when the psychology of religion became the philosophy of religion and the Brahmanic 
tradition degenerated into scholasticism, ceremonialism, and fantastic extremes of 
asceticism whose object was not to accept the opposites but to destroy them, so 
negatively was the doctrine interpreted. In the depths of this degeneration there 
appeared in India one Gautama Siddhartha, a prince of the Sakya clan, afterward 
known as the Buddha, which is perhaps the most tremendous title that a son of India 
could be given. According to the tradition, Buddhas arise in the human race about once 
in every five thousand years at times when the “True Law” is forgotten among men. 
The word “Buddha” is derived from the root budh—“to know,” and a Buddha is thus 
one who is supremely enlightened or awakened, one who has plumbed the uttermost 
mysteries of the universe and attained all knowledge, one who, out of his time, has 
reached the full height of human evolution. No one can tell whether Gautama was 
actually such a being, for the imaginative mind of the Orient has undoubtedly added 
much legend to fact, and it cannot be said that such a giddy height of attainment is the 
immediate object of subsequent Buddhist thought and practice. As we shall see, in 
China at least the word “Buddha” has been understood in a more immediately practical 
sense, although the deepest reverence is still accorded to the supreme Buddhas, to 
Gautama, Amitabha, and the various Dhyani Buddhas of Mahayanist theology. 

Although we have in writing a prodigious number of words attributed to the 
Buddha, little is known of him. For a long time after his death (circa 550 Bc) his words 
were passed from mouth to mouth and learned by rote—hence their tabulated 
mnemonic form—and when they were finally set down in writing their style bore little 
relation to the spoken words of any human being that ever lived. The earliest records 
of his teaching are found in the Pali Canon, three large groups of scriptures which read, 
for a great part, like a statistical report compiled on wet afternoons by monks who had 
nothing better to do. Another considerable section (the Vinaya) contains the very 
elaborate system of rules and regulations for the conduct of the monastic order 
(sangha), most of which were probably invented in later times and ascribed to the 
Buddha to give them the necessary sanction. Again they are obviously the work of 
those whose time was so slightly filled that they could devote hours and hours to the 
invention of pettifogging restrictions. As for the sections on psychology, never were 
there such ponderous lists of minutiae, the apparent aim of which is to analyze the 
human being down to the last detail and so prove that he does not really exist. One has 
every sympathy with the Chinese Buddhist master who described these records as “lists 
of ghosts and sheets of paper fit only to wipe the dirt from your skin.” The actual, 
positive teaching has the same tendency to repetitiveness and decomposition, having 
the general aspect of a flat, barren plain without any definite mountains or valleys; it 
just goes on and on. It seems nothing less than a miracle that a great world religion can 
have grown on such a foundation, but I do not think it did. 

Here and there we find oases in this desert of words—passages of the same 
profound beauty which graces the Upanishads and of a somewhat similar meaning. 
These will be found principally in a collection of sayings known as the Dhammapada (of 
which I recommend the translation by Mrs. C. A. F. Rhys Davids).8 They are found, too, 
in some of the Dialogues and in other isolated sections of the Canon, and they stand out 
in such contrast to the rest that they are immediately recognizable as the words of a 
truly great mind. Therefore to arrive at some idea of the Buddha’s teaching we have to 
take such passages and consider them in their historical context, in relation to what 
came before them and to what developed out of them. We must remember that the 
Buddha was active at a time when Hinduism was in a decline, when spiritual 
experience had been forgotten in its symbols. Except in some few instances his own 
teaching was swept away in this decline and became so devitalized that it ultimately 


died out in the land of its birth. But for some hundreds of years a truly vital tradition 
lived on in India, drawing to it some of the best minds then existing among the 
Brahmins. This tradition finally came north to China, Tibet, and Japan, and in China 
Buddhism achieved its full glory in the blending of Indian profundity with the Chinese 
senses of reality, beauty, and humor. 


The Buddhism of Gautama 


The Buddha’s teaching is unique in its utter lack of theology; it concentrates wholly on 
the necessity of arriving at a personal, immediate experience and dispenses with the 
doctrinal symbol of that experience. In this respect it is the only truly psychological 
religion. It is a mistake to say that the Buddha denied the existence of any kind of God 
or soul; these were subjects he simply refused to discuss on the grounds that mere 
talking and mere belief were not conducive to enlightenment. “One thing do I teach,” 
he said. “Dukkha and deliverance from dukkha.” It is usually translated “suffering and 
deliverance from suffering,” but for us the word “suffering” is rather too sweeping. I 
prefer the translation “discord” or even “unhappiness.” According to him the cause of 
discord or unhappiness was tanha or selfish craving, which is perhaps best understood 
as refusal to accept the “three signs of being.” These are: 


1.Anicca—Change or Impermanence. 

2.Anatta—Literally, “No-self.” The unreality of the ego as a permanent, self-contained, and self- 
directing unit. 

3.Dukkha—In this context, suffering in its widest sense. 


Many people have thought that in making anatta one of the three signs of being the 
Buddha denied absolutely the existence of any eternal principle in man whatsoever. 
Actually he denied nothing more than the self-existence of the ego (see above, ch. 1, p. 
25), and although as a general rule he refused to discuss the existence of a “Higher 
Self’ (which would be identical with Brahman) there is no doubt that he had it in 
mind, for he refers directly to it in several places.9 

When these three signs of being are fully accepted, man attains the experience of 
Nirvana, whose literal meaning is the dying out of the fire of tanha. In order that no 
one should confuse doctrine with experience he only described Nirvana negatively and 
would say nothing positive about it at all. Nirvana, resulting from the acceptance of the 
three signs of being, is deliverance from sangsara, the “Wheel of Birth and Death”—a 
general symbol of limited experience, of the bondage of the spirit in the wheel of 
opposites where all that we like is conditioned by what we dislike. Figuratively (and 
perhaps actually; we do not know) Nirvana is understood as deliverance from the 
necessity of being reborn again and again in this world of sangsara. For sangsara is just 
like what we have called the vicious circle—a circle which turns on and on as long as 
we try to grapple with the opposites in their own terms, as long as we set pleasure 
against pain, life against death, permanence against change, and acceptance against 
escape. The “Wheel of Birth and Death” is indeed the squirrel cage of man’s 
unhappiness, pursuing himself in order to escape from himself. It is like a bar revolving 
on its center; the more you push against one end of it, the more it revolves. 

Total acceptance of the three signs of being culminates and fulfills itself in the 
experience of enlightenment or awakening (bodhi), which is the abrupt transition from 
the dual to the nondual view of life, for Nirvana is sometimes described by the same 
negative method as employed by the Vedantins in regard to Brahman (cf. the passage 
quoted on pp. 153-54 from the Mandukya Upanishad). Thus in the Pali Canon alone 
there is an abundance of evidence to show that Nirvana indicates the same experience 
of nonduality; a somewhat neglected passage from the Canon puts this beyond all 


doubt, for Gautama says:10 


Thus the Tathagata [Buddha] knows the straight path that leads to a union with Brahma. He 
knows it as one who has entered the world of Brahma and has been born in it. There can be no 
doubt in him. 


This is one of a few hints that the Buddha’s view of life went far deeper than many of 
his disciples admit. For, after his death, his followers began to separate into two great 
divisions known subsequently as the Mahayana (Great Vehicle) and Hinayana (Lesser 
Vehicle). It was as if the seed planted by the Buddha had sprouted into two stems, of 
which one continued to grow while the other withered. For the Hinayana (now 
confined to Ceylon [Sri Lanka], Burma [Myanmar], and Siam [Thailand]) stuck to the 
letter of the Pali Canon, “working upon it,” to borrow an appropriate sentence from 
Bacon, “as the spider worketh its web, bringing forth cobwebs of learning, admirable 
for its fineness of thread and work, but of no substance or profit.” In their hands the 
Buddha’s teaching decomposed just as their psychology decomposed man and the 
universe, proving the nonexistence of all things. 


Mahayana Buddhism 


But the Mahayana began where the Buddha left off—if indeed there is no truth in the 
claim that Mahayana is the Buddha’s esoteric teaching. It explored further into the 
psychology of enlightenment, the nature of Nirvana and sangsara, and the spiritual 
ideals of Buddhism. One tradition claims that the secret of enlightenment was passed, 
by a direct mystical communication, down the Mahayana line from patriarch to 
patriarch of the order.11 Yet although Mahayana by no means escaped the 
scholasticism of the Hindu mind, and although, contrary to the Buddha’s own practice, 
it indulged in some of the most subtle metaphysical speculations that man has 
produced, it established a number of principles which have formed the basis for the 
greatest spiritual achievements of Buddhism. 

The Hinayanists looked upon Nirvana as an escape from the pains of life and death 
—a conception which to the Mahayanists with their Brahmanic background appeared 
as the old error of dualism. Thus the ideal man of the Hinayana was the Arhat—one 
who simply attained Nirvana and ceased from rebirth, entering into the formless rest, 
bliss, and impersonality of the eternal. But the Mahayanists gave their philosophy of 
nonduality practical expression in the ideal of the Bodhisattva, who attains liberation 
but remains in the world of birth and death to assist all other beings to enlightenment. 
In other words, they refused to make any absolute distinction between Nirvana and 
sangsara; the two states are the same, seen, as it were, from different points of view. 
Therefore the great Lankavatara Sutra says:12 


False imagination teaches that such things as light and shade, long and short, black and white are 
different and are to be discriminated; but they are not independent of each other; they are only 
different aspects of the same thing, they are terms of relation, not of reality. Conditions of 
existence are not of a mutually exclusive character; in essence things are not two but one. Even 
Nirvana and Samsara’s [sangsara] world of life and death are aspects of the same thing, for there 
is no Nirvana except where is Samsara, and no Samsara except where is Nirvana. All duality is 
falsely imagined. [Trans. D. T. Suzuki] 


In terms of practical psychology this means that there is no actual distinction between 
our ordinary, everyday experience and the experience of Nirvana or spiritual freedom. 
But for some people this experience is binding and for others liberating, and the 
problem is to achieve what the Lankavatara calls that “turning about in the deepest seat 
of consciousness” which effects the transformation. 


Now the Mahayana was more thoroughgoing in its statement of this problem than 
even Vedanta. For what is our ordinary, everyday experience? It is not just our 
awareness of external circumstances or even such ordinary activities as walking, eating, 
sleeping, breathing, and speaking; it includes also our thinking and feeling—our ideas, 
moods, desires, passions, and fears. In its most concrete form ordinary, everyday 
experience is just how you feel at this moment. In a certain sense Buddhism is very 
much a philosophy and a psychology of the moment, for if we are asked what life is, 
and if our answer is to be a practical demonstration and not a theory, we can do no 
better than point to the moment—now! It is in the moment that we find reality and 
freedom, for acceptance of life is acceptance of the present moment now and at all 
times. This is not to give the impression that the psychological process is a succession 
of lightning-quick acts of acceptance, as if they were hurried jabs with a sword that 
have to be thrust home before the enemy of “making a virtue of acceptance” has 
spoiled things by carrying us once again into the vicious circle. Acceptance of the 
moment is allowing the moment to live, which, indeed, is another way of saying that it 
is to allow life to live, to be what it is now (yathabhutam). Thus to allow this moment of 
experience and all that it contains freedom to be as it is, to come in its own time and to 
go in its own time, this is to allow the moment, which is what we are now, to set us 
free; it is to realize that life, as expressed in the moment, has always been setting us 
free from the very beginning, whereas we have chosen to ignore it and tried to achieve 
that freedom by ourselves. 

For this reason Mahayana Buddhism teaches that Nirvana or enlightenment cannot 
really be attained, because the moment we try to attain it by our own power we are 
using it as an escape from what is now, and we are also forgetting that Nirvana is 
unattainable in the sense that it already is. To quote the Lankavatara Sutra:13 


Those who are suffering or who fear suffering, think of Nirvana as an escape and a recompense. 
They imagine that Nirvana consists in the future annihilation of the senses and the sense-minds; 
they are not aware that...this life-and-death world and Nirvana are not to be separated. 


And again: 


Some day each and every one will be influenced by the wisdom and love of the Tathagatas of 
Transformation [Buddhas appearing in the world] to lay up a stock of merit and ascend the 
stages [of spiritual achievement]. But, if they only realized it, they are already in the Tathagata’s 
Nirvana, for, in Noble Wisdom [arya-prajna], all things are in Nirvana from the beginning. 


Indeed, from beginningless time, Nirvana has been achieved for us and we have only to 
accept or realize it. It is much the same, psychologically speaking, as the Grace of God 
in Christianity, but because of our pride we will not recognize it in our experience of 
this moment and so do not allow ourselves to be free. In the words which Edwin 
Arnold put into the Buddha’s mouth 


Ye suffer from yourselves. None else compels 
None other holds you that ye live and die, 

And whirl upon the wheel, and hug and kiss 
Its spokes of agony, 

Its tire of tears, its nave of nothingness. 


Therefore to those who, in this pride, are trying to use enlightenment as an escape from 
themselves the Mahayana says: 


When people attain Enlightenment but still continue to cherish the notion of Enlightenment, it 
means that Enlightenment itself has become an obstructing delusion; therefore, people should 
follow the path to Enlightenment until in their thoughts worldly passions and Enlightenment 
become one thing. 


And again in the Saptasatika:14 


Bodhi [Enlightenment] is the five offences, and the five offences are Bodhi....If there is one who 
regards Bodhi as something attainable, something in which discipline is possible, that one 
commits self-arrogance. 


From one point of view this is dangerous wisdom. There is no better antidote to 
spiritual pride, but, on the other hand, it might be used as an excuse for any amount of 
licentiousness. In Buddhism, wisdom is power and sometimes its symbol is a 
thunderbolt (dorje)—a gigantic force that may be used for good or ill. For reasons that 
will shortly appear, I do not feel that it is a force for ill when rightly understood, but 
Buddhism took no chances and never neglected to keep in the forefront the Buddha’s 
moral precepts. By themselves these precepts and their observance do not produce that 
wisdom. But they prepare the ground for it and make man safe for it, disciplining him 
so that he acquires a taste for morality and becomes less and less likely to use the 
power of wisdom against his own interests and those of human society. The monastic 
moral code of Buddhism is perhaps stricter than that of any other religion, and though 
this code becomes absurd when the secret of that wisdom has been lost, it is 
tremendously important when the real thing flourishes. Some of us wish that the West 
would put the same restrictions on the use of the physical powers of science. 
Sometimes I believe that the Mahayana scriptures were made long and difficult reading 
so that lazy monks who might try to abuse them would go to sleep in their studies. 
Even so, there is no doubt that the Hindu mind found a glorious opportunity for subtle 
hairsplitting in setting out the fine distinctions between Nirvana and _ sangsara, 
enlightenment and ignorance, for the Mahayana scriptures form the largest bible in the 
world. The whole Mahayana Canon comprises some sixteen hundred works, some of 
the longer ones, of which there are an appreciable number, running into as many as a 
hundred and twenty volumes! Even so, we are told that certain parts of it have been 
lost. 


Taoism and the I Ching 


In form rather than content the native Chinese religion of Taoism presents a refreshing 
contrast. It has only four important scriptures, all of which are eminently readable, 
straightforward, and brief; these are the works of Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu, Lieh Tzu, and 
Huai-nan Tzu. Its basic principles, however, are so close to those of Buddhism that the 
two faiths often became blended and were able to improve one another in many ways, 
especially as to form and method. According to tradition Lao Tzu, the founder of 
Taoism, was a contemporary of the Buddha and also of Confucius.15 Although some, 
after a modern fashion, have denied his existence the story persists that Lao Tzu was a 
court librarian who, before departing to the western mountains to end his days in 
retirement, left behind the short collection of sayings known as the Tao Te Ching. 
Chuang Tzu lived some four hundred years later and stands in somewhat the same 
relation to Lao Tzu as St. Paul to Jesus Christ; his writings are longer and in some ways 
more developed than Lao Tzu’s, one of their chief features being a large supply of 
anecdotes and parables which are an unending feast of wisdom and humor. 

Taoism is based on three fundamental principles, known respectively as Tao, Te, 
and Wu-wei. Many attempts have been made to translate the word “Tao”—the Way, 
Reason, God, Law, the Logos, Nature, Life, and Meaning. Jung, who worked with the 
German Orientalist Wilhelm, has called it the principle of synchronicity and has also 
made it mean “personality” in a special sense of the word.16 All these terms, however, 
only give certain aspects of the meaning of Tao, and I prefer to follow the example of 
those Orientalists who have left it untranslated. The idea of Tao is found in Chinese 


thought long before the time of Lao Tzu; originally it meant “speech” and thus the Tao 
Te Ching appropriately opens with the pun, “The Tao that can be tao-ed is not Tao,” or, 
as Ch’u Ta-kao renders it, “The Tao that can be expressed is not the eternal Tao.” In the 
I Ching or Book of Changes the “synchronistic” aspect of Tao is uppermost, and this 
little-understood work must be given some consideration because many authorities 
hold, and I believe rightly, that the I Ching is almost the foundation of Chinese thought. 
To my own knowledge the word does not occur philosophically in the actual text of the 
I Ching; but it is found in the appendices, of later date, and there is no doubt at all that 
the Chinese concept of Tao has been greatly influenced by the I Ching. Moreover, the 
“synchronistic” aspect of Tao has contributed largely to the Buddhist psychology of the 
moment. 

The I Ching is probably the second earliest of the great Chinese classics, and 
according to Legge was written in 1143 BC or thereabouts. It is generally used as a book 
of divination, but probably has much profounder uses. “If some years were added to 
my life,” said Confucius, “I would give fifty to the study of the I, and might then escape 
falling into great errors.”17 The actual text is an analysis of sixty-four hexagrams made 
up of eight trigrams, sets of divided and undivided lines corresponding to the eight 
principal factors or elements of life. One of these hexagrams (made up of two of the 
trigrams) is said to show the two main factors involved in any situation at a particular 
moment. The divided lines show the principle of yin (negative and female) and the 
undivided lines that of yang (positive and male), the two aspects under which Tao 
operates in the world of form. (See diagram.) The I Ching and the system of divination 
based upon it has, I believe, puzzled so many Westerners because it presupposes a view 
of life and a way of reasoning which are quite foreign to us. This is what Jung terms 
the principle of synchronicity. 


All our reasoning is based on the law of cause and effect operating as a sequence. 
Something is happening now because something else happened then. But the Chinese do 
not reason so much along this horizontal line from past, through present to future; they 
reason perpendicularly, from what is in one place now to what is in another place now. 
In other words, they do not ask why, or from what past causes, a certain set of things is 
happening now; they ask, “What is the meaning of those things happening together at 


this moment?” The word “Tao” is the answer to this question. The present situation 
within and around oneself is Tao, for the present moment is life. Our memory of the 
past is contained in it as well as the potentiality of the future. In short, this way of 
looking at things is based on a great appreciation of the significance of the moment, 
and implies that all things happening now have a definite relation to one another just 
because they have occurred together in time, if for no other reason. This is another way 
of saying that there is a harmony called Tao which blends all events in each moment of 
the universe into a perfect chord. The whole situation in and around you at this instant 
is a harmony with which you have to find your own union if you are to be in accord 
with Tao. When you have discovered your own union with it, you will be in the state of 
Te, sometimes rendered as “virtue” or “grace” or “power,” but best understood as Tao 
realized in man. Of this Lao Tzu says in his laconic style, “High Te is not Te and thus 
has Te; low Te does not lose Te and thus is not Te,” which Ch’u Ta-kao renders, “The 
superior virtue is not conscious of itself as virtue; therefore it has virtue. The inferior 
virtue never lets off virtue; therefore it has no virtue.” 

Tao and Te are best understood by considering the principle which joins them, 
which makes Tao appear in man as Te. This is wu-wei, the secret of harmony with Tao 
in its spiritual aspect. Other and slightly different orders of wu-wei give harmony with 
the Tao in its material aspects, and it is with these that the I Ching is primarily 
concerned—with the conduct of everyday affairs, politics, strategy, economics. For 
while the I Ching explores the mechanics, the parts and the detailed relationships of the 
momentary harmony, the purpose of Taoist psychology is to feel it as a whole; the 
former is analytic and the latter synthetic. Literally wu-wei means “nondoing” or 
“nonassertion” and is often mistranslated as “doing nothing.” But wu-wei means 
“nondoing” simply in the sense that by no action of our own can we bring ourselves 
into harmony with Tao, for, as we have seen, the secret of this harmony in the moment 
is not action but acceptance of a harmony already achieved by Tao itself. We do not 
alter the actual situation; but our attitude toward it undergoes a change whereby we 
feel harmony where before we felt discord. This change Chuang Tzu illustrates by the 
story of “Three in the Morning.”18 


A keeper of monkeys said with regard to their rations of chestnuts, that each monkey was to have 
three in the morning and four at night. But at this the monkeys were very angry, so the keeper 
said that they might have four in the morning and three at night, with which arrangement they 
were all well pleased. The actual number of the chestnuts remained the same, but there was an 
adaptation to the likes and dislikes of those concerned. [Trans. Giles] 


Wu-wei as acceptance indicates that the only difficulty of Taoism is its unheard-of 
simplicity. Thus Lao Tzu says: 


My words are very easy to know, and very easy to practice. 
Yet all men in the world do not know them, nor do they practice them. 


The reason for this simplicity is given in the third appendix of the I Ching. In the fifth 
chapter Legge’s translation reads: 


The successive movement of the inactive [yin] and active [yang] operations constitutes what is 
called the course of things [Tao]. That which ensues as a result of their movement is goodness; 
that which shows it in its completeness is the natures of men and things. The benevolent see it 
and call it benevolence. The wise see it and call it wisdom. The common people, acting daily 
according to it, yet have no knowledge of it. Thus it is that the course of things, as seen by the 
superior man, is seen by few. [The italics are mine.] 


The terms are different, but here is the principal meeting point of Taoism and 
Mahayana, for, as we read in the Lankavatara, “If they only realized it, they are already 


in the Tathagata’s Nirvana, for, in Noble Wisdom, all things are in Nirvana from the 
beginning.” Or, as the Christian says, if you will accept the Grace of God, you are saved 
as you are. The principle seems an outrage on common sense, backed by the egoism of 
moral ambition, and in a very complicated universe it seems much too simple, much 
too ludicrous to be true. Yet, says Lao Tzu, 


When the superior scholar is told of Tao 

He works hard to practise it. 

When the middling scholar is told of Tao, 

It seems that sometimes he keeps it and sometimes he loses it. 
When the inferior scholar is told of Tao, 

He laughs aloud at it. 

If it were not laughed at, it would not be sufficient to be Tao. 


Zen Buddhism in China 


The differences between Taoism on the one hand and Vedanta and Buddhism on the 
other probably arise from the difference of climate in China and India. The idea of Tao 
is rather more dynamic than that of Brahman; Tao is the ever-moving, momentary 
course of things, while Brahman is the eternal and the unchanging. The Hindu is 
leisurely and, like tropical vegetation, his mind is prolix, whereas the Chinese are 
rather less leisurely, for their land is none too fruitful and in their thoughts they are 
correspondingly brief and to the point. They rebelled against the wordiness of Hindu 
Buddhism and also against its tendency to seek wisdom in withdrawal from the world 
and in lofty states of consciousness without any relation to practical life. For the 
Hindus did not always follow the teachings of Mahayana to their logical conclusion, 
and it took Chinese good sense to practice what the profundity of the Hindu mind had 
conceived. Therefore toward the end of the eighth century AD the Chinese had evolved 
a form of Buddhism which combined all the virtues of Buddhism and Taoism, and, I 
cannot feel by mere chance, the rise of this Chinese school of Buddhism coincided with 
the golden age of Chinese culture in the dynasties of T’ang, Sung, and Yuan. In Chinese 
this school was known as Ch’an, but in the West it is more generally known by its 
Japanese name of Zen, and it has been summed up as 


A direct transmission [of Enlightenment] outside the scriptures; 
No dependence on words and letters; 

Direct pointing to the soul of man; 

Seeing into one’s own nature and attaining Buddhahood. 


For the founders of the Zen school believed, and rightly, that the secret of 
enlightenment can never be conveyed in any form of words or contained in any system 
of ideas. Nonduality or total acceptance defies all intellectual description, being a 
condition of the spirit having no opposite with which it may be contrasted and so 
understood. “Enlightenment,” according to a Zen teacher, “is your everyday thought”— 
and yet, what is it that makes the difference between an ordinary man and a Buddha? 
In accordance with the Taoist feeling for the moment, they called Zen the sudden as 
distinct from the gradual school of Buddhism, for its object is to see into one’s own 
nature at this moment and so realize that one’s own nature is “Buddha nature.” As Tao- 
wu said, “If you want to see it, see into it directly; but when you stop to think about it, 
it is altogether missed.” Zen as a technique is designed to solve the following problem: 
How, without resorting to the confusion of intellectualism, are we to demonstrate the 
oneness of Nirvana and sangsara, of Tao and life, and of spiritual freedom and everyday 
experience? If we say in so many words that Tao is what you are experiencing at this 
moment, this is no more than a concept. Furthermore, whenever we say that this or 


that is Tao, we are still speaking in terms of dualism; we are joining two things 
together that were never in need of joining, and still keeping in the back of our minds 
the distinction between “this” on the one hand and “Tao” on the other. In other words, 
the idea of Tao, Buddha, Nirvana, Brahman, or whatever it may be, is only confusing 
while it remains an idea, a concept over, above, and apart from ordinary experience. So 
how can we demonstrate Tao as a reality instead of a concept? How can we point to 
life and show man that it is Tao and that it can set him free without calling it by that 
name? After all, Tao and Nirvana are only names for an experience; those who 
invented them had the experience first and gave it its name afterward, but now people 
are so busy learning about the names that they forget the experience. 

The method of teaching evolved by the Zen masters was therefore a kind of spiritual 
“shock tactics” designed to demonstrate the experience itself in so concrete and forceful 
a manner that the disciple would be brought to a sudden realization. We have already 
recounted the somewhat unusual method used by Hui-neng to awaken the thief who 
tried to steal his robe and bowl, but his successors resorted to even more unusual 
tactics. The following examples have been rendered by Dr. D. T. Suzuki from early 
Chinese sources. 


Zen master Bokuju was once asked, “We have to dress and eat every day, and how can we escape 
from all that?” The master replied, “We dress; we eat.” “I do not understand.” “If you do not 
understand, put on your dress and eat your food.” 

When Gensha was treating an officer to tea the latter asked, “What does it mean when they 
say that in spite of our having it every day we do not know it?” Gensha took up a piece of cake 
and offered it to him. After eating the cake, the officer repeated the question, thinking the master 
had not heard him, whereat Gensha replied, “Only that we do not know it even when we are 
using it every day.” 

On another occasion a disciple asked Gensha how to enter the Path. Said Gensha, “Do you 
hear the murmuring of the stream?” “Yes, I do.” “There is a way to enter.” 

A Confucian scholar came to Kwaido to ask about Zen. Kwaido answered, “There is a passage 
in the text you are so thoroughly familiar with, which fitly describes the teaching of Zen. Did not 
Confucius declare, ‘Do you think I am holding something back from you, Oh my disciples? 
Indeed, I have held nothing back from you.” The scholar could not understand this, but later 
when they were walking together in the mountains they passed a bush of wild laurel. “Do you 
smell it?” asked Kwaido. When the scholar answered that he did, Kwaido exclaimed, “There, I 
have kept nothing back from you!” 


What are these men trying to convey? Does Kwaido wish to show the scholar that 
the scent of wild laurel is Tao or Nirvana? Indeed no! If that had been Kwaido’s idea, 
he would have said it in so many words. He just wanted the scholar to experience the 
scent of wild laurel. These stories are rather like jokes. The moment you try to explain 
a joke it falls flat, and you only laugh when you see the point directly. Thus to explain 
these stories is really to explain them away. Now Zen never explains; it only gives 
hints, for, as van der Leeuw has said, “The mystery of life is not a problem to be solved, 
but a reality to be experienced.” Trying to explain Zen is like trying to catch wind in a 
box; the moment you shut the lid it ceases to be wind and in time becomes stagnant 
air. For “the wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the voice thereof but canst 
not tell whence it cometh nor whither it goeth. Even so is everyone that is born of the 
Spirit.” 


The Barrier of the Open Road 


Some have thought that Zen is just a kind of “naturalism,” and so it would seem to be if 
we were to take, say, the following from Rinzai at its face value:19 


You must not be artful. Be your ordinary self. Seeking in the external world, if you would fain 
find your hands and feet by inquiring of your neighbors, you are committing an error. If you seek 


after Buddha, Buddha will turn out to be just a mere name. Rather know him who seeks for 
Buddha....You yourself as you are—that is the Buddha Dharma [Law]. I stand or I sit; I array 
myself or I eat; I sleep when I am fatigued. The ignoramus will deride me but the wise man will 
understand....If you master any place where you are, that place becomes true ground....Therefore 
the ancients said that if you make an attempt to acquire the law, the law will not operate 
naturally and all the evil circumstances will push their heads up competitively. When the sword 
of wisdom comes forth, there will be nothing at all—no enticement of any sort in the world. 
Then you will see the bright half of darkness in the darkness itself, and will see also the dark half 
of brightness in brightness itself. Wherefore the ancients said that the everyday mind is the true 
law. [Trans. Sokei-an Sasaki] 


In one sense this may be naturalism, but no one was ever natural who tried to be 
natural nor even anyone who tried not to try. As soon as we set up a technique of 
trying, we miss Rinzai’s meaning, for Zen is no sort of cult or “ism,” and the moment 
we make it into one we fall straight into the vicious circle. But Rinzai’s meaning is 
“clear as the vastness of the sky,” though to see it we have to see it directly, as if it 
were a joke. Again and again he admonishes his disciples to see themselves as they are 
at this moment, for “what you are making use of at this moment, is just what makes a 
Buddha.” 

More than the old Mahayana, more even than Taoism, Zen concentrates on the 
importance of seeing into one’s own nature now at this moment—not in five minutes 
when you have had time to “accept” yourself, nor ten years ahead when you have had 
time to retire to the mountains and meditate. The Zen masters resort to every possible 
means to direct your attention to yourself, your experience, your state of consciousness 
as it is now, for, as we have said before, there is no greater freedom than freedom to be 
what you are now. In our pride we are loath to accept freedom from an experience so 
apparently humble and prosaic. But there is another factor in the Zen realization. For 
as soon as you allow yourself that freedom, you realize that, after all, it is not a 
question of allowing; you see that there was never a time when you did not have that 
freedom. When understood, the full acceptance of what you are now, of your present 
state of mind, whatever its nature, shows you that you have been making that full 
acceptance all along, though you never knew it; it shows you that whatever your 
experience may have been in the past and whatever it will be in the future, nothing in 
yourself or in the whole universe has deprived or can ever deprive you of that freedom. 
Before this realization you seem to be confronted by a barrier standing across the path 
and dividing the road of freedom from the road of bondage; but as you pass through 
that barrier it vanishes, for it never existed and the whole road was free. 

There is a Zen book called the No-Gate-Barrier (Mumon-kwan) which Nyogen 
Senzaki translates as “The Gateless Gate.”20 Its author introduces it with this verse: 


No gate stands on the public road. 
Those who pass this barrier 
Walk freely throughout the universe. 


A master was once asked by his disciple, “Pray show me the way to deliverance.” The 
master replied, “Who has ever put you in bondage?” “Nobody.” “If so,” concluded the 
master, “why should you ask for deliverance?” Another, when asked the same question, 
answered simply, “Where do you stand now?” Yet another, who was asked a question 
to the same effect, replied, “There are no byroads, no crossroads here; the hills all the 
year round are fresh and green; east or west, in whichever direction, you may have a 
fine walk.” This is indeed straight talking, so clear that it is hard to see, but we shall 
always think we are blind while we go round looking for sight with open eyes. On one 
occasion the great master Ummon said: 


“In Zen there is absolute freedom; sometimes it negates and at other times it affirms; it does 


either way at pleasure.” A monk asked, “How does it negate?” “With the passing of winter there 
cometh spring.” “What happens when spring cometh?” “Carrying a staff across his shoulders, let 
him ramble about in the fields, east or west, north or south, and beat the old stumps to his 
heart’s content.” 

Joshu said, “The Great Way is right before your eye, but difficult to see.” A monk asked, 
“What form does it take so that we can see it before us?” “To the south of the river or to the 
north of it, just as you please.” 


The literature of Zen is full of such instances, but the Catholic sinologue Wieger 
could see in it no more than “a collection of folios filled with incoherent, crazy 
answers....These are not, as one might have supposed, allusions to esoteric matters 
which one would have to know in order to understand. They are mere exclamations 
escaping from the mouths of morons, momentarily awakened from their coma.”21 
Needless to say, the accomplished master of Zen is hardly ever found in anything 
remotely resembling a coma except when he sleeps at night, and although they 
occasionally refer to themselves as morons Zen masters have been responsible for some 
of the most superb works of art that China and Japan have produced. It is difficult to 
see how Wieger could have missed the feeling of freedom in so many of these sayings; 
for in the man who carries a staff across his shoulders and rambles in the fields, east or 
west, north or south, beating the old stumps to his heart’s content, do we not find the 
same state of soul as in the wind that “bloweth where it listeth” and which is likened to 
everyone that is born of the Spirit? 


His thatched cottage gate is closed, and even the wisest know him not. No glimpses of his inner 
life are to be caught; for he goes on his own way without following the steps of the ancient sages. 
...He is found in company with wine-bibbers and butchers; he and they are all converted into 
Buddhas. 

—Kakuan22 


Perhaps one of the best ways to catch a glimpse of the Zen experience of freedom is 
to read its poetry. Thus Hokoji says: 


How wondrous and how miraculous, this— 
I draw water and I carry fuel. 


Then we have this from Mumon: 


Hundreds of spring flowers; the autumnal moon; 
A refreshing summer breeze; winter snow: 

Free thy mind of idle thoughts, 

And for thee how enjoyable is every season! 


The free man walks straight ahead; he has no hesitations and never looks behind, for 
he knows that there is nothing in the future and nothing in the past that can shake his 
freedom. Freedom does not belong to him; it is no more his property than the wind, and 
as he does not possess it he is not possessed by it. And because he never looks behind 
his actions are said to leave no trace, like the passage of a bird through the air. 


Bamboo shadows sweep the stairs 
But stir no dust; 

Moonlight reaches the depths 

But leaves no trace in the pool. 


Here is the verse of one who has suddenly seen the truth and goes forward into life a 
free man: 


For this one rare event 
Gladly would I give ten thousand coins of gold! 


With a hat on my head and a bundle at my side, 
On my staff I carry the breeze and the full moon! 


There was one who became enlightened at the sudden playing of a flute, whereat he 
wrote these lines: 


In the days when I had no insight 

My heart was sad at the playing of the flute; 
But now I have no idle dream— 

I let the flute-man play on as he wills. 


Do not mistake these poems for the sentimental feelings of untrammeled nature lovers, 
living far from cities and modern drudgery. The surface of sentiment covers thunder 
and lightning. Here is the reaction of a Zen poet in the face of sudden death: 


Neither earth nor heaven give me refuge; 
Body and soul melt to nothingness. 

Your sword, a lightning-flash, 

Cuts like the wind of spring! 


Yet another in the same strain runs: 


Under the sword raised high 
Is hell. In fear your tremble, 
But walk on!— 

And there is the Land of Bliss. 


In Zen we discover the central truth of Oriental wisdom standing naked and 
unashamed—shorn of its trappings and symbols. At times it seems utterly perplexing 
and again utterly absurd. But it does not differ from the supreme experience which lies 
at the heart of every other faith aiming at freedom of the spirit. Yet we are so used to 
symbols and doctrines, so cluttered up with the mere images of wisdom which the ages 
have handed down, with the names of the God whose Self remains unseen, that when 
someone points directly to the experience itself we are taken aback and cannot believe 
our eyes. This is the more so when that which is pointed out is something lying right 
under our noses and which ordinarily we are too proud to consider. But God is always 
found where He is least expected, and no one would have thought of looking for Him 
in the cowshed of a country inn. 

And if Zen reveals to us the central experience of Oriental religion, no one can say 
that Asia can offer us only the via negativa of denying the world. Eastern philosophy 
makes an illusion of man and the universe only as a step to making them divine, so 
that we may see a wonder and a miracle in the drawing of water and the carrying of 
fuel. For in the doctrine that each creature and thing is a transitory aspect of the 
eternal Brahman only a benighted mind could read a denial of living forms; yet the 
intention was to accord them the most tremendous affirmation that man could utter. 


7. THE GREAT LIBERATION 


Tee who search for happiness do not find it because they do not understand that 


the object of their search is the seeker. We say that they are happy who have “found 
themselves” for the secret of happiness lies in the ancient saying, “Become what you 
are.” We must speak in paradox because we think we are divided from life and, to be 
happy, must unite ourselves with it. But we are already united, and all our doings are 
its doings. Life lives us; we do not live life. Yet in fact there is no “us” apart from life 
that life can so “live.” It is not that we are passive tools of life, as fatalists believe, for 
we could only be passive tools if we were something other than life. When you imagine 
yourself to be divided from and at war with life, you imagine yourself to be its passive 
tool and so are unhappy, feeling with Omar Khayyam— 


Oh, Thou, who Man of baser Earth didst make, 
And who with Eden didst devize the Snake; 

For all the Sin wherewith the Face of Man 
Is blacken’d, Man’s Forgiveness give—and take! 


But in truth action and passivity are one and the same act, and life and yourself are one 
and the same being. This truth of ancient philosophy is beyond our logic, but he who 
understands it is a sage and he who does not is a fool. But, curiously enough, the fool 
becomes a sage by letting himself be free to be a fool; then his joy knows no bounds 
and he “walks freely throughout the universe.” One might call this the complexity of 
the very simple. And this, without the use of technical terms, is the answer of Oriental 
wisdom to the toughest problem of Western thought—the problem of fate and free will. 


Fate and Free Will 


Inevitably, the search for spiritual freedom brings us to this time-honored conundrum. 
For, it will be asked, is not the total acceptance of life as we have described it simply 
the most thoroughgoing fatalism? Does it not mean just the huge sense of 
irresponsibility which arises from the knowledge that not only your deeds and 
circumstances, but also your very thoughts and feelings, are the acts of life or fate—and 
you may as well cease to be worried by them? If this is true, does it not also imply that 
those who persist in the apparent bondage and very real misery of refusal to accept, 
believing in free will and taking pride in their egoistic powers, are in fact unable to 
experience that acceptance, fate having decreed their belief in free will? When Oriental 
philosophy says that all things are Brahman, Western intellectualism cannot resist 
applying the label of fatalism. The reason is that we have not been able to resolve the 
problem of the vicious circle, for determinism or fatalism is its philosophic description. 
The vicious circle is the impotence of man; it is not resolved until the realization of our 
impotence as men can be complemented by our omnipotence as God. This is the point 
where fatalism bursts into freedom. Curiously enough, few philosophers have ever 
dared to be consistent fatalists because the doctrine contains an odd paradox. Fatalism 


is the doctrine of man’s utter subservience to destiny, but one strange objection is 
always raised to it—“If everyone believed that all their thoughts and deeds were 
inevitably foreordained by fate, then people would behave just exactly as they pleased.” In 
other words, they would become dangerously free! 

Total acceptance as we have described it is very nearly this carrying of fatalism to 
the point where it becomes absolute liberty. But it contains an additional factor which 
guards the process against its dangers and makes it something much more than a mere 
proposition in philosophy. But first we must consider the problem of fatalism in its 
purely philosophical sense. Logically, the position of the fatalists is unassailable; they 
reason that a given cause can have only one effect and that there can be no activity of 
the human mind which is not the effect of a cause. Thus whenever a choice of actions 
is presented to us, our decision is determined not by a free act of will but by the untold 
number of factors which make up our being at that moment—hereditary impulses, 
instinctive reflexes, moral upbringing, and a thousand other tendencies which incline 
us to a particular choice as inevitably as a magnet draws a needle lying within its field. 
An act of choice could not be free unless it were done without motive, for our motives 
are the result of past conditioning. But motive is only another name for cause, and an 
action without any kind of cause is impossible. Thus we have a chain of cause and 
effect, in which each cause is an effect and each effect a cause; each link in this chain 
can only have two particular links on either side of it, before as cause and after as 
effect. Therefore the last link in the chain is predetermined by the first. 


With Earth’s first Clay They did the Last Man’s knead, 
And then of the Last Harvest sow’d the Seed: 

Yea, the first Morning of Creation wrote 
What the Last Dawn of Reckoning shall read. 


The Freedom of Fate 


Yet, strictly speaking, this amounts in the end to a proof of free will, but a more 
tremendous free will than the advocates of that doctrine ever contemplated. For if each 
one of our acts is determined by the entire previous history of the universe, if sun, 
moon, planets, and stars are at work in the winking of an eyelid, this means that we in 
our turn are using their power in all our doings. For the doctrine of fatalism, from one 
point of view, amounts almost to God’s giving man carte blanche to use His power in 
whatever way He pleases. Objectively it may be true that in a determined universe 
fatalism gives you anything but the power to do as you please, but purely objective 
matters have little or no direct meaning for human beings when it comes to the really 
important things of life, and it is a truism that cold facts have no meaning apart from 
that which we give to them. As a rule, fatalists are those who try to understand life in 
terms of strictly rational and objective values. (“Objective values” have probably as 
much reality as cubic colors.) But if determinism is a cold fact its meaning depends 
entirely on the subjective attitude we take toward it, and it is seldom that the 
rationalist has either the courage to accept its power to liberate or sufficiently abject 
pessimism to take the other attitude and say with Andreyev 


I curse the day on which I was born. I curse the day on which I shall die. I curse the whole of my 
life. I fling everything back at your cruel face, senseless Fate! Be accursed, be forever accursed! 
With my curses I conquer you. What else can you do to me?...With my last thought I will shout 
into your asinine ears: Be accursed, be accursed! 


But even on the objective plane it does not follow that determinism deprives us of all 
freedom, because no Western metaphysician or scientist has yet decided what is the 
precise difference between the soul of man and fate itself. 


Now Oriental philosophy is quite clear on this point, and for this reason has never 
found any stumbling block in the fate-free will problem. Vedanta says that the soul of 
man is Brahman, which means that our own deepest self is that First Cause which set 
the wheels of fate in motion. But then Vedanta does not share our commonsense view 
of time, for only from the standpoint of maya was the First Cause a thing of the past. In 
reality the First Cause is forever now. We speak of the beginning and the end of the 
universe in terms of eons, kalpas, and ages simply because human intellect cannot 
grasp the nature of eternity unless it is spread out upon the measuring rod of time. But 
to the Oriental philosopher the creation and destruction of the universe are taking 
place in this moment, and for him this is true from both the metaphysical and the 
psychological standpoints. It is not our purpose to enter into the former because it is 
quite outside everyday experience, and has no more to give to the solution of 
immediate human problems than the scientific or objective view. 

In terms of practical psychology I would say that this metaphysical concept of the 
East is a state of mind in which the relation between oneself and life, fate, or destiny is 
no longer a question of moved and mover, passive agent and active power. Therefore it 
involves a change from the view of life in which man is an isolated being without any 
sense of union or positive relationship between himself and the rest of the universe as 
it exists both externally and within the soul. Spiritual freedom is not apparent in this 
state because man as an isolated unit has no meaning, just as the finger is meaningless 
without the hand, and the hand without the whole body. A life without meaning is 
unhappiness, and we have this lack of meaning whenever man’s view of life is not 
whole, whenever man sees himself as a creature whose desires and whose very human 
nature have no positive relation to the universe. 

In this view we are the merest whims of fate who can only find salvation in letting 
ourselves drift on the sea of chaos or in fighting for everything that we can hold. Man 
can never understand his freedom while he regards himself as the mere instrument of 
fate or while he limits his freedom to whatever his ego can do to snatch from life the 
prizes which it desires. To be free man must see himself and life as a whole, not as 
active power and passive instrument but as two aspects of a single activity. Between 
those two aspects there may be harmony or conflict, but conflict itself may also 
proceed from that single activity. Thus man’s experience becomes whole when he sees 
the activity of life as a whole in himself as he is now, when he realizes that there is no 
difference between his own thoughts and actions as they are at this moment and the 
nature of the universe. It is not that life is making him think and move as you pull the 
strings of a marionette; it is rather that man’s thoughts and deeds are at once his own 
creations and the creations of impersonal nature. Man’s volition and nature’s activity 
are two names for one and the same thing, for the doings of life are the doings of man, 
and the doings of man are the doings of life. 


Two as One 


Here there is no question of which is the mover and which the moved, for man lives his 
life by the same power with which life lives man. This is why total acceptance, which 
seems to be a response to bondage, is actually a key to freedom, for when you accept 
what you are now you become free to be what you are now, and this is why the fool 
becomes a sage when he lets himself be free to be a fool. Indeed, we are always free to 
be what we are now and only false pride keeps us from seeing it. Therefore acceptance 
is activity and passivity in one; as passivity it is accepting ourselves, our desires, and 
fears as movements of life, nature, and the unconscious; as activity it is letting 
ourselves be free to be ourselves and to have our desires and fears. Whereupon the ego 
and the unconscious, man and nature, oneself and life are seen as the two dancers who 


move in such close accord that it is impossible to say which moves and which responds, 
which is the active partner and which the passive. It is possible to have this feeling of 
wholeness not only in rare moments of insight but also in everyday living, and this 
comes just as soon as we realize that all our activities are just as much activities of 
nature and the universe as are the circling of planets, the running of water, the roaring 
of thunder, and the blowing of the wind. 

In this understanding we shall move forward as freely and uninterruptedly as the 
wind. But our freedom will not inflate us if we see that we share it with all things 
under the sun; for if you think you can possess and acquire freedom it will inflate you 
to the point of bursting with spiritual pride. Therefore it is not a question of putting 
yourself artificially into a certain state of mind, for freedom is no different from the 
state of mind you have now, and whether you realize it or remain ignorant it makes no 
difference to your freedom. But we are always trying to interfere with our states of 
mind as they appear from moment to moment, imagining that some are nearer to 
freedom than others—singing “Nearer my God to Thee” instead of “Just as I am, Thou 
wilt receive.” This very interference drives out the sense of freedom, for spiritual pride 
is to imagine that some creatures and some states of mind are nearer to God than 
others. Now acceptance becomes love when it enables us to see that God does not 
depart from us even when we are sinful men. 

But does man have freedom only through God? In other words, can he realize his 
freedom only in the moment when he is predestined to do so and not before? This 
question has been much of a puzzle to the theologians, the Calvinists having taken the 
view of predestination and the Catholics, generally speaking, the view that although 
man is not free to be good without the Grace of God, he is nevertheless free at all times 
to choose the acceptance of Grace. Thus Berdyaev writes in his Freedom and the Spirit: 


If human nature was definitively perverted and the freedom of the spirit definitively impaired, 
there would be no faculty in man capable of receiving the truth of revelation and he would be 
insensible to the operations of grace. But man though wounded and broken remains a spiritual 
being and has preserved his religious consciousness, for the Word of God could not be addressed 
to a being who was deprived of it. Liberty in man precedes the action of revelation and grace. 
[pp. 130-31] 


The answer seems confused because the question is wrongly stated. Both the 
Calvinist and the Catholic answer seem to fall short of the mark through not 
recognizing that man’s acceptance of Grace is one and the same act as God’s giving of 
it. Man’s free choice does not precede the action of Grace, nor does it follow it, and it 
cannot be said that the initiative comes from either side. The two acts occur 
simultaneously because they are two aspects of the same process; man’s ascent to God 
is God’s descent to man. The theologians are confused because they make too hard and 
fast a distinction between God and man—a distinction which, in view of the Christ 
symbol, the God-man, they should have avoided. As St. Athanasius said, “He became 
man that we might be made God.”1 Therefore, in Christian terms, the descent of God 
into man as Christ is a historical symbol of an eternal event—a union of God and man 
in which neither ceases to exist (for Christ was as much man as God) and a union 
which achieves realization from both sides at once. Eckhart puts it in this way: 


It is as if one stood before a high mountain and cried, “Art thou there?” The echo comes back, 
“Art thou there?” If one cries, “Come out!” the echo answers, “Come out!” 


The echo only follows the call because there is physical space between man and 
mountain, and because the mountain has no tongue and cannot call and be echoed by 
the man. But God and man have a closer union, and Eckhart says that “the eye with 
which I see God is the same with which God sees me.”2 Realization is not predestined 


to come at a certain time because predestination is an utterly limited half-truth. It may 
come at any moment, for that union exists eternally. Fate is only the other face of 
freedom, and we may say that you are fated to realize it at a certain time only because 
you choose to see it at that time. 

This argument will not, of course, appeal to those who argue fatalism on the basis 
of causality in the objective universe. These will argue that although fatalism may 
perhaps give one a wholly imaginary sense of freedom, events will nevertheless occur 
only in their predestined time and thus the development of a sense of freedom will be 
as fated as anything else. This type of fatalism takes no account of the possible 
relationships between the self of man and the “cause of fate” and depends to a great 
extent on the commonsense view of time. Factual knowledge of these matters is 
rudimentary, to say the least, and hence we cannot regard the argument as in any way 
final. Moreover, the psychology of the unconscious argues against the lesser type of 
free will (i.e., the usual theological notion) on different grounds, explaining the 
apparently free decisions of the conscious ego as “rationalizations” of unconscious 
impulses. But here it parts company with the argument from causality, for many 
psychologists of this school do not admit that causality applies within the 
unconscious.3 From the spiritual standpoint, however, the purely philosophic and 
scientific arguments are irrelevant; such metaphysical premises as it employs may be 
regarded as “working hypotheses”; the important thing is that they should be 
“working.” Scientist and philosopher may argue to the end of time, but meanwhile the 
human soul thirsts, and psychologist, priest, and mystic have the temerity to suggest 
that there may be ways of approach to the ultimate mysteries other than laboratory 
observation and pure logic. For while scientist and logician dissect and analyze, the 
mystic looks for meaning in the whole. 

At each moment the mystic accepts the whole of his experience, including himself 
as he is, his circumstances as they are, and the relationship between them as it is. 
Wholeness is his keyword; his acceptance is total, and he excludes no part of his 
experience, however unsavory it may be. And in this he discovers that wholeness is 
holiness, and that holiness is another name for acceptability. He is a holy man because 
he has accepted the whole of himself and thus made holy what he was, is, and shall be 
in every moment of his life. He knows that in each of those moments he is united with 
God, and that whether he is saint or sinner the intensity of that union never changes. 
For God is the wholeness of life, which includes every possible aspect of man and is 
known in accepting the whole of our experience at each moment. And for those who do 
not understand the word “God,” I quote from Goethe’s Fragment upon Nature: 


Nature! We are encompassed by her, enfolded by her—impossible to escape from her and 
impossible to come nearer to her....The most unnatural also is nature. Who sees her not on all 
sides sees her truly nowhere....At each moment she starts upon a long, long journey and at each 
moment reaches her end....She lets every child enlarge upon her, every fool judge her, thousands 
pass heedlessly over her, seeing nothing; yet she has friends among all and has her recompense 
from all. Even in resisting her laws one obeys them; and one works with her even in desiring to 
work against her....Love is her crown. Only through love does one come near her....She has 
isolated all things so that she may bring all together....All is eternally present in her, for she 
knows neither past nor future. For her the present is eternity. 


Freedom and Libertinism 


Indeed, Goethe’s words seem to suggest a freedom of terrifying possibilities, 
possibilities which the sages of Asia have known and understood, and which the 
mystics of Christianity may also have known but of which they have spoken only with 
the greatest care. For all things are possible to the free man—but not probable. His 
freedom is founded in the knowledge that his union with God, life, or nature can never 


be destroyed; that while he lives (and perhaps when he is dead) he can never do 
anything but express God or nature in all that he thinks and does. He is free because he 
knows that even if he descends to the uttermost depths of depravity he can in no way 
deny or separate himself from a universe which includes all extremes and hence can 
suffer from none. For as God “maketh his sun to rise on the evil and the good” so also 
He provides them with that of which His sun is a symbol—Himself. As Whitman says in 
his poem “To a Common Prostitute,” 


Not till the sun excludes you do I exclude you, 
Not till the waters refuse to glisten for you and the leaves to rustle for you, do my words refuse 
to glisten and rustle for you. 


Thus in the freedom of the spirit we understand that whether we love life or loathe 
it, whether we are filled with compassion or hatred, wonder or lust, beauty or horror, 
wisdom or ignorance—each and all of these opposites are as acceptable as day and 
night, calm and storm, waking and sleeping. We do not feel bound through any 
preconceived pattern of good character to react to our experience in the “proper” way; 
at any moment we may react to that experience just exactly as we please and 
consciously be just as uninhibited as the wild animal is by instinct. In sorrow the free 
man feels himself free to weep, in pain to scream, in anger to kill, in tedium to get 
drunk, and in laziness to idle. It is precisely this feeling of freedom which absolves him 
from the necessity of doing these things, and there is another reason too of which we 
shall speak later. He is like a man with a fire hose; the nozzle is his physical body and 
brain, and the water is the power of life. He is free to turn that hose in any conceivable 
direction, for by no twist or turn can he cut off the supply of life-giving water which 
never ceases to flow out in all its power. In moods of depression or sluggishness we 
may think that it has run low, but this is only because we do not give the mood 
freedom to expand itself; we are pointing the nozzle at the ground and the force we 
employ to keep it down is our effort to repress the mood.4 


The Dance and the Center 


We have a popular phrase that describes this freedom—“Let yourself go!” In the 
language of religion and psychology it is called self-abandonment. Essentially self- 
abandonment to life is a knack. A deliberate attempt to abandon oneself cannot be 
done without faith, for it seems like taking a plunge into a roaring torrent. Confucius 
tells of a man who managed to come safely down a huge waterfall by abandoning 
himself to the nature of falling water. But faith will follow abandonment provided we 
do not hang about on the brink and prevent ourselves from jumping by an increasing 
rush of misgivings—provided we jump immediately. This is to abandon yourself to your 
experience, your state of mind as it is at this very moment, being prepared to let it take 
you wherever it wills. But, as we have seen, as soon as you let life live you, you 
discover that you are living life with an altogether new fullness and zest. To return to 
the analogy of the dance, it is as if you allowed your partner, life, to swing you along 
until you so get the “feel” of the dance that you are doing the “swinging” just as much 
as your partner. And then she will laugh at you and tell you that you were doing it all 
the time, only that you were so busy trying to figure out the steps by yourself that you 
forgot your partner and even forgot that it was a dance. 

Thus the free man has the feeling of an unchanging center in himself—a center 
which is not exactly in his ego and not exactly in life, nature, or the unconscious as 
independent of the ego. It is the middle of the dance, the point around which the two 
partners revolve and in which they realize union. He is free because this center makes 
him feel absolutely secure and at home in the universe; he can take it anywhere, make 


it do anything, for, as Lao Tzu says of the Tao, “Using it, he finds it inexhaustible.” This 
center is the point on which his feeling of wholeness depends, and it develops out of 
faith—because he trusts and abandons himself to life on the one hand and to himself 
on the other, and also to the dance that is between them. God imparts His life and 
strength to all creatures, trusting them to use it as they will, because God is the 
principle of faith and love. When man can have that same faith and love for all the 
creatures of his mind, which are the states of his mind from moment to moment, then 
he becomes at one with God. Indeed, the kingdom of heaven is within us—microcosm 
of the macrocosm—and man finds his freedom through faith in his own universe, 
making the sun of his acceptance to rise on the evil and the good. Now in this there is 
profound humility, for as God knows Himself in the sinner as well as in the saint, in the 
slime as well as in the stars, so also man, in partaking of the freedom of God, must 
recognize himself in his depths as well as in his heights. For our true instructors in 
wisdom are not the sages and their writings but the creatures of our own minds, the 
gods and demons of thought and feeling and their reactions to the outer world of 
experience. And of these demons the blackest of all is called Lucifer, the bearer of light, 
for he is made to show us that there is light in the darkness as well as in the light. In 
the words of Monoimus the Gnostic:5 


Cease to seek after God (as without thee), and the universe, and things similar to these; seek Him 
from out of thyself,...and learn whence is sorrow and joy, and love and hate, and waking though 
one would not, and sleeping though one would not, and getting angry though one would not, and 
falling in love though one would not. And if thou shouldst closely investigate these things, thou 
wilt find Him in thyself, one and many, just as the atom; thus finding from thyself a way out of 
thyself. 


8. THE LOVE OF LIFE 


Man's life begins when he awakens to his freedom, and the earlier in life he 


discovers it, the better for him. Religion in this sense is not the goal of life; it is the 
entrance to it, and in freedom of the spirit man has the most glorious instrument of 
creation that he could desire. For he has discovered God not only in thoughts about 
God but also in thought itself, and knows himself to be thinking God even when his 
attention is absorbed in worldly affairs. To those affairs he brings a new power, zest, 
and spontaneity, for he can give himself to them unreservedly in the knowledge that 
spirituality is by no means confined to thinking about “spiritual” things. Thus he can 
devote himself to thoughts of people and things, of business, music, art, and literature, 
of science, medicine, and engineering, of eating and drinking, of walking, breathing, 
and talking, of swimming, running, and playing, of looking at the stars and of washing 
his hands; he has the freedom of God because he is free to think of everything and 
anything. For if it is true that the innumerable objects of the universe are the thoughts 
of God, this is what God Himself is doing. Now if his realization of freedom is genuine, 
it will have two important results—one of which will follow in its own time, and 
another which, coming immediately, will safeguard him against the abuses of freedom. 


The Fulfillment of Personality 


Those who realize their freedom early in life will probably not experience the first 
result until after the age of forty or some years, always provided that they do not allow 
the instrument of freedom to become rusty; it has to be cleaned and sharpened like any 
other tool. But there will ultimately come a time when this freedom will effect a 
change in their psychological structure which will be noticeable in their dreams and 
fantasies. For just as constant playing of the piano alters the structure of the hands, 
constant freedom alters the structure of the psyche. This change comes about 
gradually, whereas freedom itself is usually realized suddenly; but the psyche must 
then adapt its “organs” by slow growth to the use of its newly found instrument. When 
the psyche is fully adapted to its freedom we have the condition which Jung describes 
as “individuation”—a consequence and not a cause of spiritual freedom. The main 
features of this condition have already been described (see ch. 4, pp. 95-99), but 
certain aspects of it must be clarified. We spoke of freedom as the feeling of a center in 
one’s being, an unchanging point of balance which can enter into all circumstances 
without loss of stability. At first this center is “ideal” in the Platonic sense, and may be 
compared to the idea of a tune in the composer’s mind before it has been played on an 
instrument or set down on paper. But because it is ideal, it is nonetheless real; it is not 
an ideal in the sense of a mere wish for the future. When the composer thinks, “One 
day I shall compose a most glorious symphony,” he may be said to have an ideal. But 
when every note of it is heard in his mind and only remains to be given the vehicle of 
mechanical sound, it is then in the ideal state. To the composer, however, that 
symphony is very real and its beauty may possibly have a profound effect on his life. So 


also the ideal center of freedom may have a profound effect on one’s life, even before 
the faculties of the psyche are adapted to give it the fullest possible expression. 

In fact, however, I would set no limits to the possibilities of expressing spiritual 
freedom, and a hundred lives would not be long enough to exhaust them. But just as 
music demands four voices for the full expression of melody and harmony, so the 
human being demands four fully grown faculties to express the complete possibilities of 
freedom—and even so they are still expressing only possibilities. Jung classifies the four 
faculties or functions of man as intuition, sensation, intellect, and feeling, and it is 
almost impossible that anyone should be awakened to all of them before the middle of 
life.1 These four form a cross with intuition opposite sensation and intellect opposite 
feeling, and as a rule we grow up and reach the middle of life with only two unopposed 
faculties developed. Thus, to return to the analogy of music, we can express freedom 
only with the treble and alto voices; we may feel the center of the cross, but not be 
aware of all its arms. These two voices or faculties may express the freedom perfectly 
well within their limits, but the composer will want to express his feeling more 
completely. Therefore in time we are able to add the more mature voice of tenor and 
ultimately reach the fully mature voice of bass. It is as if the four petals of a flower had 
opened one at a time: when all are open, it remains for the flower to grow. So, when 
the composer has expressed all four voices in solo instruments, he will begin to add to 
them so that string quartet becomes chamber orchestra and ultimately full-size 
symphony orchestra. Or we may take the musical analogy in another way and liken the 
four faculties to the four orchestral divisions—strings, woodwind, brass, and 
percussion. 

We do not, however, achieve this fourfold development simply by seeking out the 
four individual parts. The petals of a flower grow from the center and the raison d’étre 
of the orchestra is the symphony, and of the four voices, the tune. Spiritual freedom, 
therefore, gives us the consciousness of a center upon which and out of which these 
four faculties can grow, though the center is not fully a center until all four are equally 
developed. The center of a semicircle is only ideally the center of a circle. Therefore in 
youth we may achieve that center of freedom, but the psyche which hinges upon it will 
be somewhat lopsided and immature. With astonishing persistence the symbols of this 
fourfold development occur in religion and mythology the world over. In Christianity it 
is the Cross; in Buddhism the swastika, the fourfold mandala, and the crossed dorje 
round a circle; in early Chinese philosophy the four hsiang or emblems of the I Ching; in 
playing cards the four suits—the list might be elaborated indefinitely. 2 

In later life this fourfold development may be consciously evolved, though many 
fail to realize it because they are unaware of their freedom and so have no creative 
center. They merely succumb to the spells of the unconscious, forgetting the reality of 
freedom in its psychological symbols. For the symbols of individuation which appear in 
dreams and fantasies grow as vehicles for freedom and follow the actual “pattern” of 
freedom. They may grow even if freedom is unrealized—just as some people have 
brains but no minds—but it is usual that in such cases the dream pictures show the four 
faculties with an empty or undeveloped center. But Jung describes the center as a 
“virtual point between the ego and the unconscious” because, as we have seen, freedom 
arises from total acceptance. That acceptance is not just the one-sided act of the ego 
“letting go” to life or the unconscious and so denying completely its egoistic nature. 
This is a false dualism. Total acceptance includes both the ego and the unconscious, 
pays due regard to the demands of both and unites them without destroying their 
functional difference. Therefore in the process of individuation the psyche may be said 
to grow a new “organ” which Jung calls the self as distinct from the ego on the one 
hand, and the unconscious on the other. This self, as the vehicle of freedom, appears as 
a rule only in the ripeness of years when freedom has become a habit and has shaped 


the human organism to suit its ends, just as perpetually running water carves out a 
permanent course in the rock. This is the fulfillment of personality. 


The Opposites as an Expression of Love 


But in some ways even more important is the immediate result of a genuine realization 
of freedom. This is that response of the individual to God known as worship or 
adoration, having its foundation in love. In the understanding of our freedom we learn 
that however low we may sink, we can never separate ourselves from the power of life 
and the love of God. For in learning to accept all possible states of our own souls, we 
learn that God accepts all possible types of human being, animal, and devil. The 
physical symbol of this love is the sun, though, like all physical symbols, it is 
incomplete. Although the physical universe visits us with both joy and pain, life and 
death, in the spiritual realm all these opposites are reconciled. Not only are they 
mutually necessary to one another, but, taken together, life and death constitute a 
more glorious life than life alone—a truth which can only be proved in acceptance. For 
if we can learn to love both life and death, we find that life and death are in turn an 
expression of love. If we can learn to love, to accord freedom to both the heights and 
the depths of our own nature, we shall instantly realize that this love is not something 
that we have produced alone but is in the very nature of the universe, and that our 
heights and depths are unintelligible without it. Just as love is the meaning of man and 
woman and has its symbol in the child, so only love can explain all other opposites 
under the sun. And this meaning, this love which is the raison d’étre of opposites exists 
long before our acceptance of the opposites reveals it, for acceptance is only a way of 
seeing that which already exists. Without these many opposites there could no more be 
a universe than there could be melody without the sounding and silencing of notes, and 
only those who do not accept them can complain that the universe was unfortunately 
arranged. Unaccepted, the universe has no meaning; it is senseless fate and chaos, but 
acceptance is a way of discovering meaning, not of manufacturing it. 

Thus there are heights and depths in man just as there is day and night in the 
external world, and both are seen as manifestations of the love of God when man 
himself learns to love them, for the love of God and acceptance by man are two aspects 
of one and the same reality. In the words of Eckhart, “As God can only be seen by His 
own light, so He can only be loved by His own love.”3 Love, however, is not to be 
confused with liking; we may love the opposites, but because of our human nature we 
cannot always like them. Only the pervert actually likes suffering, but the love of 
suffering is known in giving freedom to your dislike of it; for without dislike on our 
part, suffering is no longer suffering. 4 


The Grateful Renunciation 


The revelation through acceptance that in love we are free as to both our heights and 
our depths, calls out from us a response of love and wonder for life and for God, if we 
can see life as the outer aspect of God. We remember the words of St. Augustine, “Love, 
and do as you will,” for in love, as in acceptance, man denies no aspect of his nature. 
He realizes that life or God has given him freedom to be everything and anything that 
is in him, whether good or evil. But, as Eckhart says, “there is no inner freedom which 
does not manifest itself in works of love.”5 For the free man is so filled with gratitude 
to life for the freedom to be all of himself that he joyfully renounces it. This is where true 
freedom guards itself against abuse. Gratitude makes it possible to sacrifice the 
freedom to be immoral in the realization that immorality and sin are petty and tedious. 
In a universe where freedom of the spirit offers such gigantic possibilities, sin is a 


simple waste of time. To use a commonplace analogy, it is like gorging oneself with 
saccharine when one might be eating a skillfully prepared banquet. For in the last 
analysis sin is bad taste; it is sensationalism as distinct from sensibility. 

Because of his gratitude the free man’s religion is principally a means of saying, 
“Thank you.” It is no longer a means of discovering salvation, for religion as a quest for 
personal illumination is necessary but selfish, and until freedom is discovered it is a 
blind attempt to create for oneself what is simply to be had for the taking—“searching 
for fire with a lighted lantern.” Thus the religion of freedom consists of using that 
freedom and giving thanks for it, because it is only a dead faith that does not show 
itself in works. At the same time freedom is a tremendous responsibility. There is a 
saying that though God forgives you, nature never forgives, for the free man does not 
escape in any way from the material consequences of folly. If he abuses his freedom he 
does not lose it, but he has to pay the material price for abuse—a price which is greater 
for him than for others. It is as if his thoughts and deeds were informed with a greater 
power and thus produced more powerful results. All men use the power of God, but 
those who use it in full consciousness have to be particularly careful how they use it. It 
is difficult to believe, however, that anything but a radical misunderstanding of 
freedom could lead to abuse, so great is the gratitude which arises from true 
understanding. 

As a rule this gratitude demands expression in the ritual of worship, for some rituals 
were originally a dance of joy. As Christ is made to sing in the apocryphal Acts of 
John:6 


Grace danceth. I would pipe; dance ye all. 


The Whole on high hath part in our dancing. 
Whoso danceth not, knoweth not what cometh to pass. 


At times the free man conducts his ritual of thanksgiving silently within himself; at 
other times he conducts it in churches and temples with other people, giving it every 
possible embellishment of music, song, and visual beauty. As a religion Buddhism 
started without a God, but the principle of “Buddha” had to be raised to the level of 
God simply to offer a focal point for the gratitude which the experience of freedom or 
Nirvana inspired. It is therefore significant that Zen, philosophically and practically a 
destroyer of forms and images, has quite an elaborate temple ritual. Although it insists, 
perhaps more than any other form of Buddhism, on the inwardness of the Buddha 
principle, nevertheless the physical images of the Buddhas are treated with the greatest 
reverence. Iconoclasm may be necessary for bringing about the realization of freedom, 
but thereafter we find a new feeling for all religious symbols of life, of the universe, 
and of that “Love which moves the sun and other stars.” 

But there are those whom symbols can never satisfy, and moreover the gratitude of 
freedom is so overflowing that the forms of religion can never absorb it. This gratitude 
therefore demands expression in “works of love,” which is to say morality. It makes 
possible for the first time a genuine morality, for the free man is moral because he 
wants to be, not because he thinks he ought to be moral. Without gratitude morality is a 
mere discipline which keeps human society in a relatively stable condition until such 
time as men learn the freedom of love. But as a discipline it cannot teach love, and as a 
religious exercise it is no more than imitation of the free man’s behavior. Freedom as 
liberty to be all of oneself is amoral, but the gratitude which comes in response to this 
liberty is moral. Freedom is like a gem which shines with equal brilliance in all 
surroundings; it gleams as well in mud as on velvet, but those who appreciate it do not 
let it lie in the mud and so arrange the conduct of their lives that the gem is given the 
most exquisite setting that can be made. But just as precious stones have to be dug out 


of the depths of the earth, so man has to realize his freedom in accepting the earthy 
depths of his own being. 

Realization has done its work when one’s very life becomes an expression of 
gratitude, and this is the greatest happiness, for the meaning of happiness consists in 
three elements—freedom, gratitude, and the sense of wonder. These three elements can 
be present in the most ordinary of lives; the free man is not necessarily a magician, a 
seer, or a “mystic” absorbed in ineffable states of consciousness. So many people make 
the mistake of looking in the supersensual realms for the happiness which they cannot 
find here on earth, searching for an occult “cosmic consciousness” to release them from 
the tedious experiences of everyday life. It can never be said too often that the Great 
Illumination is not a fantastic, extraordinary state of consciousness remote from normal 
experience. It is every conceivable state of consciousness and of unconsciousness as 
well (though in unconsciousness it cannot be seen), but people are misled by the 
symbolic forms in which it is expressed. The Great Illumination is the state of 
consciousness you have at this moment, and it is recognized as such only when you 
cease to run away from it and give it freedom to reveal itself. And having found 
freedom in so unexpected a place, you will be filled with gratitude and then with 
wonder. For in its greatest form wonder is reverence for all the forms of life, from the 
highest to the lowest; it is an appreciation of the mystery that divinity is revealed in 
the most commonplace of things. For this reason Dimitrije Mitrinovi¢ (a too-little- 
known philosopher of Yugoslavia) once said that gnosis was to be surprised at 
everything. 


The Experience of Mystery 


As a rule vast knowledge of the mysteries of the universe increases pride, and to lay 
bare all mysteries is to be in danger of becoming bored. If you try to discover the secret 
of beauty by taking a flower to pieces, you will arrive at the somewhat unsatisfactory 
conclusion of having abolished the flower. For beauty is beauty just because it is a 
mystery, and when ordinary life is known as a profound mystery then we are 
somewhere near to wisdom. Here is a new connection between mystery and mysticism, 
a connection which is sometimes indignantly denied. But are we to cast aside all 
scientific curiosity and embrace the maxim that where ignorance is bliss ’tis folly to be 
wise? Of course, the catch is that every degree of wisdom has its counterpart in folly, 
and the two are so alike that the wise man is wise simply because he can distinguish 
between the two. The highest and lowest notes of musical sound are both inaudible, 
and the ignoramus and the sage are both faced with mystery. The difference between 
the two is that even if you explained the mystery to the sage, it would still remain 
mysterious, whereas the fool would simply be disappointed and disillusioned. For the 
fool would imagine that the explanation, the taking to pieces, the analysis, had spoiled 
the mystery; the sage would see that it had not even begun to explain it. The fool 
would think he had thereby become wise; the sage would know that he was still a fool. 
Therefore if the sage is told, as some “mystics” will tell him, that this everyday world is 
a mere phantom conjured up by deceptive senses from a formless primordial essence, 
he is not much impressed. If a doctor explains the transformations undergone by food 
in his stomach, he does not cease to enjoy his dinner. If a scientist tells him that 
thunder is not the music of the gods but mere electrical disturbances, the thunder is for 
him no less wonderful. And if some Philistine tells him that playing a violin is only 
scraping cats’ entrails with horsehair, he simply marvels that melody can emerge from 
things so unprepossessing in appearance. For what is especially interesting about 
explanations is that they do not explain; and what is especially dangerous about them 
is that if they are taken seriously enough and far enough, they simply explain things 


away. And even if one does resort to the ultimate madness of explaining all things 
away, there remains still the impenetrable mystery of who is it that explains and why? 


“L’Amor Che Move...” 


Thus to the free man there is as much divinity and mystery in a brick as in all the 
ramifications of occult science, for to him a brick is a magic. There is as much freedom 
of the spirit in watching sparrows on a city street as in meditating in some mountain 
solitude under the stars. There is as much expression of that freedom in peeling 
potatoes as in making a cathedral organ sing out the liquid thunder of a fugue. For the 
free man has become aware of the mystery that the whole power of the universe is at 
work in the least of things, the least of thoughts, and the least of deeds. In lifting his 
finger he uses the same power that hurls the stars through space and causes their fire, 
that bellows in thunder and whispers in wind, that produces a giant tree from the 
microscopic germ of a seed, and wears away mountains to thin clouds of dust. In 
whatever he feels, thinks, or does he cannot cut himself off from that power; he knows 
that in spite of all mistakes, imaginings, and fears he can never for a moment cease to 
share in its tremendous freedom. He knows that he expresses it both in living and in 
dying, in creating and in destroying, in being wise and in being a fool. Even so he is 
not inflated with the conceit of himself as a spiritual giant who has accepted all life and 
reconciled all opposites. He knows that because of the love of God life was never in 
need of being accepted nor the opposites of being reconciled, for in acceptance he has 
only awakened to see what that love has achieved from the very beginning of time. 
Worms, fleas, idiots, and drunkards are in fact accepting it as much as he, and even 
though they do not know it as he knows it, he cannot deny them a particle of the 
reverence that is given to saints and sages. He sees that if anyone is a fool it is himself 
for not having discovered his treasure long before. Thus in the moment of illumination 
he realizes that the universe is a mystery greater than he can ever hope to fathom, for 
the deepest perplexity of all is that such a creature as himself should be allowed to use 
the power that moves the stars in the littlest of his deeds. Whereat he will say with 
Dante,7 


Ma non eran da cio le proprie penne, 
se non che la mia mente fu percossa 
da un fulgore, in che sua voglia venne. 
Allalta fantasia qui manco possa; 
ma gia volgeva il mio disiro e il velle, 
si come rota ch’egualmente é mossa, 
L’amor che move il sole e l’altre stelle. 


[But my own wings were not for such a flight— 
except that, smiting through the mind of me, 
there came fulfilment in a flash of light. 

Here vigor failed the lofty fantasy; 
but my volition now, and my desires, 
were moved like wheel revolving evenly 

By Love that moves the sun and starry fires.] 


NOTES 


INTRODUCTION 


1.The Secret of the Golden Flower, Wilhelm and Jung (New York and London, 1931), p. 83. 

2.Here and throughout, the word “life” should not be understood simply in its biological sense, as the 
vital force which imparts movement to organic bodies. Nor should it be understood as a force which 
pervades things and moves them while remaining essentially different from them. I use the 
commonplace word because for many people it has more concrete meaning than the word “God.” It 
should be understood in the same sense as the Chinese word “Tao.” William McDougall once asked a 
Chinese exactly what he meant by “Tao.” The Chinese took him out to the balcony and asked, “What 
do you see?” “I see a street and houses and people walking and streetcars passing.” “What more?” 
“There is a hill.” “What more?” “Trees.” “What more?” “The wind is blowing.” The Chinese extended 
his arms and exclaimed, “That is Tao!” In other words, life is the whole universe as it is now. In this 
sense the universe should not be considered as just the sum of all things, but as a whole which is 
greater than the sum of its parts. That is to say, the universe or life is an organic unity from which 
all individual things derive their meaning and to which they must be referred if they are to be 
understood. For individual things can have neither existence nor meaning if they are unrelated. See 
the section on Taoism in ch. 6, and cf. my Legacy of Asia (Chicago, 1938), pp. 72-75. 

3.Mu-mon-kwan, vii. I am indebted for this translation to the Rev. Sokei-an Sasaki. (See note 19, ch. 6.) 


CHAPTER ONE 


1.Brahman as the Self is not quite the same as the usual concept of a World Soul, for Brahman is not the 
soul of the universe as opposed to its body or physical form and substance. Brahman is rather the 
wholeness of the universe from which all its parts are derived, and which indeed is each single part. 
See the section on Vedanta in ch. 6. 

2.See his South American Meditations, ch. 2. 

3.Luke 15:11-32. 

4.Cf. Gooch and Laski, English Democratic Ideas in the Seventeenth Century (New York, 1927). 

5.Psychoanalysts have never claimed that the unconscious is anything more than a working hypothesis. 
They have not insisted on its existence as a particular entity in either the bodily or mental aspects of 
man. But as a hypothesis it has proved of such value in psychological healing that it seems to matter 
little whether there is in fact an unconscious or not. It is probable that the unconscious would be 
described more correctly as a process than as an entity, i.e., the process of not being aware of certain 
operations, tendencies, and impulses that belong to our nature, revealing themselves in indirect or 
rationalized forms, or not at all. 

6.Jung does not admit that he is a mystic, for he is at pains, and rightly, to emphasize the strictly 
scientific method of his inquiry—insofar as psychological or any other kind of healing can be a 
science. For his view of the unconscious see Two Essays on Analytical Psychology (New York, 1928), 
p. 94 et seq. Also The Integration of Personality (New York, 1939), ch. 1. 

7.Maya is often translated incorrectly as “illusion”—a purely negative rendering which does not give the 
full meaning. Maya is the creative power of Brahman. 

8.From Fetish to God in Ancient Egypt, E. A. Wallis Budge (London, 1934), p. 15. 

9.1 follow the translation by H. A. Giles in his Chuang Tzu (Shanghai, 1926), p. 282. 

10.An interesting study of some of these figures will be found in Rom Landau’s God Is My Adventure (New 
York, 1936). 
11.Patanjali’s Yogasutra, 2, vi. 


CHAPTER TWO 


1.A remarkable analysis of this confusion is the first chapter of Nicolas Berdyaev’s Freedom and the Spirit 
(London, 1935), esp. p. 15. “Spirit,” he writes, “is by no means opposed to flesh; rather, flesh is the 


incarnation and symbol of spirit.” 
2.A refreshingly different interpretation of this doctrine will be found in Berdyaev, ibid., pp. 40-41. 
3.Psalm 139:7-12. 
4.Mu-mon-kwan, xxvi. 
5.See Zimmer, Kunstform und Yoga (Berlin, 1926). 


CHAPTER THREE 


1.Chapter 5, p. 182. The whole of this chapter is particularly suggestive. 
2.Romans 7:5-9. 
3.Interpretation of the Bible on these points is not easy because of an inconsistent use of words. Note 
the apparent contradiction: “For God so loved the world...” (John 3:16) and “If any man love the 
world, the love of the Father is not in him” (1 John 2:15). The Greek dyamn is used in both 
instances. 
4.Cf. Friedrich Spiegelberg’s Religion of Non-Religion (London, 1938), pp. 14-16. 
5.Tathata is usually translated as “Suchness” (Suzuki). Some people might prefer “Reality,” though 
“Suchness” is rather more demonstrative if less euphonious. 
6.Trans. Juan Mascaro, Himalayas of the Soul: Translations from the Sanskrit of the Principal Upanishads 
(London and New York, 1938), p. 89. 
7.See below, ch. 8. 
8.Ibid., p. 183. 
9.For a fuller development of this theme see my Legacy of Asia (Chicago, 1938). 
10.For a much fuller treatment of this subject see Jung’s commentary to The Secret of the Golden Flower, 
Wilhelm and Jung (London and New York, 1931). 
11.Meister Eckhart’s Sermons, trans. Claud Field (London, n.d.), pp. 19-20. 
12.See Asiatic Mythology, J. Hackin and others (London, 1932), facing p. 434. The actual painting is in 
the Musée Guimet. 
13.Theurgia, or the Egyptian Mysteries, Iamblichus, trans. Alexander Wilder (London and New York, 1911), 
p. 35. 
14.Cf. Secret of the Golden Flower, pp. 90-91. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


1.See Jung’s Integration of Personality, ch. 3, “Archetypes of the Unconscious.” For the mana-personality, 
see Two Essays on Analytical Psychology, p. 252 et seq. A more popular account will be found in 
Frances G. Wickes’s Inner World of Man (New York, 1938). 

2.Cf. Sigmund Freud, Leonardo da Vinci. 

3.See G. R. Heyer, The Organism of the Mind (London, 1933); H. Prinzhorn, Psychotherapie (Leipzig, 
1930); J. A. Hadfield, Psychology and Morals (London, 1936); E. Graham Howe, I and Me (London, 
1935) and War Dance (London, 1937); Beatrice Hinkle, The Recreating of the Individual (New York, 
1923). The Pastoral Psychologists, who have now formed an organization in London known as the 
Guild of Pastoral Psychology, are chiefly interested in promoting an understanding of psychotherapy 
among ministers of religion. To date they have done some particularly valuable work, including the 
publication of the following papers: H. Westmann, The Old Testament and Analytical Psychology; 
James Kirsch, The Religious Aspect of the Unconscious; W. H. Peacey, Pastoral Psychology and the 
Gospel; C. G. Jung, The Symbolic Life (for private circulation only). Their headquarters are at St. 
George’s Institute, Broadbent Street, London, W. 1. 

4.Detailed descriptions of the individuation process will be found in Jung’s Two Essays on Analytical 
Psychology and more particularly in The Integration of Personality. 

5.Oriental mandala are chiefly of Buddhist origin, being widely used by Lamaist Buddhism and the 
Shingon sect in Japan. Examples will be found in Zimmer’s Kunstform und Yoga, in the Musée Guimet 
publication Asiatic Mythology, in Oberlin and Matsuo’s Sectes Bouddhiques Japonaises, pp. 111-12 and 
in Waddell’s Buddhism of Tibet. Western mandala were much used by the alchemists, and several 
examples will be found in Manley Hall’s Encyclopedic Outline of Masonic, Hermetic, Qabbalistic and 
Rosicrucian Symbolical Philosophy (San Francisco, 1928). More modern mandala drawn by Western 
people will be found in Wilhelm and Jung’s Secret of the Golden Flower, in F. G. Wickes’s Inner World 
of Man, in Heyer’s Organism of the Mind, and in Jung’s Integration of Personality. 

6.See Hearn’s Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan, vol. Il, ch. 9. 

7.The Secret of the Golden Flower (text). 

8.Cf. Jung’s essay on this question in his Modern Man in Search of a Soul (New York and London, 1933). 

9.See D. T. Suzuki’s Manual of Zen Buddhism (Kyoto, 1935), also his Essays in Zen Buddhism, vol. I 
(London and Kyoto, 1927). 


10.For further observations on the individuation process, see below, ch. 8. 

11.From ch. 1 of the Tan-ching or “Platform Sutra”—the life and teachings of Hui-neng (also spelled Wei- 
lang), the sixth patriarch of the Ch’an or Zen school of Buddhism in China. Translations are: Sutra of 
the Sixth Patriarch, by Wong Mow Lam (Shanghai, 1930), an edited version of which is to be found 
in Dwight Goddard’s Buddhist Bible, 2nd ed. (Thetford, Vt., 1938). Cf. also Mu-mon-kwan, xxiii. 

12.See Jung’s Modern Man in Search of a Soul, ch. 5, “The Stages of Life.” Cf. also my Legacy of Asia, pp. 
28-29. 

13.Le Kama Soutra de Vatsyayana, trans. Isidore Liseux (Paris, 1885). An English version is The Kama 
Sutra of Vatsyayana, Hindu Kama Sastra Society (Benares, 1883). 

14.The following excerpts from the Tao Te Ching are from the translation by Ch’u Ta-kao (London, 1937). 
This same translation appears in its entirety in Ballou’s Bible of the World (New York, 1939). 

15.See Suzuki’s essay “Ignorance and World Fellowship” in Faiths and Fellowship, ed. D. A. Millard 
(London, 1936), p. 40. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


1.Cf. Goethe in his Fragment on Nature, “She is frivolity itself, but not for us, who have been made to see 
her as of the greatest importance.” 

2.Job 38:7. 

3.Freedom through abandonment is man’s sharing the nature of God. Cf. Berdyaev, “The world is the 
symbol of that which transpires within the spiritual sphere, the reflection of God’s ‘abandon’ as 
fulfilled in the spirit.” Freedom and the Spirit, p. 33. 

4.A fascinating study of this infinite regression as a psychological problem is Graham Howe’s War 
Dance: A Study in the Psychology of War (London, 1937). 

5.Cf. Suzuki in Faiths and Fellowship, p. 41. Here he describes sunyata or “no-thing-ness” (a Buddhist 
description of the Absolute) as byodo (unity) in shabetsu (diversity). He says, “The discrete and yet 
continuous state of existence is described by Buddhist philosophers as ‘Byodo in Shabetsu and 
Shabetsu in Byodo.” 

6.Cf. James’s Varieties of Religious Experience (New York and London, 1929), pp. 205-16. 

7.Cf. Plotinus, “that which mind, when it turns back, thinks before it thinks itself.” 

8.Matthew 6:27-30. 

9.It is important to distinguish between the Jewish and the Hebraic traditions. Postcaptivity Judaism 
suffered much loss of spirit from its slavery to the letter of the law, but this slavery is not to be 
found in the major prophets such as the second Isaiah. In Christ’s time Judaism had captured the 
priesthood of Jerusalem completely, and the Hebrews of the older tradition were despised. 


CHAPTER SIX 


1.The following excerpts are from Juan Mascaro’s Himalayas of the Soul: Translations from the Sanskrit of 
the Principal Upanishads (London and New York, 1938). 

2.Cf. Deussen’s Outline of the Vedanta (London and New York, 1907). “This soul in each one of us is not 
a part of Brahman nor an emanation from him, but it is, fully and entirely, the eternal and 
indivisible Brahman itself.” p. 1. 

3.Vita e Dottrina, p. 36, also cap. xiv. See too Evelyn Underhill’s Mysticism (London, 1930), pp. 129 and 
396. 

4.Shakti and Shakta, Sir John Woodroffe (Madras and London, 1929). 

5.Secret of the Golden Flower (text). 

6.Cf. René Guenon’s Man and His Becoming According to the Vedanta (London, 1928), pp. 232-35. With 
regard to “meditation” in the sense used here, an interesting quotation is found in the Chandogya 
Upanishad, 7. vi: “Meditation is in truth higher than thought. The earth seems to rest in silent 
meditation: and the waters and the mountains and the sky and the heavens seem all to be in 
meditation.” 

7.Shakti and Shakta, p. 28 et seq. 

8.In recent years Mrs. Rhys Davids has set herself the difficult task of separating the gold from the dross 
in the Pali Canon. On the whole her work has been remarkably successful, although there are some 
occasions when her reasoning seems a little wishful. No one, however, has been able to offer any 
satisfactory refutation of her claims. Her scholarship is most thorough and I recommend study of her 
Outlines of Buddhism (London, 1934), and her Manual of Buddhism (London, 1932), as well as all 
recent works including revisions of books published before 1918. A short comprehensive survey of 
this aspect of her work is What Was the Original Gospel in Buddhism? (London, 1938). 

9.See The Book of the Gradual Sayings, III, trans. E. M. Hare (London, 1934). There is a particularly 
interesting passage on p. 237. A Brahmin says to the Exalted One, “This is my avowal, this my view: 


There is no self-agency; no other-agency.” The Buddha replies, “Never, Brahmin, have I seen or 
heard of such an avowal, such a view. Pray, how can one step onwards, how can one step back, yet 
say: There is no self-agency; no other-agency?” Cf. also Gradual Sayings, I: “Thou scorn’st the noble 
self, thinking to hide the evil self in thee from self who witnessed it.” The Self of the Upanishads is 
often described as the Witness or the Spectator. Another passage from the Maha-Parinibbana Sutta is 
worth considering: “Live ye as they who have the self as a lamp, a refuge.” 

10.Tevigga Sutta, 43. See Buddhist Suttas, trans. T. W. Rhys Davids, vol. XI of the Sacred Books of the East 
(Oxford UP, 1900), p. 186. 

11.See Suzuki’s Essays in Zen Buddhism, vol. I, ch. 4. 

12.The Lankavatara Sutra, trans. D. T. Suzuki (London, 1932). An edited version of this translation is in 
Dwight Goddard’s Buddhist Bible in the second edition of which the passage quoted will be found on 
p. 292. 

13.See Goddard’s Buddhist Bible, pp. 352 and 356. 

14.Saptasatika-prajnaparamita Sutra, 232-34. A remarkably suggestive quotation from this sutra will be 
found in Suzuki’s Essays in Zen Buddhism, vol. Il, pp. 251-52n. 

15.But see Arthur Walley’s Way and Its Power (London, 1935), p. 101 et seq., also pp. 86 and 99. He gives 
the date of the Tao Te Ching as c. 240 Bc, and believes that it only became connected with Lao Tzu at 
a later date. 

16.See Secret of the Golden Flower, p. 142, also Integration of Personality, p. 305. 

17.Analects, 7. xvi. 

18.Chuang Tzu, 2. 

19.Unfortunately there is no published translation of the Rinzai Roku (ch. Lin-chi Lu), but I am most 
indebted to Sokei-an Sasaki, Abbot of Jofuku-in, for the loan of an unfinished translation of the work 
which will ultimately appear in book form. 

20.The Gateless Gate, trans. Nyogen Senzaki and Saladin Reps (Los Angeles, 1934). 

21.See Wieger’s Histoire des Croyances religieuses en Chine, pp. 517-28. 

22. This passage is from Suzuki’s rendering of the commentary to the last of the “Ten Oxherding 
Pictures.” See his Manual of Zen, p. 161. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


1.De Incarnatione, Verbi, 1, cviii. 

2.Meister Eckhart’s Sermons, p. 32. The whole passage reads: “If my eye is to discern color, it must itself 
be free from all color. The eye with which I see God is the same with which God sees me. My eye 
and God’s eye is one eye, and one sight, and one knowledge, and one love.” 

3.Cf. Fritz Wittels’s Freud and His Time (New York, 1931), pp. 133-34. 

4.Cf. the following from the Saptasatika: “O Sariputra, to commit the offences is to achieve the 
inconceivable, to achieve the inconceivable is to produce Reality. And Reality is non-dual. Those 
beings endowed with the inconceivables can go neither to the heavens, nor to the evil paths, nor to 
Nirvana....Both the offences and the inconceivables are of Reality, and Reality is by nature non-dual. 
...In the real Dharmadhatu (Realm of the Law) there is nothing good or bad, nothing high or low, 
nothing prior or posterior.” Trans. Suzuki. 

5.Fragments of a Faith Forgotten, G. R. S. Mead (London, 1931), p. 223. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


1.For a full account of the four functions see Jung’s Psychological Types (London, 1923; New York, 
1933), esp. ch. 10, sec. 11. 

2.Cf. Jung’s Psychology and Religion (New Haven, 1938), ch. 3. Also his Integration of Personality, chs. 2 
and 4. 

3.Meister Eckhart’s Sermons, p. 57. 

4.Cf. Acts of John, 96. “If thou hadst known how to suffer, thou wouldest have been able not to suffer. 
Learn thou how to suffer, and thou shalt be able not to suffer.” The translation is by M. R. James in 
his Apocryphal New Testament (Oxford UP, 1924), p. 254. 

5.Ibid., p. 54. 

6.Acts of John, 95. 

7.Paradiso, 33, cxxxix-cxlv. The translation is by Melville B. Anderson in his Divine Comedy of Dante 
Alighieri, copyright 1921 by the World Book Company, Yonkers, New York. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


The following bibliography is not intended to be in any way exhaustive, nor does it list 
all the works consulted in writing this book. It has been made up of easily available 
works which are likely to be of interest to the general reader who wishes to explore 
further into the main points raised in this book. 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS 


Coster, Geraldine. Yoga and Western Psychology. Oxford University Press, 1934. 
. Psychoanalysis for Normal People. Oxford University Press, 1932. 
Freud, Sigmund. General Introduction to Psychoanalysis. New York, 1935. 
Groddeck, Georg. The World of Man. London, 1935. 

Hadfield, J. A. Psychology and Morals. London, 1936. 

Heyer, G. R. The Organism of the Mind. London, 1933. 

Hinkle, Beatrice. The Recreating of the Individual. New York, 1923. 

Howe, E. Graham. I and Me. London, 1935. 

. War Dance. London, 1937. 

. The Open Way. London, 1939. (In collaboration with L. le Mesurier.) 
Jung, C. G. Modern Man in Search of a Soul. New York, 1933. 

. Psychological Types. New York, 1933. 

. Psychology and Religion. New Haven, 1938. 

. Two Essays on Analytical Psychology. New York, 1928. 

. The Integration of Personality. New York, 1939. 

. The Secret of the Golden Flower. New York, 1931. (With Richard Wilhelm.) 
Wheeler, R. H. The Laws of Human Nature. New York, 1932. 

Wickes, F. G. The Inner World of Man. New York, 1938. 

Wittels, Fritz. Freud and His Time. New York, 1931. 


ORIENTAL PSYCHOLOGY AND RELIGION 


Ballou, Robert. The Bible of the World. New York, 1939. 

Beck, L. Adams. The Story of Oriental Philosophy. New York, 1931. 
Besant, Annie. The Bhagavad-Gita. London, 1918. (With Bhagavan Das.) 
Buddhist Lodge. What Is Buddhism? London, 1931. 

. Concentration and Meditation. London, 1935. 

Carus, Paul. The Gospel of Buddha. Chicago, 1894. 

Ch’u Ta-Kao. Tao Te Ching. London, 1937. 

Cranmer-Byng, L. The Vision of Asia. London and New York, 1932. 
Davids, C. A. F. Rhys. Manual of Buddhism. London, 1932. 

. Outlines of Buddhism. London, 1934. 

. What Was the Original Gospel in Buddhism? London, 1938. 
Deussen, Paul. Outline of the Vedanta. New York, 1907. 

Dvivedi, M. N. The Yoga-Sutras of Patanjali. Madras, 1934. 

Giles, H. A. Chuang Tzu. Shanghai and London, 1926. 

Giles, Lionel. Musings of a Chinese Mystic (Chuang Tzu). London and New York, 1920. 
. Taoist Teachings (Lieh Tzu). London and New York, 1925. 
Goddard, Dwight. A Buddhist Bible. Thetford, Vt., 1938. 

Guenon, René. Man and His Becoming. London, 1928. 

Legge, James. Yi King. Oxford University Press, 1882. 

Mascaro, Juan. Himalayas of the Soul. London and New York, 1938. 


Okakura, K. The Book of Tea. Edinburgh, 1919. 

Otto, Rudolf. Mysticism of East and West. London, 1932. 

Pratt, J. B. The Pilgrimage of Buddhism. New York, 1928. 

Radhakrishnan, S. Vedanta. London, 1928. 

. Philosophy of the Upanishads. London, 1935. 

Senzaki, Nyogen. The Gateless Gate. Los Angeles, 1934. 

Suzuki, B. L. Mahayana Buddhism. London, 1938. 

Suzuki, D. T. Essays in Zen Buddhism. 3 vols. London and Kyoto, 1927, 1933, 1934. 

. Introduction to Zen Buddhism. Kyoto, 1934. 

. Die Grosse Befreiung. With an Introduction by C. G. Jung. Leipzig, 1939. (German translation of 

the above.) 

. Manual of Zen Buddhism. Kyoto, 1935. 

. Lankavatara Sutra. London, 1932. 

. Studies in the Lankavatara Sutra. London, 1930. 

Vivekananda, Swami. Raja Yoga, Karma Yoga, Jnana Yoga, Bhakti Yoga. All in various eds. by the Advaita 
Ashrama, Almora, India. 

Waley, Arthur. The Way and Its Power (Tao Te Ching). London, 1935. 

Watts, Alan W. The Spirit of Zen. London and New York, 1936. 

. The Legacy of Asia and Western Man. London, 1937; Chicago, 1938. 

Wong Mow Lam. Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch. Shanghai, 1930. 

Woodroffe, John. Shakti and Shakta. London and Madras, 1929. 


MISCELLANEOUS 


Berdyaev, Nicolas. Freedom and the Spirit. London, 1935. 

Eckhart, Meister. Meister Eckhart’s Sermons. Trans. Claud Field. Allenson, London, n.d. 
James, M. R. The Apocryphal New Testament. Oxford University Press, 1924. 

James, William. Varieties of Religious Experience. New York and London, 1929. 
Keyserling, Hermann. Creative Understanding. London and New York, 1929. 

Mead, G. R. S. Fragments of a Faith Forgotten. London, 1931. 

Starbuck, E. D. Psychology of Religion. London, 1899. 

Underhill, Evelyn. Mysticism. London, 1930. 


INDEX 


abandonment, 131-32, 196, 218n3 

abstinence, 41-43, 52 

acceptance: Christianity vs. Oriental religion, 73-75; conscious relationship and, 84-86; defined, 88; of 
emotions, 117-18; of evil, 64-67; as fatalistic, 184; of God, 135-36; of Grace, 138-40, 141-42; of life, 
61, 67-68, 184; modern man and, 76-77, 88; of the moment, 163-64; morality and, 71-73, 133-34; 
of oneself, 140-42, 178; of opposites, 194-95, 203-5, 211; in Oriental psychology, 105; partial vs. 
total, 68-71, 72, 132-34; spiritual freedom and, 189; St. Michael/Dragon myth and, 61-62, 72-73, 
133-34; technique of, 125-26; total, x, 60, 135-36, 174, 203; of the unconscious, 113-16; vicious 
circle in, 134-35, 139 

action, 27, 189 

Acts of John (apocryphal text), 206, 221-22n4 

Adam/Eve myth, 24-25, 137 

Adler, Alfred W., 61 

Advaita, 150 

ahimsa, 76 

allegory, 36, 103-4 

Amitabha Buddha, 157 

analytical psychology: aims of, 106; dangers of, 101-5; individuation in, 99-101, 200-203; language of, 
98-99; modern man and, 142; Oriental psychology and, 95, 105-8; practical essentials, 108-11; re- 
creation of the individual in, 95-99; religion and, 143; self in, 96-98 

anatta, 159 

Andreyev, Leonid, 187 

angels, 46-47, 79 

Anglo-Saxons, 22 

anicca, 159 

anima, 98, 119-20, 134 

animus, 98, 120-21, 134 

Apostles’ Creed, 37 

archetypes, 96, 98 

Aristotelianism, ix 

Arnold, Edwin, 130, 165 

Artha, 30 

arts, 42 

asceticism, 39, 40-43, 166 

“as if,” philosophy of, 23 

Assagioli, Roberto, 95 

association, 112 

Athanasius, Saint, 191 

Augustine, Saint, 126, 144, 205 

avidya, 154 


Bach, Johann Sebastian, 44 
Bacon, Francis, 20, 161 
Bailey, Alice, 29 

balance, 200 

Ballard, Guy and Edna, 29 
beauty, 56-57 

Beethoven, Ludwig van, 44 
Berdyaev, Nikolai, 66, 73, 144, 190-91, 215n2 (ch. 2), 218n3 
Berkeley, George, 86 

Bible, 215n3 (ch. 3) 
bodhisattvas, 82, 162 


body: interconnections of, 25; resurrection of, 37; Taoist view of, 27 

Brahman: as acceptance, x-xii, 69-70; action and, 27; Buddhism and, 159, 160; creative power of 
(maya), 214n7; nonduality and, 150-53; pantheism and, 149-50; as Self, 4-5, 26, 26-27, 159, 214n1; 
soul as, 69-70; as symbol of psychological experience, 86-87; union with, 39; Upanishads on, 69-70, 
148-53, 160; Western intellectualism and, 184 

Buchmanism, 29 

Buddha: demonic counterparts of, 82; etymology of, 156; gratitude and Godlike level of, 207; Lao Tzu as 
contemporary of, 167; Mahayana Buddhism and, 161, 162, 165; psychological approach of, 145; on 
self-agency, 219-20n9; teachings of, 159-61 

Buddhism, xix; acceptance in, 69, 124, 218n5; duality and, 136-37; early, 156-58; emotion and, 116-17; 
escape in, 38, 39; of Gautama Siddhartha, 159-61; gods/demons in, 82, 117; Hinayana, 38, 39, 116, 
161, 162; iconography of, 117; individuation symbolism in, 202; Mahayana, 136-37, 147, 157, 161- 
66, 172; mandalas in, 217n5; morality in, 166; nature in, 19; as nontheistic, 207; object of, 77-78; as 
philosophy/psychology of the moment, 163-64; as psychological religion, 73; spiritual freedom in, 
147; spiritual ideals of, 161; states of mind in, 73, 74, 75, 106; stories in, 49; Taoism and, 167, 172, 
173; upaya in, xiii; Western converts to, 76, 77, 143; Zen, 117, 173-76 

Buddhist Bible, 220n12 

Buddhist psychology, 157 

Burma, 161 

byodo, 218n5 


Calvin, John, 143 

Calvinism, 21-22, 23, 191 

Canticle to the Sun (St. Francis), 128-29 

Carlyle, Thomas, 61, 131 

Catherine of Genoa, Saint, 150 

Catholic Church, 28, 143, 191 

Catholic philosophy, 19 

causality, 23, 185-86, 192-93 

center, 196-97, 202, 203 

Ceylon, 161 

Chandogya Upanishad, 149-50, 219n6 

change, hatred of, 10-11 

charity, 41 

chastity, 42 

Chen Wei-ming, 108 

Chesterton, G. K., 129 

China, 147, 173-76 

Chinese Buddhism, 117, 157, 173-76 

Chinese philosophy, 19, 27 

Chinese proverbs, xxiv 

Christianity, xxvi, xxviii; aim of, 74; converts to, 76; doctrines in, 73; duality and, 137-38; evil and, 66- 
67, 83, 130; Grace in, 165, 172; immortal soul in, 19; individuation symbolism in, 202; life after 
death in, 58; modern, 37, 83, 142; morality in, 71-73, 133-34, 137-38; nature as viewed in, 19; 
Oriental religion and, 73-75, 143-44; psychological approach to, 145; psychology of, 74-75; 
skepticism about, 29; spiritual freedom and, 190-92, 197-98; spiritual happiness in, 36-38; worship 
rituals in, 128 

Christian mysticism, 74, 75, 78 

Christian psychology, 62 

Christian Science, 29, 64 

Christian theology, xvii, 130 

Chuang Tzu, 27, 107, 124, 167, 171 

churches, 128 

Ch’u Ta-kao, 167-68 

civilization, 13-14, 28-29, 32, 40, 70, 122 

clairvoyance, 46 

commonplace, the, xxiv-xxv 

Communism, 64 

conflict: importance of, 14-18; internal, 91-93 

Confucius, 167, 168, 176, 196 

confusion, xxvi-xxvii 

conscience, 72 

consciousness: asceticism and refining/exaltation of, 42-43; Brahman and, 69-70, 154; conscious 


relationship, 84-86; ego as center of, 98; future evolution of, 109; gods/demons lost to, 90; “higher 
realms” of, 39, 52, 208; individual, x, xxviii-xxix, 8, 15-17, 78-79, 87, 122; life centered in, 100; 
mental processes and, 111-12; Oriental philosophy and, 38, 39; religious, 191; spiritual freedom and, 
202; spirituality and, 35, 47-48, 51; in Vedanta, 153-54; Zen Buddhism and, 173, 178 

conscious relationship, 84-86 

contentment, 45 

craving, 159 

Cross, 202 

Crowley, Aleister, 29 

cults, 83-84. See also religious cults 


dance analogy, 50-51, 128, 196-97, 206 

Dante, 20, 211-12 

death, 34; as complement of life, 5-6, 204; hatred of, 10-11; love of, 204; victory over, 6 
demons, 46-47, 79-83, 89, 114. See also gods/demons 
depravity, 194-95 

depression, 113-16, 195 

Descartes, René, 86 

determinism, 21, 23, 184, 185-86, 190 

Devil, 56, 63, 83 

Dhammapada, 158 

Dharma, 30, 108 

Dhyani Buddhas, 157 

disease, 63 

divination, 168 

dorje, 165-66, 202 

dreams, 91-92, 96, 98, 105, 202-3 

dualism, 69, 77, 136-38, 142, 203. See also nonduality 
dukkha, 159 

Dweller on the Threshold, 141 


eating, 42 

Eckhart, Meister, 78, 144, 191-92, 204-5, 221n2 (ch. 7) 

ego: acceptance of life and, xxiv; Buddhism and, 159; conflict and, 17, 90-91, 92-93, 113, 114-15; 
individuation and, 203; inflated, 78-79; in Jungian psychology, 96-98; limitations of, xx—xxi; 
unconscious and, 26, 192, 203; unhappiness and, x; universe vs., 106-7 

egoism, 79, 155 

Egyptian Mysteries, 82-83 

Egyptians, ancient, 27, 114 

elementals, 46-47, 79 

emotion, xx, 110, 116-18 

enlightenment, 106-7, 116, 154, 160-66 

escape, 28-29, 31, 38, 61, 84, 133-34, 140-41 

escapism, 68-69 

eternity, 36 

everyday life, 51-52 

evil: acceptance of, 64-67; internal origins of, 64; morality by battle and, 61-62; pacifism toward, 67-68; 
problem of, 130; repressed, 137; resistance and, 63 

evolution, 17, 22, 106-7, 109 


faith, 130-32 

Fascism, 64 

fasting, 41, 42 

fatalism, 183, 184-86, 192 

fate vs. free will: fatalism and, 184-86; in Oriental wisdom, 183-84, 187-88; psychology and, 188; 
spiritual freedom and, 184-86, 188-89 

fear, 34; fear of, 11-12, 13, 32, 63; love as opposite of, 9-10; opposites and, 9-12; original, 9-10 

feeling, 98, 201-3 

feminine principle, 122-24 

flesh, mortification of, 41-42 

forgiveness, 206 

Fragment upon Nature (Goethe), 193-94 


Francis, Saint, 128-29 

freedom, xxiv, 13, 33-34, 49, 50-51, 155-56, 199. See also spiritual freedom 
Freedom and the Spirit (Berdyaev), 66, 190-91, 215n2 (ch. 2) 

free will, 184, 186, 189, 191, 192. See also fate vs. free will 

French rationalism, 22 

Freud, Sigmund, xix, xxiii, 23-25, 26, 61, 90 


Galatians, Epistle to, 67 

Gautama Siddhartha, 156, 157, 159-61 

Geden, A. S., 148 

genius, 94-95, 100 

Gilbert, W. S., 136 

gnana, 155 

gnosis, 209 

Gnosticism, 197-98, 209 

God: abandonment to, 131-32, 218n3; acceptance of, 135-36; anthropomorphic conception of, 19; belief 
in, 28; conscious relationship with, 84-86; contemplation of, 73-74; cruelty of, 129-30; Devil created 
by, 83; fate/free will conundrum and, 186; forgiveness of, 206; Grace of, 24, 39, 41, 138-40, 141-42, 
165, 172, 191; happiness as union with, ix; Kingdom of, 36-37; longing for, 126-29; love of, 55, 203- 
5, 211; nature of, 3; Oriental idea of, 136; spiritual freedom and, 190-92, 197-98, 199; substitutes 
for, 93; union with, 45, 49, 139-40, 191-92; as wholeness of life, 193-94; will of, xxvi, 54; wrath of, 
72 

Goddard, Dwight, 220n12 

gods/demons: ego vs., 113; in emotions/moods, 110, 113-16; importance of, 79-83; modern blindness 
to, 93, 121; spiritual freedom and, 197; unconscious and, 81-82, 83-86, 87, 90, 113-16 

Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 193-94, 218n1 

goose/golden eggs fable, 3-4 

Graham Howe, E., 95, 218n4 

gratitude, 205-9 

Great Illumination, 208 

Guild of Pastoral Psychologists, 216n3 

Gurdjieff, G. L., 29 


Hadfield, J. A., 95 

happiness: books on, xv-xvi; dependent on external circumstances, 41; elusiveness of, xxiii-xxvi, 17, 32, 
134, 141, 183; freedom of, 34; relaxation and, xxvi-xxvii; religion and, 32, 35; religious experience 
and, 43, 44-45; secret of, 183; spiritual, 36-39; superficial sense of, 127; unfortunate associations of, 
xxiii 

harmony, xxiv, 15, 16 

hatred, 63, 89 

Hearn, Lafcadio, 100 

heaven, 36 

Hebraic tradition, 218n9 

Hegel, G. W. F., 86 

hell, 36 

Heyer, Gustav, 95 

Hinayana Buddhism, 38, 39, 116, 161, 162 

Hindu Buddhism, 173 

Hinduism, xix, 129; acceptance in, 69-70; decline of, 158; doctrines in, 148-53; duality and, 136-37; 
education in, 119; gods/demons in, 82; life stages in, 30; man’s evolution in, 16; nature in, 19; object 
of, 77-78; poetry, xviii; as psychological religion, 73; self as viewed in, 26-27, 33; spiritual freedom 
in, 147; spiritual happiness in, 38-39; states of mind in, 73, 74, 75, 153-56; union with life in, 50; 
Western converts to, 76, 143. See also Brahman; Vedanta 

Hinkle, Beatrice, 95 

Hokoji, 180 

homosexuality, 94 

hsiang, 202 

Huai-nan Tzu, 167 

Hui-neng, 108, 175 

Humanism, 20-21, 22, 24 

humor, 105 


Iamblichos, 82-83 

I Ching, 168, 171, 172, 202 

iconoclasm, 207 

identity, personal, 9, 41-42 

ignorance, 155 

illusion, 77, 151, 214n7 

impermanence, 39, 40, 56-57 

India, 147, 148, 173 

individual, re-creation of, 95-99 

individuality, x, 7, 33 

individuation: in Jungian psychology, 95-99; meaning of, 99-101; spiritual freedom and, 200-203; 
symbols of, 107, 202 

infantile sexuality, 94 

inferior functions, 98 

insecurity, 63 

insomnia, 115 

inspiration, 43-44, 48 

intellect, 24, 98, 136, 137, 201-3 

intuition, 98, 201-3 

irritation, 116 

Isa Upanishad, 153 


Japanese Buddhism, 117, 217n5 

Jesus Christ, 74, 75, 117, 167, 191 

Jewish law, 21 

Jewish morality, 142-43 

Jewish tradition, 218n9 

John, Gospel of, 215n3 (ch. 3) 

Joshu, 179 

joy, xxiv, 45, 155 

Judaism, 218n9 

jujitsu, 68 

Jung, Carl G.: analytical psychology of, 61, 95-99, 102, 200, 203 (see also analytical psychology; 
unconscious); on Christianity as theology, 144; followers of, 95; as mystic, xxii, 25, 26, 214n6; 
Oriental philosophy and, xxiii; scientific method used by, 214n6; synchronicity principle of, 167, 168; 
unconscious theory of, 25-26; Western influence of, xix 


Kakuan, 180 

Kali Yuga, 16 

Kama, 30 

Kama Sutra, 119 

Katha Upanishad, 148-49 
key dreams, 96, 98 
Keyserling, Hermann von, 9 
Khayyam, Omar, 183 
knowledge, 155 

Knox, John, 143 
Krishnamurti, Jiddu, 29 
Kwaido, 175-76 


Lamaist Buddhism, 217n5 

Lankavatara Sutra, 162-63, 164, 172, 220n12 

Lao Tzu: duality and, 137-38; on feminine principle, 122-24; on self-justification, 130; spirituality of, 47; 
on Tao, 140, 171-72, 197; Tao as concept preceding, 167; Tao Te Ching and, 220n15 

Lear, Edward, 115 

legalism, 142-43 

Legge, James, 168, 172 

Leonardo da Vinci, 20, 48, 94 

libertinism, 194-95 

Lieh Tzu, 114, 167 

life, xxiv; acceptance of, 61, 67-68, 184; beauty of, 56-57; dark side of, 59-60, 71; death as complement 
of, 5-6, 155, 204; ego vs., 17; everyday, 51-52, 58-59, 189-90; as expression of gratitude, 208; Hindu 


views of, 30; meaningless, 188; opposites in, 4; religion and, 36-39, 199; spirituality as union with, 
48-51; stages of, 30; union with, 59-60; use of term, 213n2; wholeness in, 3-5 
life after death, 54-55, 58; ignorance of, 53 
lila, 129 
logic, 20, 80, 83-84 
love, xxvii, 51; acceptance and, 60; fear as opposite of, 9-10; of God, 55, 203-5, 211 
Lucifer, 83 
Lucretius, 43 
lunacy, 90 
Luther, Martin, 143 
Lutheranism, 21 


machine, 20-21, 24 

Maha-Parinibbana Sutta, 220n9 

Mahayana Buddhism, 136-37, 147, 157, 161-66, 172 

Mahayana Canon, 166 

man: civilized, unhappiness of, 14; faculties/functions of, 201-3; impotence of, and vicious circle, 184; 
modern, and conscious relationship, 84-86; modern, and Oriental philosophy, 76-77; modern, ego of, 
78-79; primitive vs. civilized, 13-14; religious problem of, 142-45; salvation of, 19 (see also 
salvation); separateness of, 151-52; unconscious goal of, 23-24; universe in, 12, 26 

Mana-Personality, 90 

mandala, 98, 107, 202 

Mandukya Upanishad, 153-54, 160 

man vs. nature, 32; civilization and, 13-14, 70, 218n1; ego and, 78; as evolutionary stage, 16-18; 
historical background of, 19-23; Prodigal Son parable and, 14-16; unconscious and, 108-9 

Marx, Karl, 21 

masculinity, false, 118-20, 121 

materialism, 36 

Matthew, Gospel of, 62 

maya, 26, 77, 151-52, 187, 214n7 

McDougall, William, 213n2 

meaning, 188 

means, 132-34 

meditation, 76, 77, 155, 219n6 

Meher Baba, 29 

men: feminine spirit in (anima), 98, 119-20; women misunderstood by, 118-19 

mental heredity, 111 

mental processes, 111-12 

mental vitality, 111 

metaphysics, 86-87, 162 

Methodism, 21 

Michael, Saint, 61-62, 67, 72-73, 133-34 

Middle Ages, 19 

mind: health of, 32; mechanical aspect of, 20-21; processes of, 111-12; unconscious, 25-26 

mind reading, 46 

Mitrinovi¢, Dimitrije, 209 

Modern Man in Search of a Soul (Jung), 144 

moksha, ix, xiii 

moment, the, 163-64, 170, 174, 177-78 

Monoimus the Gnostic, 197-98 

moods, 89, 90, 110, 195 

moralism, 142-43 

morality: acceptance and, 71-73, 133-34; by battle, 61-62; evil and, 65-66; as expression of love, 54; 
gratitude and, 207; by law, 137-38; reason and, 21-22; religion and, 43, 45-46, 54 

mortification, 41-42 

Mumon, 180 

Mu-mon-kwan (Zen text), 178-79 

Mundaka Upanishad, 149 

Myanmar, 161 

mystery, 209-12 

mysticism: Jung and, xxii, 25, 26, 214n6; mystery and, 209-10; union with God in, 45; Western converts 
to, xxi; wholeness and, 193. See also Christian mysticism 


naturalism, 176-77 

natural law, 17 

nature: acceptance of, 32-33; conscious relationship with, 84-86; dark side of, and ego, 17; everyday 
experiences of, 64; “getting back to,” 13; harmony with, 15, 16; Oriental vs. Western conceptions of, 
19-23; as unforgiving, 206; wholeness in, 193-94. See also man vs. nature 

“nature-in-man,” xx—xxi 

Nazism, 64, 83-84 

neti/neti, 154 

neurosis, 94-95, 100 

New Testament, 66 

Nilambara-Vajrapani (Buddhist deity), 82 

nirvana, x, xiii, 160-66, 174-75, 207 

No-Gate Barrier, 178-79 

nonduality, 150, 154, 160-61, 162, 174 

no-self, 159 

no-thing-ness, 218n5 


occultism, xxi, 46-48 

Oedipus Complex, 90 

opposites: acceptance of, 194-95, 203-5, 211; in life, 4; love/fear, 9-10; merging of, 39, 77; problem of, 
5-9, 32; reason for existence of, 204; tension of, 10-12 

optimism, 23 

Orientalists, xvi-xvii, 167 

Oriental mysticism, 84 

Oriental philosophy: acceptance in, 69; Christianity and, 73-75, 143-44; doctrines in, 147-48; duality 
and, 136-37; English language and, xvi; fate/free will conundrum and, 183-84, 187-88; gods/demons 
in, 79-82; happiness in, ix—x; modern man and, 76-77, 142; nature as viewed in, 19; object of, 77-78, 
86; psychology vs. metaphysics in, 86-87; scientific psychology and, xx—xxiv; states of mind in, 73, 
105; unhappiness in, x; Western converts to, 76; Western influence of, xix-xx; Zen and, 182. See also 
Buddhism; Hinduism; Taoism 

Oriental psychology, 95, 105-8, 116 

Original Fear, 9-10 

original sin, 23-25 

Ouspensky, P. D., 29 


pacifism, 64, 67-68, 76 

pain, 11, 116; evil and, 63; problem of, 58-60 
Pali Canon, 157, 160-61, 219n8& 
pantheism, 149-50 

paradox, 185 

participation mystique, 70 
passivity, 189 

Pastoral Psychologists, 95, 216n3 
Patanjali, 33 

Paul, Saint, 66-67, 137-38, 167 
personality, fulfillment of, 95-99, 200-203. See also individuation 
pessimism, 187 

Pharisees, 117 

philosophy, popular, xxiv-xxv 
phobias, 90, 116 

physics, 50 

pleasure-pain principle, 9, 155 
pleasures, worldly, 39, 40-43 
Pomp, Cornelius, 127-28 
possession, 89, 117-18 

pralaya, 153 

prayer, 41, 128 

predestination, 21-22 

pride, 138, 189 

Prinzhorn, Hans, 95 

problems, facing, 105 

Prodigal Son parable, 14-16, 70 


progress, 37 

Protestantism, 21-22, 143 

Psalms, Book of, 48 

“psychic science,” 46-47 

psychism, 54 

psychologists, xvi-xvii 

psychology: aim of, 90; Christian, 62, 74-75; fate/free will conundrum and, 188; of Oriental religion, 
86-87; of religion, 75; religion and, 216n3; scientific theories and, 80-81 

psychology, modern, xvi; devotees of, 31; Oriental philosophy and, xx—xxiv; Western influence of, xix. 
See also analytical psychology 

psychosis, 90 

psychotherapy, 216n3 

Puritan tradition, 21, 22 

Pythagoreans, 140 


rationalism, 22-24, 55, 144, 186-87 

rationalization, 83-84 

reason, 39; freedom through, 33; limitations of, 121; man/nature division and, 13, 33; morality and, 21- 
22; nature and, 20-21; unconscious and, xx 

regression, 92-93, 218n4 

relaxation, xxvi-xxvii, 40, 56, 68 

religion: ascetic, 40-43; as denial of life, 36-39; as entrance to life, 199; essential function of, 54; 
everyday life and, 58-59; happiness and, 32, 35; “higher sensuality” in, 56-57; individuation symbols 
in, 202; modern man and, 142-45; nonessentials of, 52-55; occultist, 46-48; psychology of, xxiv, 75; 
psychotherapy and, 216n3; science vs., 52-53, 55; spirituality in, 35-36, 54-55; substitutes for, 93; 
women and, 29-30. See also specific religion; spirituality 

religious cults, xxi, 29 

religious experience, 43-46, 48 

Renaissance, 19-20 

repression, 32, 64 

resistance, 63 

resurrection, 37 

Rhys Davids, Mrs. C. A. F., 158, 219n8 

Richard II (Shakespeare), 101 

Rinzai, 176-77 

Romans, Epistle to, 66-67 

Rosicrucianism, 29 


salvation: in Christian doctrine, 19, 62, 75, 138-39; of human mind, 24; morality and, 37; religion and, 
31, 55, 206; search for, 31-32, 77; spirituality and, 35-36 

sangha, 157 

sangsara, 160, 161, 162-63, 174 

Saptasatika, 165, 221n4 (ch. 7) 

Sasaki, Sokei-an, 220n19 

Satan, 63 

science: gods/demons and, 80; human anatomy discoveries in, 3; psychology and, 80-81; rationalist, 55; 
religion vs., 52-53, 55 

self, xx; Hindu views of, 33; in Jungian psychology, 96-98, 203; multiplicity of, and universe, 6-7 

Self, 49; Brahman as, 4-5, 214n1; Buddhism and, 159; of the universe, God as, 136; of the universe, 
union with, 74, 77-78; of the Upanishads, 220n9 

self-abandonment, 196 

self-agency, 219-20n9 

self-consciousness, xxviii, 15-16, 78-79, 84, 87, 122 

self-deception, 11, 24, 141 

selfishness, 159 

self-knowledge, 140 

self-tension, xiii 

self-will, xxvi 

sensation, 98, 201-3 

senses: religious antipathy toward, 41-43, 56; use of, in Hinduism, 119 

sensuality, “higher,” 56-57 

Senzaki, Nyogen, 178 


separateness, 151-52 

Sermon on the Mount, 143 

serpent, 61-62 

sex, 42, 52, 94, 119-20 

shabetsu, 218n5 

Shadow, 90 

Shakespeare, William, 20, 94, 101 

Shakti and Shakta (Woodroffe), 151 

Shaw, George Bernard, 81 

Shingon sect, 217n5 

Shiva (Hindu deity), 50 

Siam, 161 

sin, 205 

sorrow, xxiv, 34, 155 

soul: Christian concept of, 19; departed, 46-47; isolation from nature, 13; longing for God in, 126-29; 
multiplicity of, 100-101, 111; opposites in, 32; powers of, 89; salvation of, 62; World Soul, 214n1 

spirit, flesh as incarnation of, 215n2 (ch. 2) 

Spirit of Zen, The (Watts), ix 

spiritual freedom: through abandonment, 218n3; acceptance and, 189; dance analogy, 196-97; defined, 
132; depravity and, 194-95; faith as key to, 130; fate/free will conundrum and, 184-86, 188-89; God 
and, 190-92, 197-98, 199; gratitude and, 205-9; individuation and, 200-203; joy of, 128-29; mystery 
and, 209-12; in Oriental wisdom, 147, 163; psychological symbols of, 202-3; snags in quest for, 125- 
26, 132-34; unconscious and, 108-9; as unlimited, 135-36; wholeness and, 189-94; wonder and, 
208-9; in Zen Buddhism, 178-82 

spiritual genius, 44-46 

spiritual happiness, 36-39 

Spiritualism, 29 

spirituality: acceptance and, 70-71; allegories of, 103-4; awakening, 47-48, 54-55; defined, 58; of 
everyday life, 51-52, 58-59; occultism vs., 46-47; pain and, 58-60; in religion, 35-36, 54-55; 
religious experience vs., 48-49; suffering and, 116; unconscious and, 104-5; as union with life, 48-51. 
See also religion 

Sri Lanka, 161 

Stoicism, 118 

Suchness, 215n5 (ch. 3) 

suffering: happiness unaffected by, xxiv; knowledge of, 221-22n4; love of, 205; man’s conflict with 
universe and, 7-9; scientific measures for removing, 7; spiritual reason for, 116; unhappiness vs., 14 

Sung dynasty, 173 

sunyata, 124, 218n5 

supernaturalism, 54, 55 

superstition, 80 

Suzuki, D. T., 175-76, 218n5 

swastika, 202 

synchronicity, 167, 168 


tamas, 92 

T’ang dynasty, 173 

tanha, 159, 160 

Tao: body as image of, 27; ego and, 114; elements of, 168-72; happiness as harmony with, ix; 
inexhaustibility of, 197; as reality, 174-75; release from self-tension as meaning of, xiii; synchronistic 
aspect of, 168; translations of, 167; universe as, xi; use of term, 213n2 

Taoism: Buddhism and, 167, 172, 173; duality and, 136-37; fundamental principles of, 167-72; 
individuation symbolism in, 202; morality in, 137-38; object of, 77-78; as psychological religion, 73; 
scriptures in, 166-67, 220n15; spiritual freedom in, 147; states of mind in, 73, 74, 75, 106; 
unconscious and, 27; Western converts to, 76; Western influence of, xix 

Taoist psychology, 171 

Tao Te Ching, 137-38, 167-68, 220n15 

Tao-wu, 174 

Tathata, 69, 215n5 (ch. 3) 

Te, 170-71 

telepathy, 46 

Ten Commandments, 143 

Ten Oxherding Pictures, 103-4 

Terrible Mother, 90, 92 


Thailand, 161 

theology, 45-46; speculative, 54 

theosophy, xxi, 29, 77, 143 

Thomism, ix 

“Three in the Morning” (Chuang Tzu), 171 
thunderbolt, 165-66 

Tibetan Buddhism, 117 

“To a Common Prostitute” (poem; Whitman), 194-95 
Tozan, 124 


unconscious: acceptance of, 113-16; analytical psychology and, 93-94; causality in, 192; dark side of, 
113; ego and, 192, 203; evil in, 137; gods/demons and, 81-82, 83-86, 87, 90, 113-16; as irrational, 
121; Jungian concept of, 25-26; language of, 98-99; Oriental philosophy and, xx-xxi; proving 
existence of, 112-13; psychology of, xx, 90, 95, 95-99, 142 (see also analytical psychology); spiritual 
freedom and exploration of, 108-9; spirituality and, 104-5; symbols of, 91-92, 105-6; as working 
hypothesis, 214n5 

unhappiness: civilization and, 13-14; of civilized man, 14; defined, 188; ego and, x; longing for God and, 
127; man’s conflict with universe and, 7-9; root of, 8, 88; suffering vs., 14 

union, xxiv 

United States, 118-19 

universe, xi; asceticism as abolishment of, 40-43; bodily connections with, 25; conflict with, 88; ego vs., 
106-7; God as Self of, 136; inner, 90, 109-11; in man, 12, 26; man’s conflict with, 7-9; multitude of 
selves in, 6-7; reason for existence of, 129; Self of, union with, 74, 77-78; union with, 49 

Upanishads, 38-39, 69-70, 148-56, 160, 219n6, 220n9 

upaya (awakening tool), xiii 

utopia, 36 


Vaihinger, Hans, 23 

Vedanta: Brahman in, x—-xii, 38-39, 160; Buddhism and, 163; duality and, 136-37; fate/free will 
conundrum and, 187; meaning of, 153; as psychological religion, 73; spiritual freedom in, 147; states 
of mind in, 74; Upanishads as teachings of, 38-39, 148 

Vedas, 27, 148 

vicious circle: acceptance and, 134-35, 139; duality and, 136-38; fatalism and, 184; as impotence of 
man, 184; motivating power of, 138; reason for existence of, 140-41; sangsara and, 160 

vidya, 154 

Vishvasara Tantra, 152-53 

visions, 46-47 


Walley, Arthur, 220n15 

war, 63, 89 

War Dance (Graham Howe), 218n4 

Way and Its Power (Walley), 220n15 

Wells, H. G., 21 

Wesley, John, 143 

Western civilization: Oriental philosophy and, xix—xx; psychology and, xix 

Wheel of Birth and Death, 160. See also sangsara 

Whitman, Walt, 194-95 

wholeness, 3-5, 127, 155; acceptance and, 68-71; of life, God as, 193-94; in nature, 193-94; spiritual 
freedom and, 189-94; symbols of, 98 

Wieger, Georges Frederic Leon, 179, 180 

Wilde, Oscar, 43 

Wilhelm, Richard, 167 

wisdom: as acceptance, x; defined, 54; religion and, 53-54; unconscious exploration and, 107 

Wise Old Man, 90 

women: masculine spirit in (animus), 98, 120-21; men’s misunderstanding of, 118-19; religion and, 29- 
30 

women’s clubs, 119 

wonder, sense of, 208-9 

Woodroffe, John, 151, 152-53, 155 

World Soul, 214n1 

World War I, 24-25, 30 

World War II, ix 


worship, 128, 203, 206-7 
wu-wei, 87, 171-72 


Yajnavalkya, 148 
yathabhutam, 164 
yin/yang binary, 168 
yoga, 76 

yogis, 39 

Yuan dynasty, 173 


Zen Buddhism, 117; in China, 173-76; fundamental principles of, 173-75; as naturalistic, 176-77; 
spiritual freedom in, 178-82; teaching methods in, 175-76; temple rituals in, 207 

Zen masters, 179-80 

Zen poetry, 180-82 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


Aven Watts is best known as an interpreter of Zen Buddhism in particular and of 


Indian and Chinese philosophy in general. He earned the reputation of being one of the 
most original and unfettered philosophers of the twentieth century. He was the author 
of more than twenty books, including The Way of Zen, The Wisdom of Insecurity, Does It 
Matter, Psychotherapy East and West, The Book, This Is It, The Joyous Cosmology, In My 
Own Way, and Tao: The Watercourse Way (with Chungliang Al Huang). He died in 
1973. 


NEW WORLD LIBRARY is dedicated to publishing books and other media that inspire and challenge us 
to improve the quality of our lives and the world. 

We are a socially and environmentally aware company. We recognize that we have an ethical 
responsibility to our customers, our staff members, and our planet. 

We serve our customers by creating the finest publications possible on personal growth, creativity, 
spirituality, wellness, and other areas of emerging importance. We serve New World Library employees 
with generous benefits, significant profit sharing, and constant encouragement to pursue their most 
expansive dreams. 

As a member of the Green Press Initiative, we print an increasing number of books with soy-based ink 
on 100 percent postconsumer-waste recycled paper. Also, we power our offices with solar energy and 
contribute to nonprofit organizations working to make the world a better place for us all. 

Our products are available in bookstores everywhere. 


www.newworldlibrary.com 


At NewWorldLibrary.com you can download our catalog, subscribe to our e-newsletter, read our blog, 
and link to authors’ websites, videos, and podcasts. 


Find us on Facebook, follow us on Twitter, and watch us on YouTube. 


TICE: 


Send your questions and comments our way! 
You make it possible for us to do what we love to do. 


Phone: 415-884-2100 or 800-972-6657 
Catalog requests: Ext. 10 | Orders: Ext. 10 | Fax: 415-884-2199 
escort@newworldlibrary.com 


SIN 
z NEW WORLD LIBRARY 


publishing books that change lives 14 Pamaron Way, Novato, CA 94949 


