THE LEGACY OF ASIA AND 
WESTERN MAN 


THE LEGACY OF ASIA 
AND WESTERN MAN 


A Study of the Middle Way 


BY 
ALAN W. WATTS 


LONDON 
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W. 


Farst Edition 1937 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 
INrRODUCTION . : . xi 

T TxHo Wispom or Asia I 
IX Tur Frur or tug Tres. : . 42 
III Tse Son or Gop AND Man , 72 
1V.) Tas Secret oF THe Branoen Barnantan . 104 
Vo Tue Grnat RENUNCIATION - ‘ . 128 
CONCLUSION - 154 
Binuocrariry : : 161 
TLOSSARY . ‘ ‘ 169 
Inpax : : . : 181 


NOTE 


S this book is rather a propos of than about the 
philosophy and religion of the East, I would 
especially dircct the rcader’sattcntion to the Bibliography 
and Glossary at the end. The former is a comprehensive 
selection of the innumerable works on Vedanta, Bud- 
dhism, Taoism and Yoga published in English, French 
and German. This book is Icss a description of the 
information contained in these works than a guide to 
it, an account of certain principles which will makc it 
more understandable to the Western mind. It might 
therefore be called a preface to books on the wisdom 
of Asia, whilc the Bibliography forms the contents list 
of the main work. Incvitably a study of Eastern rcligions 
involves the usc of technical terms which can only be 
translated by a sentence or a paragraph in English. All 
the important terms uscd in this book are briefly defined 
in Uie Glossary, for though many of them arc explained 
in the text, their constant recurrence requires a briefer 
definition casily to hand. 

I must take this opportunity of thanking Mr. Cranmer- 
Byng, the publishcr’s reader, and Mr. Christmas Hum- 
phreys for giving many valuable comments and sug- 
gestions which have been of the greatest use. And 

ix 


NOTE 


for help in a number of small but important way 
am indebted to Dr. Lioncl Giles and Mr. John 
Watkins. 
Avan W. Watts 
Rowan TREE COTTAGE, 
CHISLEHURST. 
Spring, 1937- 


INTRODUCTION 


F this book had been written three hundred years 
ago, its title would have read like this: The 
Religious and Philosophical Legacy of Central and Eastern 
Asia, considered in relation to the Spiritual Problems of 
Western Man—being a Study of the Middle Way as expressed 
in Buddhism, Taoism and Vedanta, together tvith an examina- 
tion of its relations with Christianity and Modern Psychology, 
and cven that would have been a little inadequate. 
Convention, however, forccs us to confine it to the 
shorter though less explicit form: The Legacy of Asia 
and Wester: Man. But this is not simply a book about 
Oricntal Philosophy and Religion or those other, if 
Icss important, parts of Asia’s legacy—her art, litcraturc 
and law, cxccpt in so far as thesc bear directly on our 
subject. Alrcady there is a large cnough number of 
books on the wisdom of the East considercd by itself, 
for the most part written by scholars and students of 
comparative religion! In the last fifty ycars tremcn- 
Ve is interesting ¢o note chat in spite of their rather limited appeal, 
on Buddhism alone there are almost 2,000 books in English and at 
Icast ewice that number in French and German. The number on 
other branches of Oriental philosophy—Vedanta, Yoga, Taoism, 
Confucianism, Sufism, Zoroastrianism, Jainisin, Mohism and Tantra 
—has never been counted. Apart from those issued by well-known 
publishing houses, hundreds are published every ycar by socicties 


and private individuals in Europe, America and Asia, a large pro- 
portion even of the Asiatic ones being written in English. 


xi 


INTRODUCTION 


dous progress has been made in Oricntal studics, and 
thanks to the diligent labour of scholars a vast amount 
of information is now available. The scholar would 
be no scholar if he did not pay the most carcful atten- 
tion to details, and inevitably his pre-occupation with 
the trees obscures his vision of the wood. There arc 
exceptions, but generally speaking before the public 
can make use of the fruit of research, there must come 
between the scholar and the world at large the inter- 
preter. There cxist already many interpreters of Eastern 
thought, presenting it in everyday language and in 
broad outlines so that it can be understood by thosc 
who have no taste for tcchnicalitics and trifling details. 
But beyond research and interprctation there is another 
important question. For having amassed and, in part, 
understood this wealth of information, we have to con- 
sider what relation it has with our own traditions, and 
what influence it can have on our own way of life. 
So far, however, little has been done in this way. 
It is true that many have suggested that the wisdom 
of the East is so far superior to our own that we should 
at once discard Christianity (and cven Science) and 
become Buddhists, Hindus or Theosophists. But this 
is as much beside the point as the suggestion that Asiatics 
should become Christians or Rationalists, for a world 
devoted to one particular religion would be as uninterest- 
ing as‘a diet of one particular food, however nourishing 
that food might be. Moreover, prosclytisin has this 
fault: that being unwilling to Icam from others it 
lacks humility. Therefore the object of this book is 
xii 


INTRODUCTION 


less to describe Eastern thought and mysticism than to 
relate it to Christianity and to that young but swiftly 
growing scicncc—Psychology. Further, the stress is 
laid not so much on the two things to be rclatcd as on 
the actual relationship. Every book is in some degree 
an expression of personal opinion, an account of personal 
experience, and in so far as this is truc here it must 
be regarded as the view of life suggested through 
Eastern thought to onc brought up in Western traditions. 
For thosc traditions he has decp respect, and though 
his respect for the traditions of Asia is cqually dcep, 
he is in no way temptcd to “ change his skin” and try 
to become Oriental. But respect for an alicn culture 
necd not be the respect one fecls for a valiant cneniy ; 
it should be ncarcr to the regard which man fecls for 
woman. He docs not wish to become a woman, but 
through union with her he creates a child. Therefore 
this book is concerned with the possible child of Eastern 
and Western wisdom. As such it is written in the main 
for tlirce kinds of people: for the sincere Chistian who 
wishes his religion to mcan more for him than it does 
alrcady, for those sccking cnlightenment in the new 
psychology of Freud, Jung and Adler, and for those 
Westerners who are so enthralled with the wisdom of 
the East that they neglect the wisdom of the West. 
All these three kinds of people, living as they arc in the 
Twenticth Century, are likcly to belong to one general 
type: the thoughtful person who feels unccrtain of his 
roots, who has scen tlic replacement of Faith by Reason 
and has learnt the barrenness of Reason alone, whose 
xiii 


INTRODUCTION 


head is satisfied but whose heart thirsts. He has much 
knowledge, much cducation, much power of intellect, 
but he finds that there is a gulf between what he thinks 
and what he feels and docs. 

Among psychologists there is one who has alrcady 
begun to tackle this very problem, and that is Jung 
himself, Although le has confined his work to a 
rather specialized ficld, he is one of the first to approach 
the problem in the right way. In his commentary to 
The Secret of the Golden Flower 1 he has made a profound 
study of the advantages and dangers of the assimilation 
of Eastern thought by Europeans. In a comparatively 
short space he has put forward an cxtraordinary number 
of vital and suggcstive ideas, and whether or no he will 
agree with the main conclusions of this book, it owes 
its inspiration to his work. For Jung opens up a way 
to the understanding of the East which docs uot involve 
breaking away from our own roots. He keeps care- 
fully to scientific inethod in so far as he is never Icd 
away by the mere glamour of words, symbols and exotic 
doctrines which capture the faith of so many who have 
lost confidence in Christianity. For by approaching the 
Eastem wisdom neither as outwom superstition, nor 
as metaphysics, nor as a body of csoteric and inaccessible 
mysteries, but as psychology, he sccs it as a natural 
growth of the soul which we of the West can develop 


1 Wilhelm and Jung, London, 1931. Translated by C. F. Baynes 
from Des Geheimnis der Goldenen Blite, Munich, 1929. This is an 
old Chinese ext of Buddhist and Taoist origin called T’ai I Chin 
Hua Tsung Chih, 


Xiv 


INTRODUCTION 


out of our own roots without any resort to imitation. 
The danger, according to Jung, is that we should imitate 
the high states of mind mentioned in Eastern philo- 
sophies, that we should try to add to oursclves artificially 
what we have not achicved by natural evolution. It 
is not for the West to copy the East, for to steal the 
prize of wisdom before it is earnmcd can only lead us 
to confusion. In the words of a Chinesc sage, “* When 
the wrong man uscs the right means, the right means 
work in the wrong way.” Obviously it would be 
absurd for those who arc still in some way attached to 
the world to pretend that they have attained conscious- 
ness of Nirvana. Fundamentally, however, Eastern 
philosophy applics to mankind in all stages of his cvolu- 
tion. For it is concerned not only with that final cycle 
of man’s cxistence where he passes into the state of 
Supreme Enlightcnment, but also with the cycle of 
those who, like ourselves, have still our debts to life, 
our responsibilitics in the world of maya. There are 
many who imagine that in order to practisc tle wisdom 
of Asia it is necessary to retire from carthly activities, 
to sever all attachments and to wander away into soli- 
tude as a homeless sanyassin. But this is altogether a 
wrong impression, for if Eastern philosophy applied 
only to men in certain conditions it would have no claim 
to be universal. Indeed, if it necessarily involved the 
life of the sanyassin it could be of no use to the “West 
whatever, for thcre can be no question of giving up 
earthly functions until they are completely fulfilled. 
While there is any fear of carthly life and its functions, 
xv 


INTRODUCTION 


of earning onc’s living, of marriage, of establishing a 
family, of making friends, they cannot be avoided with 
impunity. In the West we arc by no mcans proficient 
in these arts, and before we can even dream of giving 
up the world we must have mastered them, for there 
is no short cut to Nirvaua. 

But to carry out the functions of the world with 
success, to be truly constructive and creative in this 
lower cycle of being, it is neccessary that we should be 
reconciled to it. For unless we are as much in union 
with life as man is with woman, we can never produce 
any child. Now in the course of his evolution man 
must produce many children, and if the last of all is the 
Holy Child, the Saviour, the Bodhisattva, there are 
many lesser children to come before. Supcrficially, 
Easter philosophy scems to be concerned only with 
the last, but the same principles of union and birth 
apply on every plane. For whatever our particular 
vocation in the world, it is essential that we cmbracc 
life whole-heartcdly, that we acccpt it, that we give 
ourselves to it; otherwisc nothing will come of it but 
frustration and mental disease. It is curious, howcver, 
that the very words we use in ordinary specch—embrace, 
accept, give ourselves to it—apply both to life and to 
the love of man and woman. For this is yct another 
illustration of the fact that ccrtain principles apply in 
all places and to all activitics alike. Eastern philosophy 
is, for the most part, the study of these principles and 
the technique of their application. If the superhuman 
heights of Buddhas, Bodhisattvas and Avatars are beyond 

xvi 


INTRODUCTION 


us, let us regard them as symbols of lesser achievements 
as well. And if it is not for us at present to attain 
that final union with the One Reality as described in 
the Upanishads, the Gita and the Yoga Sutra of Patanjali, 
we can at least attain it in a lesser way in the ordinary 
affairs of the world. For is not this the meaning of 
the prayer, ““ Thy will be done on earth as it is in 
heaven ” 2 


XVii B 


Like unto space the Tao knows no boundaries ; 

Yet it is right here with us ever retaining its serenity and 
fulness. 

It is only when you seek it that you lose it. 

You cannot take hold of it, nor can you get rid of it ; 

While you can do neither, it goes on its own way. 

You remain silent and it speaks ; you speak and it is silent. 


Hstian-chiao, 


To seek after the Tao is like turning round in circles to 


see one’s own eyes. Those who understand this walk 
straight on. 


From a Notebook. 


I. THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


S yet we have made use of only a small portiori 

of the legacy left to us by the ancient world. 

We have tumcd our attention in the main to the heritage 
of Greece, Rome and Israel, and for hundreds of years 
a knowledge of the literature and arts of these three 
civilizations has been the essence of our cducation. It 
is probable, thercfore, that onc of the reasons for the 
increasing neglect of classical cducation is that we have 
now almost wholly absorbed this heritage, but it would 
be absurd to imaginc that, because of this, we have 
nothing further to Icarn from antiquity. If a plant is 
to flourish, care must be taken that it does not exhaust 
all the goodness in its soil lest it should be forced to 
feed upon itself and so perish. From time to time it 
is necessary for the soil to be revitalized, and it seems 
that the time has come for fresh food to be given to 
the roots of Wester civilization. Otherwise we shall 
try to nourish ourselves on our own indigenous culture, 
thus pcrishing before our time as it were through 
spiritual consumption. Our own culture is primarily 
scientific, and the growing tendency towards a purely 
utilitarian cducation is a sign that this consumptiog has 
already begun. Therc is no need, however, for us to 
perish so soon through lack of suitable food, for in recent 
years the enormous wealth of ancient India and China 
has become available. It was once customary to refer 

qT 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


to these pcoples as heathens, but increasing familiarity 
with their cultures should convince us that what they 
have to offer is unquestionably cqual to all that cver 
came from Greece, Rome and Israel. If any doubt 
remained among reasonable people in thc West as to 
the value of this legacy, the International Exhibition of 
Chinese Art which was held in London at the end of 
1935 should have made them wonder at the attitude to 
life which inspired such inimitable beauty. Artistic 
achievements of this kind are astonishing cnough in 
themselves, but there is something which for ccnturics 
Asia has valued higher than art, somcthing which lay 
behind this art and which has been the main pre- 
occupation of Asiatic culture for almost three thousand 
years. That thing is, to usc the most inclusive tcrm, 
Wisdom, comprising religion, psychology and philo- 
sophy. The wisdom of Asia is the greatest portion of 
its legacy, and it is significant that all the great religious 
systems of the world had their origin in Asia, if we 
are to allow that the Semitic peoples arc truly Asiatic 
in spirit. This, howcver, is open to question, for, 
apart from Sufism, the Near East produced nothing to 
approach the high level of mystical and psychological 
philosophy attained in India and China. Thercfore for 
our purpose it will be sufficient to consider only the 
distinctly mystical religions of Asia—Hinduism, Bud- 
dhism and Taoism. The tcachings of Confucius arc 
primarily ethical, and in spite of their undoubted nobility 
they are more subject to changes of manner and custom 
than thosc which concem the aspect of man which 
2 


THE ROOTS OF CHRISTENDOM 


is constant in whatever time or of whatever race. Islam 
is so closely allied to the tradition of Israel that it offers 
little beyond what we already know, and however 
much we may admire the simplicity and evangelical 
power of its faith, it is so essentially a religion suited to 
the uncontemplative vitality of youth that it is unable 
to satisfy the more complex needs of maturity. Christi- 
anity, however, although of Semitic origin, has become 
an integral part of our own culture, and as such it is 
just as dangerous for it to fced on itself instead of an 
older tradition. During the Thirteenth Century, when 
Christianity reached a highcr levcl than ever attained 
in subsequcnt times, it was nourished by Greek philo- 
sophy, principally of the school of Aristotle. In its 
eatlier days it dcrived power from Neo-platonism, 
but now that thesc particular traditions are almost 
absorbed it must scek energy froin other sources. The 
Reformation instituted a rctum to the source from 
which Christianity had sprung in its very carlicst days, 
the tradition of Israel, and for many years Protestantism 
had a decidedly Old Testament flavour. But now even 
that is passing, and Christianity is left with three alterna- 
tives : to resurrect its own past by returning to Puritan- 
ism, Scholasticism or Gnosticism! ; to root itself in 

1 The term Puritanism as usd here should be understood to 
embrace all those post-Reformation forms of Chrisnanity which 
gave preponderance to the Jewish tradition, which saw Chrigtianicy 
as set forward in the New Testament simply as the fulfilment of 
the philosophy of the Old. It 1s am inceresting fact, to which far 


too little study has been given, that almost every form of Protes- 
tantism gives far more cmphasis to the Mosaic tradition than Catho- 


3 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


moder scientific thought; or to explore the entirely 
new field of the tradition of Asia. To take the first 
alternative would yield but poor results. Both the Old 
Testament and the philosophy of Aristotle have been so 
thoroughly absorbed and exhausted that Christianity 
would only be feeding on what has now become a part 
of itself. Gnosticism has now little to offer beyond a 
most involved and contradictory set of metaphysical 
systems which are little more than garbled versions of 
truths far better expressed in the Asiatic religions from 
which they were derived. Most of what was csscntial 
in Gnostic docwines Christianity absorbed, and we 
find it in such ideas as the Trinity and in the Pauline 
conception of Christ as an inward, spiritual expericnce, 
known in Gnosticism as the Chrestos, or Christ- 
principle. 


lidsm. The latter has a more thorough grasp of the significance 
of St. Paul’s Epistles, in which he is at pains to emphasize thac 
through Christ the Mosaic law is rendered obsolete. The term 
Gnosticism 1s here used in a far wider scnse than usual—a sense which 
few Chistian historians would be ready to allow. The term is 
generally applied to ccreain “heretical” sects which practised a 
form of Christianity strongly permeated by Nco-platonism and 
Oriental mysticism. The cvidence of this permcation is so strong, 
however, especially in Catholic Christianity, that it would appear 
that all Early Christians were Gnostics in greater or lesser degree. 
Thus we understand the Gnostic period of Christianity to be that 
in whitch it absorbed Neo-platonic and Kabalistic thought, together 
with what was left of the tradition of the Mystcrics. This, how- 
ever, was by no means a full absorption of Asiatic mysticism, for 
in those days that particular mysticism was only available in Europe 
and the Near East in a peculiarly muddled and incoherent forin. 


4 


PSYCHOLOGY AS AN ART 


Modem scientific thought, however, presents a 
different kind of problem. Certainly Christianity has 
not yet absorbed this, but the absorption would hardly 
be profitable, for science, as we know it, has little or 
no relation with what is important in religion. If we 
regard the essentials of religion as certain doctrines 
about the objective universe, then, perhaps, a relation 
between science and religion may be found. Fundamen- 
tally, however, religion is concerned with subjective 
values and intuitions which can no morc be treated by 
science than colour can be described in terms of shape. 
All sciences with the one exception of psychology are 
concemed with the objective world, with the measure- 
ment of quantities, with the relationships between bodies 
which can be estimated in terms of feet, pounds, volts or 
wave-lengths. But if we define scie1ce as measurement 
in the widest sense of the word, psychology as applied 
to the cure of neurosis, to the adoption ofa right attitude 
to life, can hardly be called a science. It is rather an art, 
almost a religion. A psychologist cannot be said to 
measure a “ guilt-feeling” as a physician measures the 
beat of the pulse or the quantity of uric acid in the blood. 
In truth there is no science of psychological healing in 
the strict sense of the term, for no system can be evolved 
which can just be learnt from a book or a teacher and 
applied with success. The cure depends almost entirely 
on the person who applies it, and its effect can only be 
measured by the somewhat immeasurable thin g which 
is called a man’s happiness. A system of psychology 
corresponds almost exactly to the technique of an artist- 

5 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


Given sufficicnt knowledge almost anyonc can diagnose 
blood-pressure by making physiological mcasurcments, 
but no amount of mere knowledge can detect lack of 
beauty in a picturc or lack of happiness in a human being. 
These things require an innate feeling for qualitics, an 
intuitive faculty which no learning can give. Precisely 
the same faculty is neccssary in religion, for no merc 
philosophical or metaphysical study can produce an 
appreciation of such personalities as the Buddha and the 
Christ. It can produce no love for man, no fceling of 
God, no sense of holincss. The objects of religious 
experience, as of asthetic experience, can in 10 way be 
measured, It may be incorrect to call then objects at 
all, for strictly speaking they arc subjects ; thcy are not 
things externally created or secn by man; thcy arc 
manifested through him, and he feels them because thcy 
come subjectively from his own divine nature. 

Thus Christianity may learn from psychology, but it 
would be absurd for it to look to this alone for a new 
source of nourishment. In the West psychology is in 
its babyhood. As Jung once said, it was not cven born 
yesterday ; it was only bom this moming. Morcover, 
it is gradually evolving more or less independently ideas 
which have been known to the East for centuries. The 
philosophy of Freud is far more completely expressed in 
Tantra and the cult of Kali, while some of Jung's most im- 
portant discoveries will be found in Vedanta, Buddhism 
and Taoism, to which he has frequently acknowledged his 
debt. The unique value of modem psychology is that 
it presents these conclusions in a form more easily adapt- 

6 


A NEW INTERPRETATION 


able to the West, though it is to be regretted that there 
is not sufficient knowledge of Tantra and the cult of Kali 
to enable us to sce the very scrious dangers of Freud’s 
philosophy. We refer especially to his teaching of the 
goal of life as death, and death as re-cntry in the womb 
of the mother—a philosophy which has been the excuse 
for some of the most depraved rites of India’s “ rcligious 
underworld.” But if a satisfactory relation can be 
established between modern psychology and the wisdom 
of Asia, Christianity may find a source of energy which 
might produce a Christian renaissance as great, if not 
greater, than that of the Thirteenth Century. That is 
not to say that Christianity would simply imbibe these 
new teachings without making any fundamental altcra- 
tion in its own. Although it is claimed by Catholics 
that the schoolmen, in tuming to Aristotle, only amplified 
the Christian revelation, it is just such amplification which 
is really altcration. It is part of the Christian revelation 
that there is a God, that there is a Trinity, that there is a 
soul, but almost more important than one’s belief in 
these things is one’s conception of them. The Christian 
revelation is ignorant superstition or divine understanding 
according to the manner in which we conccive it, and 
it is our conception which is altered by the absorption 
of other philosophics. It would be splitting hairs to 
contcnd that this docs not amount to an altcration in 
Christian doctrine. For the bare essentials of Christi- 
anity, the few revealed truths which compose its creed, 
are symbols into which we may read not just what we 
like but just what our spiritual devclopment enables us 


7 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


to read. Thus we might say that although the present 
interpretation of those symbols adopted by Catholicism 
is true, it is not much of a truth. In just the same way 
we say that although a man is a man, he may not be much 
of a man. The difference may be of both quality and 
quantity, but the lesser contains the possibility of the 
greater. 

We cannot, however, consider the future of Christi- 
anity unless it is related to the life of the West as a whole. 
It is a common fallacy to imagine that the West can cut 
adrift from its Christian roots, to regard Christianity as 
an outwom creed in no way suited to the development 
of a rational civilization. But it is precisely to preserve 
us from a rational civilization (in a special sense of that 
term) that a vital Christianity is nccessary—a Christianity 
reinforced by all that Asia and moder psychology can 
give. To understand the danger of this particular type 
of “ rationality’ we must return to the beginning of 
modem history—the Renaissance—and to trace the 
growth of the attitude to lifeknown as Humanism. The 
main characteristic of this attitude is its faith in the self- 
sufficiency of rational man—a faith which has dominated 
the history of Europe, and especially of Protestant 
Europe, ever since the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Cen- 
turies. Of course, there are no abrupt beginnings of 
world movements; Humanism may be traced back 
farther than the Renaissance, and its rapid spread in those 
two centuries was only possible because for many years 
previously the ground had been in course of preparation, 
The Renaissance apparently marks the beginning of the 

8 


THE WORSHIP OF MAN 


spectacular devclopment of rationality which has enabled 
this civilization to advance farther in five hundred years 
than the older civilizations advanced in two or three 
thousand. It has made possible the unparalleled feats 
of invention and organization which have given us the 
conceit that ours is the first truly progressive culture, 
and that there is no reason why it should not go forward 
indefinitcly to greater and greater heights of supremacy 
over nature. We call the Renaissance the beginning, 
however, mainly for convenience, for the movement 
was already in progress when St. Thomas Aquinas 
resorted to reason for proof of tlic Church’s revelation. 
But at thistime we notice a markedchangein the direction 
of men’s interests; their cycs were turncd from God 
to Man, hencc the term Humanism, and they gave their 
attention in the main to that aspect of Man which is 
conscious and rational. Their attitude may be summed 
up in thosc words from Hamlet : 


What a peece of worke is rman, how noble in reason, how inGnie 
in faculties, in form and moving, how expresse and admirable in 
action, how like an Angell in apprchension, how like a God ! 


Thus in art we sec an cmphasis on the beauty of the 
human form and in litcrature an absorption in human 
decds and emotions. M¢cn, as it were, fell in love with 
Man, until in time they imagined that the human under- 
standing was so great that it could be sufficient to itself, 
that it could solve all problems and embrace all know- 
Icdge. The mediaevalist, however, was not interested 
in humanity as such. When he drew a Madonna he 

9 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


had in mind not so much the form of a woman and child 
as the divine truth of which the drawing was no morc 
thanasymbol. But the artists of the Renaissance were 
interested rather in the humanity of these divine beings, 
and when they painted the crucified Christ they were at 
pains to express human form and emotion—the Son of 
Man rather than the Son of God. The mediacvalist 
knew that the love of God could never be shown in any 
picture, and he was content with the symbol ; he took 
little pains to evolve a correct likeness of the human form, 
for it did not interest him. At his best he loved God 
infinitely more than Man, and trusted in the providence 
of God rather than the exercise of his own reason. The 
contrast between these two attitudes is seen again in the 
drama. In mediaeval times thc mystery play was con- 
cerned not with the hopcs and passions of men, but with 
the re-enacting of the divine story of the Creation, the 
Fall, and the Birth and Passion of the Christ. The 
mystery play was in truth an cxtcnsion of the symbolic 
rites of the Church, but in Shakespeare these mystical 
themes arc set aside ; here we have a complete map of 
the human soul in its most exalted and its most depraved 
aspects. For Humanism, “ the proper study of mankind 
is man ”’—but, it should be added, conscious, rational 
man, for Humanism never cmbraccd those aspects of the 
soul which moder psychology groups under the term 
“the Unconscious ”—that part of us which is inscparably 
bound up with nature and with the divine. This is no- 
where better illustrated than in the course of post- 
Renaissance philosophy. For Descartes, who is regarded 
Io 


NARCISSUS 


as the father of rationalism, set out to build up a phift 
sophy by rcason from the very beginning. Starting 
from a complete doubt of all existence, he reasoned that 
if he was reasoning there must be a he that rcasonced. 
This gave him his first principle—cogito, ergo sum—and 
from this he developed his whole system. An carlicr 
example of his mcthod may be found in St. Thomas, 
but he began with a revelation and sought to prove 
by reason, while Descartes began with nothing and relied 
on reason alone. Iu this the whole trend of Western 
philosophy has followed him until recent times ; it “has 
sought to solve the mystcrics of the universe purcly by 
the exercise of human reason, imagining that all things 
can be grasped by the intellect. Thus in art, drama, 
literature, philosophy and science Humanism cxalts Man 
as a fully conscious and sclf-sufficicnt being ; it is not 
even as near to nature as Scholasticism, for in all forms 
of nature it secs only the likencss of humanity. The 
rose is comparcd to a woman, thc mountains to the soul’s 
aspirations, and the ordering of the stars to human 
intelligence. The universe becomes Man’s mirror, into 
which he gazes like Narcissus, adoring his own image. 

In these old myths there is always an important moral, 
for Narcissus languished and died through the adoration 
of his own beauty. In the same way, Man will languish 
and dic through adoration of his own reason, for un- 
wittingly it will lcad him to a state of exhaustion and 
sclf-contradiction, a state which was foreshadowed as 
early as the Reformation. In Calvinism we discem the 
beginnings of this self-defeat, for in the doctrine of 

II 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


Predestination, of detcrminism, is the logical end of pure 
reason. It is here that Humanism begins to crush 
humanity, for it gives preponderance to a principle 
which is but one half of true philosophy. For reason, 
in the sense in which it is used hcre, is the characteristic 
of intellect, the faculty which is at a loss unless it can 
understand life as conforming to certain fixcd laws. 
The philosopher who relies on reason alone is not happy 
unless he can classify and arrange things, unless he can 
place his data in mental pigeon-holes so that he can know 
where to find them when he wants them; otherwise 
he would be overwhelmed by a mass of details, 
each demanding individual attention. But life has an 
unfortunate perversity which philosophers find sadly 
disturbing, a perversity which is the causc of all the 
philosophical arguments which have filled and will con- 
tinue to fill an alarming number of inconclusive volumes. 
Tt has been said that three-quarters of controversy is duc 
to inadequate definition or undcrstanding of terms. It 
would be more correct to say that it is due to life’s 
unfortunate dislike of terms. Terms themsclvcs arc 
misleading enough when ill-defined, but the real diffi- 
culty is that the facts of life refuse to be termed ; thcy 
are so clusive and changeable that before they can be 
sufficiently described they have become different. It 
would not be so difficult if it were only that things arc 
so very different from one another; what aggravates 
the difficulty is that they are always becoming so very 
different from themselves. But even in making that 
Convenient generalization we have fallen into the trap ; 
12 


THE BOREDOM OF SOLOMON 


we have termed the facts of life clusive and diverse, and 
at once they refuse the terms. For we are reminded of 
the old saw, Plus ¢a change, plus c'est la méme chose, and 
that is uo idlesaying. Yet while similar situations repeat 
themselves again and again under many different forms, 
and while all things have to conform to certain eternal 
and universal principles, we know that the under- 
standing of such principles alonc does not amount to an 
understanding of lifte. This is the limitation of reason 
and intellect. However thoroughly we may analyse 
the laws of the universe, however much we may try to 
impress upon nature the order of our own intellects, 
there is still somcthing lacking, for we understand only 
the mechanics of life. In terms of principles life is a 
machine in which every cvent is determincd, and to 
explain life in such terms is to explain it away. It is 
foolish to believe that things are cxplained when their 
causes arc revcaled; to imagine that the wind is no 
longer a mystery when we know that it is. caused by 
changes in the temperature of thc atmosphere is to try 
to deprive life of its wonder. But life is not deprived ; 
the loss is suffered by our own souls, and to lose the sense 
of wonder is to take on the boredom of Solomon who 
declared that there is nothing ncw underthe sun. Indeed, 
he found this life such a vanity that he devoted his of 
age to concubines and idolatry, until the Lord said, * 
will rend the kingdom from Solomon.” 

For in philosophy there is a conflict between two 
principles. On the one hand there is life elusive, end- 
lessly diversc, cver changing, ever becoming new, 

13 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


joyously frce and refusing all definitions. On the other 
there is life cternally repeating itsclf; bound by iron 
laws and determined in its cvery movement. These two 
principles represent life and death respectively, yet how- 
ever much we may desire to cast away the latter and 
embrace the former, we must remember that life is not 
possible without death. Both principles are truc, for 
without liberty law is dead, and without law liberty 
would bring itself to confusion. And just as law sets 
bounds to liberty, death sets bounds to life; both are 
essential to one another. Thus exclusive reliance upon 
reason is equivalent to an over-emphasis of the principle 
of law, and this involves its own contradiction. The 
Humanist would measure all things by thc laws of Man’s 
intellect, but, however wondcrful this intellect, in itself 
it is no more than a mental machine, and through it all 
things seem mechanical. The Humanist looks in the 
mirror of life and beholds an order which reflects his 
own intellect. He sees all events as conditioncd by 
previous causes and all causes by previous effects ; cach 
event becomes inevitable, and by infcrencc he assumes 
that this is true also of his own mind. For reason leads 
us inescapably to the conclusion that we have no free 
will; it binds all things to law; it claims that there 
is nothing which cannot be explained by reference to 
law. The dctcrminist description of life is thus-the 
description of a machine. We can claim no lory for 
any achievement ; we can deserve no blame for any 
failure. That iscomplctc cxhaustion. There is nothing 
morc to be done; cverything has been explained, and as 
14 


THE DANGER OF BEING RATIONAL 


soon as mystery dies, life dies too. By trying to measure 
the universe by his own reason, Man imparts to it the 
limitations of that reason. 

Herein lies the danger of the “ rational civilization.” 
For the purely rational ordcring of life becomes a purely 
mechanized life. The complete planning of our exis- 
tence required by Marxism and Fascism is nothing other 
than social determinism. Scientists are expected to find 
ways and means of evolving, through eugenics and 
other expedicnts, the perfectly planned human being. 
It is hoped that an opcration on the brain of a criminal 
will cure his anti-social tendencies; perfect hygiene 
will destroy all possibility of diseasc ; perfect economics 
all prospect of poverty ; tlic scicntific study of aesthctic 
reactions to colour and form will produce perfect art. 
If it went so far as to say that perfect medicine would 
abolish all chance of death, we inight say that perfect 
planning would disperse all hope of life. That is 
certainly an extreme statement of the rationalist position, 
but it is the inevitable result of following Humanism to 
its extreme, even if the followers themselves do not 
desire such a barren existence. But there is no need to 
fear that Western civilization will ever come to that end. 
Not only will the suppressed irrational forces assert them- 
selves (in an unpleasant manner if we do not forestall 
them), but already there is a widespread revolt against 
the Age of Reason, an interest in things beyond and 
greater than rational man. For Humanism has already 
shown its bankruptcy, even without going to its logical 
extreme. In art it reached the end in perfect realism— 

15 c 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


at least, what should have been its end. The various °* 
“ futurist’ schools are the logical result of that realism ; 
they are in no sense a reform, for they demonstrate the 
victory of the machine. In realism we see the height 
of rational art, with its absorption in the accurate por- 
trayal of rational man ; in “ futurism”’ is the inevitable 
result—Man’s subjection to mechanics, for reason, by its 
very nature, is mechanical. Its processes are as unavoid- 
ably determined as the effect of one revolving cog-wheel 
on the other to which it is joined. Thus it is par excel- 
lence the faculty for ordering nature, for mastering 
the external world, for conducting the struggle for 
existence. Our grasp of it has made possible the present 
civilization, materially without any rival in history. 
But to master nature in the extreme, to control all things, 
to explain all things, is to defeat one’s real purpose. 
The subjection of life to reason is the method of kecping 
oneself alive, and the animal uses a primitive form of 
reason when it outwits its prey or builds a nest. But 
a balance must be maintained between reason and un- 
reason, for if all life is subject, there is nothing left on 
which to live. The complete planning of society must 
lead to a spiritual exhaustion and emptiness; it may 
give us all that could be desired of food, clothing, luxury 
and health, but the life is more than meat. Complete 
order must produce complete boredom, for Man’s soul 
longs for the unpredictable and the mysterious. 

The serious problems of hfe [wmtes Jung] are never fully solved. 


If it should for once appear that they arc, this is the sign that some- 
thing has been lost. The meaning and design of a problem secm 


16 


THE UNCONSCIOUS 


not to lis in its solution, but in our working at it incessantly. This 
alone preserves us from stultification and petrefaction. 

Man knows little of himself if he takes into account 
only the conscious, reasoning aspect of his mind. For 
just as we are unconscious of the greater part of the 
body, so we are unconscious of the greater part of the 
psyche ; and just as the body goes on its own way, 
forcing us to recognize its demands in spite of all our 
ingenuity, so the unknown depths of the mind must assert 
themselves to our confusion if we do not make provision 
for them. We feel nothing of the countless processes 
which cffect the digestion and assimilation of our food, 
and yet they perform thcir work cntircly without the 
direction of our reason. Unless we are physicians we 
are utterly unaware of the operations of our nerves, of 
the origins of the forces of scx, and the miraculously 
intricate system of the circulation. But these proccsses 
rule our lives to such an extent that it is absurd to imaginc 
that we are mastcrs of our bodics. For once we act 
in disregard of these unconscious forccs they asscrt them- 
selves in a sufficiently unpleasant mamncr to make us 
remember that they cxistand must be respected. Indeed, 
we are only conscious of digestion, circulation, breathing 
and nervous response when these proccsses suffer from 
some disorder, when thcy makc themselves felt as a 
result of our disregard. In the same way, there are 
countless mental systems and impulses which so rule our 
thoughts that in fact the belicf in the supremacy of reason 
is a laughable conceit. The conscious “I” docs not 
rule the mind, for although the “I” is allowed to 


17 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


assume that it is the willer and the thinker, it is scarcely 
ever aware that it acts in accordance with forces which 
pay little heed to the “‘ reasonable ” and the “ intelligible.” 
The “I,” however, has a remarkable faculty for persuad- 
ing itself that it is being rational when it obeys irrational 
impulses ; it has the most subtle expedients for justifying 
itself, for finding an explanation for all that it thinks 
and does. But the conscious “I” is but a small fraction 
of the whole man ; indccd, it is perhaps the most limited 
and fettered part of the soul. Certainly the will is frec, 
but it is not the “I” that wills ; it is willed by the pro- 
founder aspect of the mind in which is to be found both 
the wildly irrational freedom of the satyr and the divinc 
freedom of God. Here is the will, the director of life, 
the source of energy, of libido, while conscious reason 
is simply the tool, the machine, which it uscs to carry out 
its desircs. It must not be imagined, however, that this 
completc subjection of the conscious to the unconscious 
is a happy arrangement. In spite of the “I’s”’ capacity 
for rationalizing unconscious impulses, thcre arc times 
when unconscious demands are so strong that they con- 
flict violently with all that the “I” understands as reason- 
able. Whereupon there occurs a splitting of the person- 
ality ; the conscious and rational part of man attempts 
to be a law to itself; with the result that it becomes only 
law; it kills everything by its desire for order and per~ 
fection. On the other hand, the unconscious and irra- 
tional part, without the restraining influence of law, 
becomes so utterly unruly that in time it wrecks all that 
mere reason has achieved on its own The one is 
18 


WHEN LAW IS DISORDER 


inflamed by the independence of the other, and the 
harmonious interaction of law and liberty is replaced by 
the extremes of tyranny and licence. Modem civilization 
offers an unusual example of this conflict—a conflict 
which, when it occurs in the individual, is regarded as a 
serious form of insanity known as schizophrenia. To 
some extent we suffer from a social schizophrenia, for 
in no other age have there been such extremes of scientific 
order and political organization, yet it is precisely our 
immense scientific knowledge which makes possible the 
most violent orgies of destruction, and it is just those 
nations which regiment and organize their pcoplc in the 
extreme that are most eager for war. Herein we sce the 
truth of Lao Tzu’s aphorism that when the laws are 
overmuch in evidence, thieves and robbers abound. 
But even in this violent splitting of the personality, 
the conscious reason is not so free as it would believe. 
It is probable that its apparent freedom is only one of 
the devices of the unconscious for indulging its own 
liberty. For the unconscious is by no mcans at peace 
within itself, and its conflicting parts see in liberty an 
opportunity to fight. The reason is persuaded to join 
in this conflict ; it is cajoled by one part to resist others ; 
it is inflamed with a pride in itsclf which simply assists 
one unconscious impulse against another. The same 
may occur in the bodily realm, for here again there is 
conflict. There is an unconscious process which causes 
delight in the sensation of taste, and this may so capture 
the consciousness that scrious harm is wrought on the 
process of digestion. But the conscious faculty is in 


19 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


some sense responsible for the conflict. Without its aid, 
the various unconscious processes would be unable to 
fight one another, and therefore we find that in forms of 
life where consciousness as we understand it is undeve- 
loped there is little or no disharmony. The trouble is 
that consciousness is strong enough to make a conflict, 
but not strong enough to resist the persuasions of the 
various combatants. What is necessary, thereforc, is 
not the subjection of the unconscious to the conscious, 
but, as it were, a treaty between the two. The terms 
of this treaty must be that all unconscious forces shall 
have liberty to fulfil themselves, provided that this docs 
not involve the destruction of one anothcr. Thus our 
task is to become conscious of the unconscious, not to 
put it in fetters, but to give fair recognition to all its 
demands. We must make no attempt to claim victory 
over it, for this would be trying to deprive it of its own 
essential value. A garden requircs discipline, but it is 
understood that this discipline exists simply to give all 
the flowers and plants freedom to grow to thcir best. 
Needless to say, this coming to terms with the un- 
conscious is no easy task, cspecially in a civilization 
which for some five hundred years has been steeped in 
the philosophy of Humanism. It is just because of all 
that has happened in this period that we cannot retum 
to the old method of saving the soul from disintegration. 
This method is the practice of Catholicism—a system 
which contains every device necessary for the fulfilment 
and control of unconscious impulses. In the symbolism 
of the Mass, the practice of confession and the story of 
20 


THE PASSING OF BELIEF 


Christ there is all that the unconscious rcequircs, and to 
have faith in these doctrincs is to have a peace of mind 
unknown to those who rely on reason alone. That, 
however, is well enough if onc can have faith, but five 
centuries of Humanism has made a rcturn to the Catholic 
Church impossible for all but the comparatively few. As 
Jung writes in his Modern Man in Scarch of a Soul : 


People no longer feel themselves to be redeemed by the death 
of Christ ; they cannot believe—thcy cannot compel themselves to 
believe, however happy they may deem the man who has a belief. 
Sin has for them become something quite relative: what is evil 
for one, is good for the other. After all, why should not Buddha 
be in the right alsoz (p. 268.) 


This scepticism, however, docs not alter the inherent 
value of Christianity ; the trutl remains in its symbols, 
and what is necessary is not just a rctum to belicf but 
an enquiry which will show just how and why those 
symbols arc effective. To carry out this cnquiry it is 
essential to consider the religious Icgacy of Asia, because 
here we find a fuller and profounder treatment of the 
same symbols, with this difference: that the Eastern 
doctrincs are confesscdly psychological rather than theo- 
logical. That is to say, their intention is not to provide 
a satisfying cxplanation of the world and a theological 
sanction for morality; thcy cxist simply to provide a 
technique for the soul’s cnlightcnment. Buddhism in 
particular claims not to be a revelation, but the result 
of countless cxpcriments, the sum total of centuries of 
experience. The Buddha did not come to earth with 
a wisdom which had been his from all eternity ; accord- 
ar 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


ing to his own account as recorded in the Jataka Tales, 
he acquired it through innumerable lives of patient effort. 
Thus he offers his disciples a technique of spiritual 
development rather than a set of doctrines to be believed 
as if belicf were the chief thing necessary for salvation. 
Christianity offers salvation through acceptance of a 
historical event—the Passion of Christ, and the difficulty 
is that when man doubts its historicity, he doubts also 
its power to save. But the Passion is actually the story 
of the spiritual adventure which is necessary to every 
man’s salvation. To us, its value is not so much that it 
once happened, but that we can make it happen again 
and again. Thus the “revelation” of the Church can 
be seen less as an account of certain historical events, 
than as an allegory of the soul’s development. Salvation 
can be obtained not simply by believing in and relying 
on the efficacy of things which actually happened, but 
by re-enacting them in our own lives. Hence the im- 
portance to us of the Asiatic religions is that they placc 
little or no trust in historical events, and precisely through 
their very full descriptions of spiritual technique we are 
enabled to understand the Christian allegory in a new 
and morc satisfactory way. 

For the West, however, the approach to Eastern philo- 
sophy is encumbered with many difficulties created both 
by our own lack of understanding and the Eastern habit 
of speaking in paradoxes so alien to our own ways of 
thinking. The wisdom of Asia has only been studicd 
at all seriously within the last fifty ycars, and much of 
this study has been undertaken by missionarics who 

22 


EXPERIMENTAL RELIGION 


approached the subject with anything but sympathy. 
On the other hand, many students have been mere 
scholars whose interest in the letter dimmed their perccp- 
tion of the spirit. Certainly we owe a great dcbt to 
their work, but it is seldom that the scholarly mind is 
able to interpret. It can give us the facts, but seldom 
their meaning, for only too often it is the purely analytic 
mind which is unable to sce the wood for the trces. 
Above all it is that strictly logic-bound mentality which 
is unable to appreciate the subtle flights of intuition which 
mark all Eastern mysticism. For the Oriental philoso- 
pher pays little attention to the rules of philosophy as 
we understand them ; he seldom troubles to offter logical 
proof of his conclusions ; he seldom reasons out his thesis 
from a fundamental postulate in the manner of Descartes. 
On the contrary, the only proof he offers is the proof 
of experience ; he says in effect, “‘ Put my conclusions 
into practice and prove them by the results which this 
has on your life.” In this it is similar to psychotherapy, 
which has never sought to prove the existence of the 
Unconscious as theologians and philosophers have tried 
to prove the existence of God and the soul. The uncon- 
scious is confesscdly no morc than a working hypothesis ; 
its reality has been assumed simply because the assumption 
has been effective in the treatment of patients. There is 
little foundation for belicf in thc unconscious in physio- 
logical psychology, unless we take it to mean no more 
than the involuntary response of the mind to certain 
circumstances. But thc unconscious as understood by 
Freud and Jung means far more than this; it is the 
23 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


receptacle of all that has been seen, felt, thought—and 
forgotten, not only in the life of the individual, but also, 
as Jung insists, of the whole race. More than this, it is 
the source of that cnergy which shapes our lives—an 
energy far older than man—which is the libido or, in 
ordinary speech, desire. This is in many ways similar 
to the Buddha’s doctrine that all desirc (frishna) ariscs 
from ignorance (avidya) or lack of knowledge; the 
desire which causes us to be born into the world, which 
drives us along the road of our destiny whether we 
consciously wish it or not, procceds from that part of 
ourselves which we do notknow. The Buddha taught 
that this desire could be controlled by the conquest of 
avidya, that through sel&knowledge we could master 
our destinies. Psychothcrapy, in cffect, brings forward 
a similar teaching: if we can make conscious what is 
unconscious wecan make ancnd of mental discase. Thus 
we find a close resemblance between the Buddhist and 
Vedantist concept of avidya and the unconsciousness of 
psychology, though the term “the Unconscious” signi- 
fies the something of which we are ignorant rather than 
ignorance itself. Neither of these systems, however, 
requires any theology. [tis not necessary for the Buddhist 
or the yogi in search of self-knowledge or the psycho- 
logist in search of the unconscious to have any belicf 
in the saving powcr of a historical event or in the existence 
of a particular universal scheme. He requires no morc 
than the facts of life as hc knows them and the knowledge 
of a technique which can reveal further facts. H¢ travels 
by himself into the unknown, for thosc who have gonc 
24 


OUR SUPREMACY IN LOGIC 


‘before can find no language to describe what they have 
found. They can only offer guidance on the journey ; 
the traveller must undertake the journcy for himsclf, and 
experience for himsclf what lics at its cnd. Thus until 
he has reached that cnd he must regard all thcorics of the 
universe, all metaphysics, all theology as hypothctical and 
unproved ; the proof is only to be found in cxperiment 
and even then it can only give satisfaction to thc cxperi- 
menter himself. 

For this reason the philosophics of the East indicatc 
rather than explain ; from thc Europcan point of view 
their metaphysics are poor and thcir reasoning unccrtain. 
But they would be of little value to us if they offered 
merely a repetition of the mctliods of Western philo- 
sophcrs. In logic the West is supreme ; in Plato, Des- 
cartes, Kant, Hegel and the other “ classical ” philosophers 
of Europe we have the greatest mastcrs of reason known 
to history. If life could be managed cntircly by the 
exercise of reason we should have all that we rcquirc. 
But however intellcctually convinced onc may be of a 
certain philosophy, this conviction is oftcn cnough 
strangely remote from the serious problems of our lives, 
for the satisfaction of the intcllect docs not neccessarily 
involve the satisfaction of cmotion, fccling and intuition. 
It is therefore necessary to find a morc catholic philosophy, 
a philosophy which applics to the whole of man instcad 
of to but one of his parts. 

If the wisdom of Asia sccms strange to our rcason, 
if it seems poor as philosophy, it is beyond qucstion the 
most catholic of all psychologies. It may appcar absurd 

25 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


to speak of the wisdom of Asia as a unity, seeing that the 
religions of the East comprise a vast number of different 
sects and schools. There are the six systems of Indian 
philosophy, the five schools of yoga, the two “ vehicles ” 
of Buddhism with their innumerable subdivisions, and 
the two philosophies of China (which seem as far apart 
as black and white) to mention only a few of the more 
important groups. But, apart from the fact that these 
systems have certain common elements, we of the West 
are able to approach them as a whole. Coming from 
afar we are able to see what is invisible (or rather, what 
is not often recognized) near at hand. Even if Eastern 
philosophers do not understand (though some are well 
aware of it) that their hundreds of different schools form 
a living organism, a unity in diversity, the West can 
appreciate that Asia offers us “ ways to the Onc as many 
asthe lives of men.” This unity is only possible because 
it offers us waysas distinct from creeds ; it offers a varicty 
of techniques suited to the many different types of mind. 
ranging from the advanced psychism of Tantra to the 
practical mysticism of the Bliagavad-Gita. Crccds there 
are as well, complex metaphysical doctrines over which 
pandits have argued without end, but the true wisdom 
of Asia does not lie in these. The theologics of Brah- 
manism and Mahayana Buddhism are regarded in all the 
important texts as subordinate to the practical technique 
of spiritual development, and they insist not that a man 
should believe in a set of theological propositions but 
that he should tread a path. These philosophics arc 
nothing if they are not tways rather than creeds, for they 
26 


WAYS AND NOT CREEDS 


“never tire of stating that their deepest truths are unintelli- 
gible to those who have not attained such an exaltcd state 
of understanding that those truths are less believed than 
known. So far as “ultimate realities”? are concerned, 
the religions of Asia require not faith but knowledge ; 
faith is only required in the technique for attaining that 
knowledge. More than this, even if Asia herself docs 
not always recognize it, faith is not asked for any parti- 
cular technique, for her religions offtcr a variety of ways 
leading to the samie Goal—ways which are adapted to 
the varying capacitics and talents of mankind. It mattcrs 
little which technique is chosen, provided that, when 
chosen, it is followed with unswerving loyalty, for no 
one is entitled to say that his technique is useless until 
he has given it fair trial. 

So far as the religions of Asia as a whole are concerned 
this catholicity can hardly be called intentional. The 
pandits of Vedanta, Buddhism and Taoism did not meet 
together and arrange to construct an organic philosophy. 
On the contrary, they frequently sought to cxalt 
their own religions over others, but the organism grew 
in spite of their cfforts. The reason for this was that 
the two greatest religions, Vedanta and Buddhism, were 
organic in themselves. Vedanta and its developments, 
which are contained in the inclusive term “‘ Hinduism,” 
consciously made provision for varying mentalities, while 
Buddhism adapted itself to the peoples amongst whom it 
spread. As an example of the former we may cite the 
different forms of yoga, all of which are recognized in 
India as equally effective. For the intellectual type there 


27 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


is Gnana yoga, the way of thought ; for the feeling type’ 
there is Bhakti yoga, the way of love; for the worker 
therc is Karma yoga, the way of service. But for thosc 
exceptionally gifted, therc is a fourth which compriscs 
the other threc—Raja yoga, the royal way, and this 
contains not only the trinity of thought, love and service, 
but also that mainly psychic form of yoga known as 
Hatha. For Westerners, unaided by an cxpericnced 
teacher, this last is an extremely dangerous practicc, and 
it is to be regretted that many irresponsible writers have 
madc a knowledge of its methods too easily available. 
It releases znergies too strong for untrained nerves, burn- 
ing them as a powerful electric current burs a weak wire. 
Moreover, so great are the powers which it develops 
that they are only safe in the hands of those of thc highest 
moral discipline, those who can be trusted to use them 
without thought of personal gain. 

Thus Hinduism provides for the occultist and for the 
three types of mystic, and not only docs it offer different 
paths for different men ; in addition it recognizes threc 
differcnt vocations, all of which arc cqually necessary to 
the life of each individual. Some form of yoga or 
spiritual exercise is not thc only object worthy of pursuit, 
for being gifted with faculties other than spiritual it is 
our responsibility to use them well. Hence three voca- 
tions, or functions, pertaining to the different periods of 
man’s life are given cqual recognition, and these are 
Artha, Kama and Dharma. “In youth and maturity,” 
writes Vatsyayana, “ man busics himsclf with Artha and 
Kama, and in old age he follows Dharma, striving thus to 

28 


THE STAGES OF LIFE IN MANU 


‘attain Moksha, the deliverance from further re-birth.” 
Artha compriscs the dutics of citizenship, of acquiring 
a profession or trade, of making friends and cstablishing 
a family. Kata is the right use of the senscs, the tech- 
nique of sexual cnjoyment and of all forms of plcasure 
natural to man. Dharma is the fulfilment of spiritual 
duties, the study of the scriptures and the practice of yoga. 


Thus [says Vatsyayana] a man who practises Dhariua, Artha and 
Kama tastes at the same time fortune in this world and in the world 
tocome. ... Each act which conduces to the practice of Dharma, 
Artha and Kama together, or of two of them, or even of one, that 
act should be performed ; but one must avoid an act which con- 
duces to the practice of onc alone at the expense of the other two. 


Hinduism, therefore, is perhaps the most catholic of all 
religions, for it has not become so in the course of its 
evolution but was based on the principle of catholicity 
from its very beginnings. Those who laid down the 
code of Manu made provision both for different mentali- 
ties and different vocations in the most thoroughgoing 
manner ; they showed an undcrstanding of the social 
organism which in subsequent times has scldom been 
equalled, and it is probable that the peculiar missionary 
methods of Buddhism were strongly influenced by the 
social ideals of its native land. 

For among missionary religions Buddhism is unique 


1 A fuller treatment of this subject will be found in the first scc- 
tion of Vatsyayana’s Kama Sutra, from which the two passages above 
are quoted. The fullest treatment is, of coursc, in the 2nd to 6th 
books of the Laws of Manu, upon which Vatsyayana has based his 
observations. 


29 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


in that it is almost entirely free from the desire to eradicate* 
the indigenous faiths and cultures of the peoples to whom 
it spreads. When it took root in China, instead of trying 
to impose Indian ways of thought upon people of a very 
different temperament, it skilfully adapted itself to the 
Chinese mind. Its founder had always counselled a re- 
spect for the opinions of others, and when in China it 
came into contact with Confucianism and Taoism it 
soon adapted itself to these native philosophies, producing 
a way of life which was the “ Chinese synthesis ” of the 
three religions. From time to time it was strongly 
resisted by hostile Emperors, but because of its unusual 
method of propaganda it succeeded where a morc self- 
assertive method would have failed. Mahayana Buddh- 
ism as taught by the Indians was a highly involved and 
speculative system of inetaphysics far removed from the 
practical tendencies of the Chinese. But not long after 
its introduction, these Indian characteristics began to 
disappear. Instcad of keeping Sanskrit as the official 
language of Buddhism as for many centuries the Chris- 
tian Church kept Latin, every assistance was given to the 
great scholar-pilgrim Hiuen-tsang to translate the Sans- 
krit sutras into Chinese. Hence before long a peculiarly 
Chinese form of Buddhism arose which combined with 
Buddhism certain aspects of Taoism and Confucianism. 
This was known as Ch’an (Japancse, Zen), a product of 
Southern China which in years to come was to have 
the most profound influence on Chinese ideals and especi- 
ally on the art of the T’ang and Sung Dynastics. If in 
India Buddhism had fallen away from the practical spirit 
30 


THE CATHOLICITY OF BUDDHISM 


of its founder, the Chinese brought this spirit back to 
life in the most intense form. For in Zen they brought 
together the Buddhist’s tremendous will for Enlighten- 
ment and his detachment from all changing things, the 
Taoist’s reverence for nature and his understanding of the 
value of rhythm and change, and the Confucian’s respect 
for ceremony and social order. But it is said that the 
whole is greater than the sum of its parts, and it is certain 
that Zen was not merely the adding together of these 
several virtues It was as if a number of chemical in- 
gredients had been mixed to produce something alto- 
gether new and unique, for in Zen there was a spirit 
which had not previously existed in either of the three 
faiths alonc. It was something as mighty as a gale and 
as impossible to grasp in the hands of logic, something 
so one-pointed in its quest for Enlightenment that its 
rough treatment of mere doctrines and intellectual 
formulae was almost alarming. 

Zen, however incomprehensible to Western thought, 
is the essentially Chinese form of Buddhism, and its 
ascendancy from the Eighth to the Twelfth Centuries 
coincided with the Golden Age of Chinesc Art. But 
China is now long past its meridian and Zen has given 
way to corrupt forms of religion in which are litdle more 
than the shadows of Buddhism, Taoism and Con- 
fucianism. Even so, the three still exist side by sidc, and 
it is said that people go to the Taoists for reading the 
destiny of new-bom children, to the Confucians for a 
blessing on marriage and for rules for the conduct of 
life, and to the Buddhists for the burial of the dead. 


LA. 31 D 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


But in Japan Buddhism lives on in vital form, and here 
again there has been an adaptation to native culture. 
Zen became the religion of the warriors and artists, and 
was soon brought into an intimate relation with the 
Japanese love of nature. The indigenous cult of Shinto 
was enabled to exist together with Buddhism, partly 
through the ingenious proccss of identifying thc various 
Shinto deities with the various Buddhas and Bodhi- 
sattvas. From this there arose a curious cross betwecn 
Shinto and Buddhism known as Ryobu Shinto in which 
the rites and symbols of both religions were merged 
together. For Shinto is an essentially national religion ; 
it could not apply to any other country than Japan, and 
thus it is possible for millions of Japanese to be Shintoists 
as Japanesc and Buddhists as human beings. In all 
matters affecting the nation as such they observe the rites 
of Shinto, but in those which affcct all men alike—birth, 
suffering, love, death—thcy arc Buddhists. 

These, however, arc only a few of the countless ways 
in which Buddhism has given fresh life and mcaning 
to cultures different from its own. In the 2,500 ycars 
of its history it has expressed itself in forms corresponding 
to almost every general type of mind, and at the same 
time it has preserved a unity. Never has there been a 
Buddhist religious war in any way cqual to the Wars of 
Religion between Catholic arid Protestant in Sixteenth- 
Century Europe, and this may be attributed in part to 
the Buddhist vision of universal salvation. Men may 
hold foolish opinions, but in the course of many rebirths 
they will eventually learn from their own mistakes and 

32 


SPITTING AT THE HEAVENS 


“followthetrueway. Inthe meantime, nothing can force 
them, and a man learns more from the natural results of 
his own follies than from the interference of others. 
This attitude has its disadvantages, and it may be said 
that whereas the strife between the sects of Christianity 
is a sign of life and health, the casy-going tolerance of 
Buddhism results in an aimless and uncnding differentia- 
tion like the decomposition of a corpse. The metaphor 
would be peculiarly apt were it not for such noteworthy 
memorials of greatness and life as the art of China and 
Japan, and the records in the literature of almost evcry 
people in Central and Eastern Asia of the lives of the 
Buddhist sages. Certainly we do not find much evidence 
in Asia of material improvement, of general education, 
of health and prosperity among the masses of the people, 
and for this rcason it is often said that its religions are 
a failure. But it is absurd to compare civilizations to 
each other’s disadvantage in this way, for such forms of 
condemnation are like the boomerang. Or, as the 
Buddha said, “ It is asa man who looks up and spits at 
heaven ; the spittle docs not soil the heaven, but comes 
back and defiles his own person.”” For it must be rc- 
membered not only that the East is old and that the 
glorious days of India and China have, as must all things 
on this carth, passed away, but also that it is a mistake to 
judge it by our own standards of greatness. The achievc- 
ment of Asia is its spiritual understanding and its art, 
and if these have had little cffect on the lives of the masses, 
let us remember that the scientific creations of Europe 
are used for peculiarly hidcous forms of self-destruction, 
33 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


and that its high standard of living and universal “* educa~ 
tion ’” have given ignorant pcople unheard-of opportuni- 
tics for vulgarity. We are proud enough of the way in 
which we fattcn our people, but we must not be surprised 
if the Asiatic remarks that pigs also arc fattened for the 
slaughter-housc. His remark might not be altogether 
just, but neither are similar accusations against Asia, 
There is no profit, however, in mutual disparagement, 
for it blinds us to the fact that Asia’s gift to us is now 
at our feet, and that it would be madness simply to 
relegate this untold wealth to museums and the libraries 
of learned socicties. It is true that the days of the old 
and wise Asia are past, but Greece, Rome and Isracl 
vanished centurics ago and yct we have since that timc 
reaped countless benefits from thcir remains. 

But it is said that we can learn little from the East 
that we do not already know, and morcover that its 
wisdom is so cold and impersonal that it is utterly unsuited 
to the Western tempcrament. It is said to be the ‘* wis- 
dom”’ of those who did not understand the meaning and 
value of personality, of a people crushed by poverty and 
tyranny to a dull uniformity, and overawed by vast 
natural forces which made man scem asnothing. Again 
the accusation invites the Easterner to observe, in rc- 
sponse, that we are so vain that we have made the whole 
universe our looking-glass, even to the extent of making 
God in our own image. But both observations, apart 
from being not strictly true, neglect tlic obvious nccessity 
of relating the two attitudes in such a way that the 

‘ personal and the universal are scen in their right propor- 


34 


THE PARADOX OF IMPERSONALITY 


‘tions. There can be no doubt that in some ways the 
philosophies of India are radically impersonal and, to our 
ideas, cold and vast like the lifeless infinities of space. 
To a superficial understanding they naturally imply that 
the world and all its beauties, horrors, pleasures, pains, 
virtues and vices is maya—illusion ; personality is a dream 
born of ignorance ; to the wise, all differentiation is the 
mind’s distorted view of the Onc Reality, and man’s task 
is so to unify himself with the Onc that personality 
vanishes and the limited self becomes the universal Self. 
But by one of those curious paradoxes which attend all 
spiritual life, the men who followed this way, so far 
from becoming nonentities, grew into personalities of 
the highest form. Perhaps the Chinese had a clearer 
understanding of this paradox, for in Taoism and Zcn 
we find the cult of impersonality side by side with a 
profound appreciation of things momentary and personal. 
For in answer to questions about ultimate realities the 
Zcn masters, instead of giving philosophical discourses 
in the Indian manner, pointed to a clump of bamboos, 
a flock of wild gecse on the wing, or a sack of rice. 
Long before Indian philosophy had bcen heard of in 
China Lao Tzu said: “ The Sage keeps himself behind 
and he is in front ; he forgets himsclf and he is preserved. 
Is it not because he is not self-intercsted that his self- 
interest is established ?’’ Here was the paradox of 
impersonality and personality devcloping togethcr, and 
in an old Zen saying we find it stated in another way : 

To a man who knows nothing of Buddhism, mountains arc 
Mountains, waters are watcrs, and trees are trees But when he 


35 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


has read the scriptures and knows a little of Buddhism, mountains 
are no longer mountains, waters no longer waters, and trees no 
longer trees [ie. they are maya or wlusion]. But when he has thor- 
oughly understood Buddhism, mountains are once again mountains, 
watcrs are waters, and trees are trees. 


Whatever the precise meaning of these words, the differ- 
ence from the accepted trend of Indian philosophy is 
obvious. But though it may seem that the Indians were 
content with the second stage, and seldom passcd on to 
the third, this is only partially truc, for there were some 
who understood morc decply. Thus this third stage, 
although not expressly stated, is at lcast implied in two 
of the Mahayana sutras—the Lankavatara and the Vima- 
lakirti—and even in the Upanishads. What is important 
to note, however, is that as Indian philosophy developed 
through Buddhism, the division between the world of 
reality and the world of illusion, Nirvana and Sangsara, 
became less absolute. This change did not take place 
in Buddhism of the Hinayana or Southern School, which 
claiins to contain no morc and no Iess than the original 
teaching of thc Buddha—a claim upon which recent 
research has thrown considerable doubt. The trend of 
Hinayana is to deny uttcrly thc world of form, to see in 
all earthly beauty a sensual snarc, to look forward only 

1 We refer to the work of Mrs. C. A. F. Rhys Davids. In spite 
of some of her rather extravagant conclusions, she has done most 
valuable research in showing the disparities in the Pali C:non 
between the authentic words of the Buddha and the dull interpola- 
tions of monkish commentators. Sce her Ontlines of Buddhism, 


London, 1934; Manual of Buddhism, 1932, and all recent works, 
including revisions of books published before the War. 


36 


THE DENIAL OF LIFE 


to escape from life and death—an escape to be achieved 
in the quickest possible manner. To the Hinayanist, life 
is misery and all its forms, whether beautiful or ugly, 
good or evil, he rejects as equally vain. 


The well-taught disciple feels disgust for body, feels disgus for 
feeling, feels disgust for perception, for the activities, fecls disgust 
for consciousness. So fecling disgust he is repelled ; being repelled 
he is freed. .. . So that he knows, “ Destroyed is rebirth ; lived 
is the nightcous hfe; done is my task; for life in terms like these 
there is no hereafter.” 1 


Here is the doctrine of maya in its cxtreme, and similar 
passages, drawn out in monotonous and repetitive form, 
abound in the Pali Canon—the scriptures of Hinayana 
Buddhism. The tragedy is that until comparatively 
recently such doctrines as these were prescntcd to the 
West as orthodox Buddhism. Scholars began by con- 
centrating on the Pali scriptures, and it was not until 
later that the Sanskrit texts of the Mahayana were given 
publicity. But even here they found persistent reference 
to the cmptiness and vanity of the world, and it seemed 
as if Mahayana were only a metaphysical version of 
Hinayana. 

Yet there was a difference, and in Mahayana the trend 
of Indian philosophy underwent a subtle change. For 
there came into being the sublime conception of the 
Bodhisattva—the sage who sought Enlightenment, not 
for his own peace and salvation, but for the welfare of 
allsentient beings. “* Never will I seek or receive private, 


1 Vinaya Pitaka, i. 6, and Samyutta Nikaya, iii. 66 et seg. Trans. 
F. L. Woodward. 


37 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


individual salvation ; never will I enter into final peace’ 
alone ; but forever, and cverywhere, will Ilive and strive 
for the redemption of every creature throughout the 
world.” Such was the Bodhisattva’s vow, and in it we 
see, not the desire to escape from the world, but its fullest 
acceptance. For the Bodhisattva identifics himself with 
all that lives; he acccpts responsibility for every singlc 
creature, and instead of trying to be delivered from the 
world of life and death he enters into it, knowing that 
there can be no peace for himself until the world, too, 
has peace.t. Thus in Mahayana therc is little mention 
of “ disgust” for the things of this world; on the con- 
trary, we find it said that all things are potcntial Buddhas 
and should be treated as such. Furthermore, if we could 
only realize it, we should know that at this moment 


This very earth is the Lotus Land of Purity, 
And this body is thc body of Buddha. 


This was the logical result of the ancicnt teaching of 
the Upanishads that all individual forms are appearances 
of the Divine Self. By this the world of form was 
given divinity, and thc cmphasis was shifted from the 
illusoriness of the form to the Reality which it contained. 
Nirvana and Sangsara werc shown to be in truth onc and 
the samc, the only barrier between them being our own 
ignorance. But the implications of this teaching do 
not end here, for the Mahayanist philosophers set them- 
selves to understand the whole psychology of the attitude 
to life which it involved, and in China we find this 
1 See Chap. V for further treatment of the Bodhisattva idcal 
38 


THE MIDDLE WAY NOT COMPROMISE 


‘intensely subtle and complex psychology transformed 
into a practical way of living. 

A study of this cvolution of thought will show that 
our impression of the Eastern wisdom as a mercly im- 
personal and world-denying pliulosophy is no more than 
superficial. This is not to say that it does not contain 
a strong element of the impersonal, but apart from im- 
portant modifications of that clement in its highcr forms, 
this impcrsonality might well be a uscful counterbalance 
to theexcesscs of Western Humanism. For the principle 
by which all problems arc understood, including the pro- 
blems of Eastern philosophy, the principle which is at 
the root of all creative thought and action, is contained 
in the Buddhist doctrine of the Middle Way. This 
is not exclusively a Buddhist doctrine, for though it is 
given especial emphasis in that religion and also in Taoism, 
it is found in somewhat lesscr degree in many other 
systems. The Middle Way must be carcfully distin- 
guished from mere comproniisc or modcration ; it is 
not so much that which is between extremes as that which 
is born of thcir union, as the child is born of man and 
woman. Hencc it is this principle which we must con- 
sult in relating all the pairs of opposites. By means of 
it we are able to be at peace with life and death, to recog- 
mize alike the demands of conscious and unconscious, 
to harmonize reason and nature, law and liberty, West 
and East. In this sense, the Middle Way is the first 
principle of life, for all that is born proceeds from the 
union of two opposites, just as in the myth the world 
was created through Water and the Spirit, the symbols 


39 


THE WISDOM OF ASIA 


of matter and energy. At heart, the wisdom of Asia” 
is the application of this principle to the spiritual life 
of man. For the problem which the sages of the East 
endcavoured to solve in so great a variety of ways comes 
eventually to this: If man and woman together create 
a child, what is That which we must create from the 
opposites of life and death, subject and object, mind and 
form—and how is it to be done? Disharmony comes 
through failure to create, through the opposites being 
in confusion. Therefore Asia sought the One which 
proceeds from the union of man and the universe, the 
self and the “non-self,” that through life he might 
create instead of being at enmity with the world. Thus, 
if it is true that we of the West are ill at ease because of 
the conflict of our reason with nature in ourselves and 
around us, and if we suffer becausc we have isolated 
rational and conscious man and set him at war with life, 
then we have much to leam from Asia’s legacy of the 
Middle Way. 


Il.) THE FRUIT OF THE TREE 


OWEVER shallow we may find the interpreta- 

tions which the Catholic Church has placed upon 

its ancient symbols, it would be the grcatcst folly to reject 
the symbols themsclves. In the doctrines of the Fall of 
Man, the Incamation, the Immaculate Conception, the 
Atonement, the Resurrcction and the Trinity we may sce 
mere mythology, merc rclics of paganism, of no signifi- 
cance to an age of scicntific understanding. But how- 
ever much we may boast of this undcrstanding, the 
Catholic Church continucs, not only to flourish, but to 
increase in spite of it. In recent years there has been 
an important revival in Catholic litcrature, for the 
Church has gathered to hersclf in modern times a group 
of most able writcrs—von Higel,. Mercicr, Adam, 
Chesterton, Gilson, Bclloc, and Dawson, not to men- 
tion that great philosophcr of the Eastem Church, 
Nicholas Berdyaev. There is little doubt that one of the 
reasons for this revival is that which we have already 
mentioned—the inevitable revolt of the modern mind 
against the so-called Age of Reason. But there is another 
which is perhaps cven more important, and this is the 
tremendous power of the Church’s symbols to excite 
the unconscious depths of the soul. For however much 
we may imagine oursclvcs to have cut adrift from them, 
they retum to us under many forms in our dreams and 
phantasies, when the intellect slecps and the mind has 

AI 


THE FRUIT OF THE TREE 


liberty to break from the rational order which it de-' 
mands. These symbols are far more ancient than the 
Church; they are found in the mythologies of cvcry 
culture of antiquity and seem to have been embeddcd in 
human thought even in prchistoric times. From time 
to time fashionable theorics arisc concerning their origin ; 
it is said that they are “ nothing but ” phallic, or “ nothing 
but” solar, yet therc is always something in thesc 
“nothing but” theories which reminds onc of the 
sweeping generalizations of the scientific tyro, of the 
amateur who desires facts to conform with preconccived 
theories. Without doubt these archaic symbols are not 
only phallic and solar but also spiritual, for it appears 
that all forms of growth and life follow a similar pattern, 
whether the functions of sex, the stars or the development 
of divine understanding. To say that a symbol is phallicis 
not, as some imagine, a way of detracting from its valuc. 
On the contrary, if it were unable to be interpreted in a 
phallic scnse it could not be called a universal symbol. 
For the principles of sex are in no way different from 
the principles of religion, which is not to say that religion 
originates in sex, but simply that both are aspects of the 
same life. If it is going to be argued that all culture is 
based uponsex, it might equally well be argued that it is 
based upon breathing or cating, for all three are alike 
methods of sustaining life and follow the samc principles. 


1Sce Gustav Richard Heyer, Der Organisenus der Secle, cine 
Einfeuirung in die analytische Seclenheilkunde, J. F. Lehman-Verlag, 
Munich, 1932. English translation The Organism of the Mind, 
London, 1933. 


42 


THE SYMBOLS OF CHRISTIANITY 


Thus our method will be to work from these symbols, 
to examine their “ orthodox”? intcrprctations, and then 
to show how much morc they can mean in the light of 
Oricntal and modem psychology. And here it must be 
made clear that we are concerned less with their cos- 
mological, nictaphysical and biological meanings than 
with their application to the human soul. Hence, to 
begin at the beginning, we arc interested rather in the 
creation and Fall of Adam than in the creation of the 
universe. Keeping to the ancient order, we shall pro- 
ceed from Adam to the birth of the Christ, and thence 
to the Passion and Resurrection, for there is meaning 
not only in the isolated symbols but also in their wholc 
connection—not only in the Fall and the Incarnation, 
but in the Fall followed by the Incamation. In the 
words of St. Paul, “‘ For as in Adam all dic, even so in 
Christ shall all be made alive.” Furthermorc, we are 
not concercd with any historical connection that may 
or may not exist between the symbols of Christianity 
and thosc of Buddhism, Vedanta, Taoism and thc 
Mystcries. It would certainly be convenient if we could 
be surc that all religions have their root in a central 
Wisdom Religion imparted to the world from time 
to time by a scerct hicrarchy of initiatcs. This would 
no doubt solve many of the problems which trouble the 
religious historian, the scholar who is interested in the 
spread and cvolution of the symbols themsclves. But 
it would be of little concern to those who are simply 
interested in the mcaning of symbols. From the stand- 
point of meaning it does not matter whcther Christianity 


43 


THE FRUIT OF THE TREE 


is a development of Paganism, an offshoot of the Wisdom 
Religion or a purely independent growth. These are 
historical and not psychological questions. 


The doctrine of the Fall and of Original Sin was one 
of the first Catholic dogmas to be rejected by modern 
rationalism. For Humanism is distinguished by a 
certain optimism, a certain faith in the supremacy of 
human reason, to which the idea of man’s cssential 
frailty and sinfulness is wholly repugnant. Since the 
Great War less and less has been said about the great 
ideal of Progress so favoured by the scientists and philo- 
sophers of an earlier generation, for that war was, among 
other things, the greatest witness of our age to the truth 
of Original Sin, to the presence of the unregcucrate 
Adam in the soul of homo sapiens. Some may have scen 
in it the judgement of a wrathful God against a people 
so confident of thcir own inherent wisdom as to be able 
to do without Him ; it would perhaps be more correct 
to saythat the Lord simply left His people to themselves 
so that, without any interference on His part, their 
“wisdom” simply proved its own limitations, its 
incapacity to override that aspect of the soul which 
corresponds to “ nature, red in tooth and claw.” For the 
Church has always taught that man is unable to achicve 
salvation by his own light. By rcason of Adam's 
disobcdiencc, of his eating of the fruit of the tree of 
Knowledge, and of his expulsion from Eden, the whole 
human race has inherited the desire for Sin, for diver- 
gence from the will of God. And because “ the wages 

44 


NO GOOD WITHOUT EVIL 


‘of sin is death,” man has been placed in a condition 
wherc there is not only a conflict between good and 
evil but also between life and death. Thus man is, of 
his own power, unable to conquer cither sin or death ; 
whatever he may have of goodness and life is tainted by 
their oppositcs. In this scnse man is predestined to 
damnation, to cternal banishment from Eden, from the 
presence of God, to try and work out his own salvation 
—if he can. But because, in this condition, he is tormm 
mercilessly betwecn good and evil, and because from the 
frailty of his naturc he tends to move towards the latter, 
life divorced from the presence of God is necessarily 
a hell. Christian cschatology has made this hell an 
after-death state, and in the samc way has removed the 
blesscdness of Eden to the life beyond the grave. This 
is perhaps the least profound of all its teachings, for unless 
it is recognized that heaven and hell are very much in 
this present world the whole Christian scheme becomcs 
dependent upon metaphysics, and the demise of the 
body becomes an cvcnt of unnecessary significance. 
The Day of Judgement is thus placed in the future 
instead of in the past, and though this may be convenient 
for the purpose of frightening people into good be- 
haviour, it does not encourage any real enlightenment. 
The Day of Judgement, however, was the day when 
Adam was banished from Eden, and this involved a 
judgement not on Adam alone but on his entire progeny. 
For it signified the removal of man from the Divine 
Grace, a removal whose necessary and immediate conse- 
quence is damnation. But Calvin maintained that there 
45 


THE FRUIT OF THE TREE 


was, besides predestination to damnation, predestination ° 
to Gracc, and that through Adam the human race was 

not only inevitably sinful, but that “ before the founda- 
tions of the world were laid”” God had forcordained 
those who were to receive His Gracc. This doctrine 

follows perfectly logically from the conception of an 
anthropomorphic God who is omnipotent (and thus 

knows the future). However, it reduces the Christian 

scheme of the universe to the merely mechanical, to 
a mere arrangement of wooden chessmen with which 
God and Satan play on the Eternal Board. Through 
this doctrine the human being cntirely loses significance ; 

all that mattcrs is the struggle of wits betwcen God and 

Satan, and that is no concern of human beings. For 
some reason it is considered incvitable that God will 
win, and the whole procedure is rendered more purpose- 

less then ever. Calvinism may have becn a triumph 

of human logic, but it was an utter defeat of the human 
soul, and it is to the Catholic Church that we are indebted 
for preserving that wholly illogical but essentially divinc 
factor called free-will. For this implies that though 

man has not the power to attain salvation through his 

own efforts hc has freedom to choosc between the accep- 
tance and refusal of Gracc. 

In spite of the revolt of sciencc against the idea of 
Original Sin, it is science which has m our own timc 
provided the most powcrful advocate of that very 
doctrine. The revelations which this particular scientist 
presented to a world still deeply imbucd with Humanist 
idcals were reccived with incredulous horror. But time 

46 


FREUD AND ORIGINAL SIN 


‘and growing knowledge have made us more accustomed 
to his discovery, and, in spite of some of the unfortunate 
conclusions he drew from it, it is finding a growing 
acceptance. When Sigmund Freud declared that be- 
neath our conscious mental processes there are other 
unconscious and more powerful processes, he was 
certainly bearing witness to human frailty. And when 
he showed that some of these processes were peculiarly 
horrible, he was simply repeating what the Church had 
always said about man’s essential sinfulness. But what 
made his discoveries especially unpopular was his in- 
convenient way of discovering the most vile unconscious 
motives behind the most virtuous conscious deeds. 
Yet this was only further proof of Christian teaching, 
in that those who neglect God and attempt to be virtuous 
of themselves have no real virtue but are simply re- 
sponding to their evil nature, attempting to deny God 
by proving that His Grace is not necessary. In this 
sense the saying holds true that “all good deeds are 
done for the love of gain.” It is possible for cynic and 
psycho-analyst alike to find, with perfect justice, cssen- 
tially selfish motives behind apparently unselfish deeds, 
eventhough the person in question: may be unaware of 
them. 

To obtain a deeper insight into the doctrine of the 
Fall of Man and Original Sin we must, for the moment, 
set aside the factor of Divine Grace and consider the 
life of man as something quite apart from God. In 
short, we must consider the condition of the soul in its 
unredeemed and unregencrate state. What is cspecially 


Led 47 EB 


THE FRUIT OF THE TREE 


significant about the Fruit of the Trec of Knowledge is- 
that it gave man consciousness of good as well as evil. 

Before the Fall Adam was unaware not only of evil 
but also of good, and at that point the story leaves us 

altogether vague as to what manner of life Adam led 

in the state of blessedness. If we are to consider the 
myth chronologically, we may perhaps assume that he 

led a merely amoral existence like the animals, and that 
the eating of the fruit signified the birth of self-conscious- 

ness. Just as the child is apparently without the moral 

sense of the adolescent and adult, so perhaps Adam led 

the life of a child concerning which Jesus said, “‘ Except 

ye be aslittle children ye cannot enter into the Kingdom 

of Heaven.” It is here that we receive some enlightcn- 

ment from the Taoist sages of China, for Taoism also 

had its state of blessedness and its Fall Tuming to 

Chuang-Tzu we find the following description of man 

before the Fall : 


Good men were not appreciated ; ability was not conspicuous. 
Rulers were mere beacons, while the people were free as the wild 
deer. They were upright without being conscious of duty to their 
neighbours. They loved one another without being conscious of 
charity. They were true without being conscious of loyalty. They 
were honest without being conscious of good faith. They acted 
freely in all things without recogmzing obligations to anyone. 
Thus their deeds left no trace ; their affairs were not handed down 
to posterity. 

(Trans. Giles.) 


As to the Fall itself, Lao-Tzu says in the Tao Té Ching : 
“ Great Tao lost, and there came duty to man and right 


48 


THE FALL IN TAOISM 


‘conduct. That is to say, as long as one is in perfect 
accord with the Tao the question of good and evil does 
not arise; one’s actions are spontaneously adapted to 
social and material conditions. But there comes the 
Fall, and at once the pairs of opposites are born. Of 
these Lao-Tzu says (Tao Té Ching, 2): 


When all in the world understand beauty to be beautiful, then 
ugliness exists. 
When all understand goodness to be good, then evil exists. 
Thus existence suggests non-existence ; 
Easy gives risc to difficult ; 
Short 1s derived from long by comparison ; 
Low is distinguished from high by position. 
(Trans. Ch’u Ta-Kao.) 


As soon as we are conscious of these opposites it becomes 
necessary to make laws, to ordain rewards and punish- 
ments, to preach good conduct and to study ethics. 
Thus there arises a violent conflict between good and 
evil, and because it is impossible for the one to exist in 
our consciousness without the other, the conflict re- 
mains without victory or defeat on either side. But 
man imagines that by strict obedience to the moral law 
good can be madc to conquer, so much so that much of 
the ethical teaching of to-day (as of other “ rational ” 
ages) is based on the assumption that all that is necessary 
is a sound law and a powerful will to obedience. People 
who call themselves Christians so often say that if we 
only obeyed the precepts given in the Sermon on the 
Mount, that would be sufficient to bring civilization to 
a state of blessedness. But in the Epistles to the Romans 


49 


THE FRUIT OF THE TREE 


and the Galatians St. Paul shows that to rely on law is* 
to enter a spiritual cul-de-sac, to continue in a state 
of imprisonment between its two sidcs, good and evil, 
and to run wildly from onc to the other in a vain attempt 
to find salvation. Thus in the scventh chapter of 
Romans is the following significant passage : 


For when we werc in the flesh, the motions of sins, which were 
by the law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto 
death... . What shall we say then? Is the law sin? God for- 
bid. Nay, I had not known sin, but by the law : for I had not known 
lust, execpt the law had said, Thou shalt not covet. But sin, taking 
occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner of con- 
cupiscence. For without the law sin was dead. For I was alive 
without the law once: but when the commandment came, sin 
revived, and I dicd. 


St. Paul is not suggesting that the law is in itself an evil, 
but simply that, as a result of his own fallen state, when 
the law admonished good this incvitably suggestcd its 
opposite, evil. 

To some it may not be sufficient to say that we cannot 
of ourselves overcome cvil with good because the two 
mutually give risc to one another. Thcy will say that 
this isno morc than a logical trick and demand concrete 
evidence. Let us then imagine for a moment what 
would happen if everyone suddenly decided to observe 
the moral law. Apart from the not very serious sug- 
gestion that it would cause grave uncmployment among 
policemen, bankers’ clerks, ticket-collectors and soldiers, 
we should find the absence of evil the main cause of its 
speedy return. For the greater part of virtue, as we 

50 


WITHOUT THE LAW SIN IS DEAD 


*know it, consists precisely in resisting evil, and goodness 
derives its health and strength from the excrcise of this 
conflict. Without the stimulus of evil the power of 
moral resistance would become atrophied, and the 
moment someone decided that life was growing a 
little dull and that it might be interesting to have some 
evil for a change, sin would retum with redoubled 
strength and continue to flourish unopposed until the 
balance was restored. But as this is somewhat outside 
the bounds of possibility, Ict us consider instead the 
problem of what is known in psychological jargon as 
“repression.” This is generally understood as the 
conscious or unconscious attempt to resist and banish 
from the mind an impulse or impression which it cither 
fears or for some other reason considers undesirable. 
Psychological research reveals that such impulses arc 
in fact not banished but rather aggravated by the rcsis- 
tance offered. In the course of resistance they may be 
forgotten, because forgetting is in itself an unconscious 
method of resisting, and, although temporarily un- 
conscious, these impulses cause a state of mental indi- 
gestion similar to the results of retaining decayed food 
inthe body. This discovery is often used or condemned 
as an excuse for all manner of immorality. Yet if 
the discovery is true, it seems that man has only two 
alternatives: to contract serious neuroses through 
repression or to indulge his impulses without restraint. 
Of course, it is almost impossible to adopt cither extreme 
in its entirety, for man cannot continuc on any cx- 
treme course for any length of time without meeting 
51 


THE FRUIT OF THE TREE 


opposition. Thus in its own terms the problem has 
no satisfactory solution, for it is concerned only with 
two opposites—the conscious and the unconscious 
—and in terms of opposites alone nothing is ever 
solved. 

For the fallen condition of man consists preciscly in 
being bound to this pendulum which swings from one 
extreme to the other, from good to evil, life to death, 
pleasure to pain, and love to hate. Indeed, it is upon 
the fact of opposites that the very existence of the uni- 
verse depends, for who can conceive light without 
darkness, fullness without emptiness, expansion without 
boundary, beginning without ending: Just as man 
would cease to exist without woman, there could be no 
life without death. For in eating our food we kill in 
order that we may live, and from the decaying matter 
of animals and plants build up the living tissue of our 
bodies. And from cast-off manure flowers and plants 
grow again to die in their turn and give nourishment 
to other forms. Yet it is not usual to consider that 
there is anything particularly disgusting in this iter- 
dependence of life and death, and there is no more reason 
to find anything repulsive in the existence of an un- 
conscious mind whose contents somewhat resemble 
manure. When food enters our mouths we like it to 
look pleasant and taste good, but in the unconscious 
realms of the stomach and bowels it develops just the 
opposite qualities. This remains a perfectly natural 
and happy arrangement until there arises a conflict 
between the conscious mouth and the unconscious 


52 


THE CONFLICT OF OPPOSITES 


stoniach. In such conflicts it is usually, in fact always, 
the unconscious element which asserts itself to most 
effect. However much we may repress it or try to 
forget its existence, it suddenly rebels and makes us 
vomit or else causcs all manner of disease. Whereat 
we are confronted with some highly unpleasant facts 
about our internal organs. It should not surprise us, 
therefore, when Freud confronts us with some equally 
unpleasant facts about the unconscious and internal 
workings of the mind. For between mental and bodily 
processes there is an almost cxact correspondence, and 
the maladjustments of modern man may thus in grcat 
measure be put down to his disregard of the mental 
stomach, to his absorption in the purely conscious 
delights of the feast. 

Thus the fallen condition of man does not consist in 
the fact of there being opposites; it is rather in his 
incapacity to cope with the conflict between them—a 
conflict, moreover, which he in his unrcgencrate state 
creates. For underlying the conflicts between good 
andevil, pleasure and pain, life and death, is what might 
be called the primary conflict between man and the 
universe, the “I” and the “not-I,” the subjective ego 
and the objective world. Hence we find in the story 
of the Fall that, beforc Adam eats of the fruit and so 
creates the opposition between good and evil, this 
primary conflict is shown in the temptation to disobey 
the will of God. For God has created the universe and 
seen that all in it is good. Everything conforms with 
His plan, and the world is at one with Him But be- 


53 


THE FRUIT OF THE TREE 


tween Adam and Eve and God there comes the Serpent, 
and from that moment man is sct at variance with God 
and His universe. He cats of the Tree, and at once 
God proclaims a state of conflict between Adam and 
the world. 


Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and 
thy conception ; in sorrow shalt thou bring forth children... . 
And unto Adam he said . . . Cursed is the ground for thy sake ; 
in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life. 


There is a peculiar resemblance between these words 
and the famous passage on sorrow (dukkha) in the first 
sermon of the Buddha (Samyutta Nikaya, v. 421-3). 
“ Birth is sorrow, decay is sorrow, sickness is sorrow, 
death is sorrow. ... To be conjoined with things 
we dislike, to be separated from things which we like 
—that also is sorrow. Not to get what one wants— 
that too is sorrow.” Sorrow in this sense must be 
understood not simply as pain as opposed to pleasure. 
For if we conccive dukkha as “ discord” or “ lack of 
harmony,’ we shall sce that it refers rather to a state of 
discord in the rclationship between pleasure and pain, 
implying a conflict between the two opposites. This 
conflict exists only in the mind of man, for it is hc who 
scts the opposites at war by striving for the perpctuation 
of one and the abolition of the other. It is precisely 
this conflict which is at the root of man’s misery, of 
his spiritual dis-ease, for he is seeking something which 
simply docs not exist, which is maya in the real sense of 
that term. For as there is no pleasure without pain, 
dukkha would seem to be the illusion (maya) of sccking 


54 


SORROW AND DESIRE 


pleasurc as a thing-in-itself (atta). Thcreforc the Buddha 
described all individual things considercd in and by 
themselvcs as anatta, anicca and dukkha—without soul, 
impermanent and producing sorrow. Furthermorc, 
man’s desire for the thing-in-itself arises from what we 
have called the primary conflict betwecn himself and 
the universe, between the part and the whole. For this 
is the desire (tanha) to cxist as an isolated being for 
whom the universe is no morc than a personal appendage, 
imagining that the part has some meaning in and by 
itself and that the universe can be brought into line with 
that meaning. 

Thus tanhacan only come into being because man does 
not understand anatta, becausc he tries to hold himself 
apart from life as a separate entity. This tremendous 
attachment to the ego implies that he can only acccpt 
those things in life which please it and reject those which 
give it pain, and in this he is like onc who attcmpts to 
separate the beautiful parts of the human body from the 
ugly with the result that he Kills both. For anatta 
means that any individual thing taken apart from life 
has absolutely no meaning, no usc, no lifc, no autono- 
mous soul. For there is no living finger without a 
hand; a spoke cannot ru round without a whecl ; 
a hair cannot grow without a head. For if we consider 
these two opposites the part and the whole, we sce that 
they can no more exist without cach other than pleasure 
without pain. That they are opposites we know well 
enough, for cach one of us distinguishes sharply between 
the self and the not-self, subject and object, “I” and the 

55 


THE FRUIT OF THE TREE 


universe. But separate sclf from the universe and it 
has no existcnce—it is avatta. The converse is also truc, 
and here we have to remember that in original Buddhisin 
there is no reference whatever to the doctrinc which 
some Western interpreters have ascribed to it, namcly 
that the Goal is man’s absorption into the universe. For 
the whole has no cxistence without its parts. No onc 
ever saw a hammer without handle or head, or a cubc 
without sides, or a tree without leaves, branches, roots 
or trunk The Buddha never said that the sclf docs not 
exist in any sense whatever; indecd, when a certain 
Vacchagotta presscd him for a definite Yes or No on 
this point, the only answer he received was a “* Noble 
Silence” (Samyutta Nikaya, iv. 400). In the same way 
he did not say that life is esscntially suffering. The 
point is that without sorrow there is no joy, and joy is 
not any the less joyful for this reason. On the contrary, 
if there were no sorrow, joy would not only be tedious 
but unnoticed. Thcse thrcc misintcrprctations have 
sadly clouded Western understanding of Buddhism, 
though it should be notcd that the West does not bear 
the sole responsibility. Buddhism has suffered just as 
much at the hands of ccrtain monk interpreters who 
have turned it into a philosophy of purc disintcgration. 
They have simply analysed life into its various parts, 
declared that the whole does not exist because there 
are only parts, and then proceeded to deny the parts 
themselves. 

A trend of thought similar to the Buddlia’s may also 
be found in the Upanishads, and here again we have 

56 


MAYA IN THE UPANISHADS 


fo encounter misinterpretation. For we shall find that 
what the Buddha described in the three terms of anatta, 
anicca and dukkha is here contained in the single term 
maya—illusion. In the Rigveda the word denotes a 
cunning device, a magical act or even a trick, but in the 
Upanishads it is given the wider mcaning of the trick, 
the deccit, by which the mind of man produces the 
illusion of separateness (sakayaditthi), the consciousness 
of objects as realities in themsclvcs. But it is held that 
the only reality is the Sclf (Atman), and that objects are 
only real in so far as they are appcaranccs of the Sclf, 
which is to say that whercas their distinctive marks are 
unreal, there is a single Reality from which they arc 
manifested through the ignorance (avidya) of our minds. 
Thus Yajnavalkya says: “ When the Self is secn, heard, 
perceived and known, the whole universe is known,’ 
and again, “ He who imagines there is plurality gocs 
from death to death.” (Brihadaranyaka-Upanishad, 4. 
iv. 19; v. 6). And in the Chandogya-Upanishad (7. 
xxv. 2.) we find: ‘‘The Self is above and bclow, 
behind and in front. The Sclf is allthce world.” In the 
tropical climate of India this doctrine became what we 
might call an ‘‘ cxcuse for idleness.” For it seemed to 
proclaim the world of form as a dream, a phantasm 
which the wise would do well to ignore, and in carrying 
it into practice many a sannyassin became a world- 
denier, an utterly isolated sccker of enlightcninent which, 
if it satisfied himself, was of little benefit to others. The 
doctrine of maya was thus, on the onc hand, the occasion 
of a via negativa which involvcd the virtual annihilation 
57 


THE FRUIT OF THE TREE 
of the world. The seeker lost both himsclf and the 


universe in the contemplation of the Infinite—a con- 
templation which may not appeal to us but requircs, 
we are told, a special sense of appreciation. For the 
ego is not bored by the Infinite when the ego has ceased 
to exist. But the difficulty of the Infinite, though some 
might think it almost blasphemy to say so, is that it is 
a mere opposite, that it would be altogether inconcciv- 
able without the Finitc. Someone has cven gonc so 
far as to say that “there is nothing infinite apart 
from finite things” and Chesterton once observed that 
God is ‘‘the synthesis of infinity and boundary.” 
Yet it should be sufficicntly obvious that the Infinite 
means simply that which is not finite and so is only 
distinguished, only cxists, by contrast. This point, 
however, did not escape the philosophers of Vedanta. 
For, on the other hand, we find this passage in the 
Isha-Upanishad: ‘“‘In darkness are they who worship 
the world alone, but in greater darkness they who 
worship the Infinite alonc. He who accepts both saves 
himself from death by knowledge of the former 
and attains immortality by the knowledge of the 
latter.” 

But this may seem to be at variance with the true 
Advaita Vedanta—the doctrine that the world is Onc, 
that all forms and qualities are illusion, and that even 
the illusion is itself an illusion. That is to say, there 
are not two worlds, the real and the unreal, the Absolute 
Brahman and the world of forms. For Sankara, thic 
great exponent of Vedanta, says that the latter simply 

58 


THE LIMITATIONS OF INFINITY 


does not cxist,! that there is only the Absolute Infinite 
Brahman, without form and without attribute, which is 
described in the Mandukya-Upanishad (vii) as 


that which is not conscious of the subjective, nor that which is con- 
scious of the objective, nor that which is conscious of both, nor that 
which is simple consciousness, nor that which is 4 mass all scnticncy, 
nor that which is all darkness. It is unseen, transcendent, unappre- 
hensible, uninferable, unthinkable, indcscribable, the sole essence of 
the consciousness of self, the negative of all illusion, the ever peaceful, 
all bliss, the One Unit. 
(Trans. Dvivedi.) 


Sankara points out that although the Onc is described by 
negatives (neti, neti) it is not itself a negative ; ncgatives 
are only used because “ the imagination must have soimc- 
thing to stand upon”; in fact, we can only conceive 
the Infuzite as the not finite, as the word itsclf implics. 
Yet apparently Sankara would say, not that the Infinite 
presupposes the finitc, but that there is only the Infinite 
and the finite docs not exist. But however satisfactory 
this may be from the purcly mctaphysical standpoint, 
practically it is the absolute denial of the world. If 
Sankara’s philosophy, supposing we have s10¢ misunder- 
stood it, is to be made a way of life, it can only lead us 
to the ultimate futility of purc Infinity, which is to say 
non-existence, for the Infinite has no existence apart 
from its opposite, the finite. 

But Vedanta can only have mcaning and practical 
application if we understand Sankara in this way: 


1 Manduk yopanishad, with Sankara’s commentary (trans. M. N. 
Dvivedi. Bombay, 1909), pp. 20 et seq. 


59 


THE FRUIT OF THE TREE 


that finite and Infinite are not separable, that they aré 
Advaita—not two but One, and that One is Brahman. 
Thus we have the Trinity : 


BRAHMAN 


INFINITH FINITE 


and these three arc Onc. Maya (illusion) is to regard the 
Infinite as in any way opposcd to the finite (or vice 
versa) or to regard Brahman as opposed to finite and 
Infinite together. Hence, if we say, ‘* There is only the 
finite,” we crt ; if we say, “ There is only the Infinite,” 
we err. Vedanta denies both, if they arc to be sought 
as things existing apart from cach other and without 
each other ;_ but it affirms both if they arc understood as 
together being Brahman. Thus it docs not deny the 
world ; it glorifics it by making it onc with Brahman. 
To think that the world is not Brahman is indeed maya, 
but the world ceases to be maya when understood as onc 
with Brahman. But that does not mean that the world 
itself ceases to exist. Hence thc saying Tat tvam asi 
— That (Brahman) art thou ! ’—and if we understand 
that, the world is no longer maya. In othcr words, if we 
apprehend separate forms as one with Brahman, this 
does not imply that we pass beyond forms itito form~- 
lessncss, into pure Infinity. For Brahman is not form- 
lessness alone, aid it must not be thought that the aim 
60 


“TAT TVAM ASI!” 


of true Vedanta is absorption into the Infinite, which is 
tantamount to annihilation. This is expressly stated 
in one of the most important Upanishads, the Brihadaran- 
yaka: “In truth there are two forms of Brahman : 
the formed and the formless, the mortal and the immortal, 
the solid and the fluid, the definite and the indefinite.” 
In the same way Deussen wnites that “ Brahman is sat 
and asat, the existing and the non-existing, satyam and 
asatyam, reality and unreality.”! For here again we 
have the principle of the Middle Way beyond the 
opposites. Paradoxically the Goal is both and neither, 
for it is synthesis, whereby the opposites through them- 
selves surpass themselves, just as man and woman unite, 
while yet remaining different, and create a child. Taken 
together, the opposites create and are Brahman; taken 
apart they create maya, illusion, which is to say that 
they cease to exist. We must understand maya as the 
opposites taken apart just because man, when under 
the veil of maya, tries to separate them and to hold to 
one alone. The error of the opposites is not in dis- 
tinguishing between life and death, but in attempting to 
isolate them, to hold to the one and reject the other. 
To the Vedantist and Buddhist alike both are aspects of 
the same Brahman or Sunyata; thus they deny them 
as things-in-themselves, not as aspects. 

As the philosophy of Mahayana Buddhism was evolved 
out of Indian thought the idea of the One Reality 
as something opposed to this unreal world gradually 

1 Allgemeine Gesiclite der Philosophie (Leipzig, 1854-1908), i. 2, 
p- 117. 

61 


THE FRUIT OF THE TREE 


drifted even farther into the background. Thus Dr. 
D. T. Suzuki writes : 3 


Sunyatais a concept even prior to the rise of this world of plurali- 
ties, underlying it, and at the same time conditioning it so that all 
individual exdstences have their being in it. Although we say that 
Sunyata is “ that which underliss” the onc and the many, birth 
and death, you and mc, that which is and that which is not, it is 
not quite right to say “underlies,” for it suggests the opposition 
between that which lies under and that which lies over—which is 
a new dualism ; and when we go on like this we commit the fault 
of infinite regression. 


Sunyata literally means “ Emptiness’ or what is some- 
times known as “ the Void,” though according to Dr. 
Suzuki it should be regarded morc as a “ third concept ”’ 
mediating between the opposites and existing in them, 
so that the whole trinity compriscs what the Japanese 
Mahayanists call Byodo in Shabetsu and Shabetsu in Byodo 
—unity in diversity and diversity in unity. It will be 
noted that Dr. Suzuki describes Sunyata as that which 
underlies “the onc and the many,” for thc Mahayana 
insists that even if one discovers the One Reality behind 
the manifold appearances the Goal has not yet been 
achieved. For the Sutras say that we must get rid 
even of the idea of One-ness, even of Nothingness, until 
we finally realize the state of “ neither existent nor non- 
existent,” “neither nameless nor not nameless” (hiso- 
hihiso-sho) ; then only have we realized Sunyata. In 
fact, we may say that Sunyata is neither real nor unreal, 
positive nor negative, plural nor singular. In other 


1 Buddhism in the Life and Thought of Japan (London, 1937), p. 2. 
62 


“THE FULLNESS OF THE VOID” 


words, although the Mahayana statcs it negatively, 
Sunyata is the synthesis of both. This is perhaps the 
most fundamental and the least understood principle 
of Buddhist philosophy, and though we find it stated 
more explicitly in the Mahayana, it is implied even in 
the Pali texts of the Hinayana (as in the four jhanas). 
For Buddhism never teaches categorically that the 
world is unreal ; ! and when it says that it is ncither real 
nor unreal it is neither avoiding the issue nor making a 
compromise. Its position is simply that if we conceive 
a single Reality behind the multitudinous forms of the 
world, we must not make an opposition between the 
two. This is in the true Advaita tradition of Indian 
philosophy ; for Advaita means “ not two,” and if we 
begin to think about the real and the unreal, the one and 
the many, we immediately fall into a dualism. Further- 
more, when Buddhism tcaches that Sunyata is neither 
real nor unreal it is not opposing Sunyata to reality 
and unreality (sat and asat), for this would be another 
dualism. It is only another way of saying that Sunyata 
is both real and unreal. Fundamentally this means that 
Sunyata is neither of the pairs of opposites but both, 
that it is neither life nor death alone, ncither singular 
nor plural alone, but that it is the two taken together. 
Here we return to the original idea that saya applics 
to the opposites considered scparately, to reality as 
existing apart from unreality, to life considered as somc- 
thing which can be had without death. But it docs not 
apply tothe opposites when seen as mutually dependent. 
1, Samyutta Nikaya, iv. 400. 
63 F 


THE FRUIT OF THE TREE 


Thus if we try to grasp pleasure and reject pain, we seek 
a maya; if we accept both we find Brahman. 

This is even more clearly stated in Taoism, for the 
Chinese preferred to use the language of everyday life 
rather than the jargon of philusophy. Indeed, so clearly 
did Taoism grasp the idea of the opposites as mutually 
dependent that it is almost unique among religions in 
possessing no moral code. Both Buddhism and Vedanta 
speak of the Goal as beyond Good and Evil, yet at the 
same time they provide a morality for the discipline of 
those who have not reached the spiritual insight of the 
sage. Thus both Buddhism and Vedanta were able to 
retain a certain dignity when they became popular 
creeds, whereas Taoism very rapidly degenerated into 
a mixture of laziness and superstition. This, however, 
is no reficction on the truth of Taoism, for oftcn enough 
in the greatest truth is the greatest danger. Essentially 
Taoism was a religion for the few, for it recognized fully 
the interdependence of good and evil, and preached 
what might be called a Greater Good beyond the pairs 
of opposites. But for those whose understanding is 
not sufficiently developed, the doctrine of the relativity 
of good and evil is simply an excuse for libertinism. 
Thus Chuang Tzu says: 

Those who would have right without its correlative, wrong ; 
or good government without its corrclative, misrule,—they do not 
apprehend the great principles of the universe nor the conditions 
to which all creation is subject. One might as well talk of the 
existence of heaven without that of earth, or of the negative prin- 
ciple without the positive, which is clearly absurd. 

(Trans. Giles.) 
64 


AVOIDING EXTREMES 


The obvious conclusion would be that if it is impossible 
to have good government without misrule, no harm 
can be done by indulging in inisrule to our heart’s 
content, and no good by rebelling against tyranny. 
And once again we sec that the problem has no solution 
in its own terms. However much Chuang Tzu’s dry 
statement may conflict with our ideals, we have to admit 
that in those words he has summed up the whole history 
of human politics to the present day. For the Taoist 
views morality neither as somcthing with which the 
world can dispense, nor as a sign of spiritual progress. 
He does not strive to cultivate it in others or in himsclf 
any morc than he strives to cultivate immorality. Hc 
simply observes that the two must necessarily follow 
one another or cxist together, because thcy arc back and 
front of the same coin. He has no moral law to preach, 
for he knows that if there is evil, a moral law will arisc 
of itself and vice versa. For this reason the advice which 
the Taoist sages gave to the rulers of statcs may seem 
the purest cynicism. ‘The cnergics of the Empcror 
should be dirccted to keeping the minds of the pcople 
unpreoccupied and their bellies well filled.” For the 
uncomfortable fact is that unless people can of themselves 
find the Tao, the ruler must just do his best to keep a 
balance between extremes. 

Not exalting the worthy keeps the pcople from cmulation. Not 
valuing rare things keeps them from theft. Not showing what is 


desirable keeps their hearts fron. confusion. 
(“ Tao Té Ching,” I. Trans. Ch’t Ta-Kao.) 


In fact the object of Taoist politics seems to be 
65 


THE FRUIT OF THE TREE 


to avoid extremes of evil by avoiding extremes of 
good. 


Do away with learning, and grief will not be known. 

Do away with sagencss and eject wisdom, and the people will be 
morc bencfited a hundred times. . . - 

Do away with artifice and eject gains, and there will be no robbers 
and thieves. 


(Ibid., XIX.) 


This, however, is rather different from the advice given 
to the ruler for directing his own life—advice which, as 
we shall see, concerns the same Middle Way that we 
find in Buddhism and Vedanta. And here again let it 
be said that the Middle Way is not just an avoidance of 
extremes like Taoist politics. This is but a shadow of 
the Middle Way, and there is much to be said for the 
wisdom of Buddhism and Vedanta in incorporating a 
moral law as well as a mystical philosophy. For even 
if morality is, by itself; utterly unable to remove cvil 
from the world, it does at least give that mental con- 
centration which is necessary for the Middle Way apart 
from any question of good and evil whatsoever. For 
where there is morality there is struggle, certainly in- 
decisive struggle, but nevertheless life and movement. 
It may be moving round in circles, but it saves the soul 
from petrefaction. It has been said that where there 
are great saints there are great sinners; thus there is 
perhaps more virtue in the great sinner than in the man 
who is a moral nonentity, who is no better than a lump 
of wood or a piece of stone. A criminal may be going 
in the wrong direction, but he is at least going. Hence 
66 


THE MORAL PENDULUM 


the words of the Bible, “ because thou art ncither hot 
nor cold I will spew thee out of my mouth,” and hence 
also Christ’s preference of publicans and sinners to the 
pharisees who prided themselves on the somewhat 
useless attainment of not being very evil. Herein is the 
stupidity of the merely negative precept so often mis- 
taken for an effective moral code, for it does not follow 
that because a person is not evilhe is therefore necessarily 
good. He is just neither good nor evil, which is not the 
same thing as being beyond good and cvil. In one 
sense it is the differcnce between stopping the swing of 
a pendulum altogether and, altcrnativcly, going to the 
point on which it hangs. That point represcnts the 
Middle Way, for though the opposites depend on it 
they do not affect it. 

Nevertheless, it remains truce that, apart from that 
point on which the pendulum hangs, we have to choose 
between an alternation of good and cvil or merc lifeless 
mediocrity. For unless we considcr that ftertium quid 
which relates the opposites to one anothcr and at the 
same time surpasses them, we are hopelessly bound by 
the curse of Adam, involved in a mechanical, determin- 
istic and barren condition from whose logic there is no 
release. This is yet another cxainple of the insufficiency 
of reason alone to cope with the decpest problems of 
life ; at its best it will try to subject all things to the 
moral order, neglecting the irrational and unconscious 
forces of disorder which have an equal claim to recogni- 
tion ; atits worst it will perceive the incvitability of this 
moral alternation and preserve an attitude of “ fatalistic 

67 


THE FRUIT OF THE TREE 


realism.” Christianity has a profound understanding’ 
of this problem, for in recognizing man’s inability to 
solve it of his own will and reason, it finds this tertium 
quid in the Grace of God which brings Christ to birth 
in the human soul. It does not reserve the gift of 
Grace for the morally perfected; Grace is offered 
through Christ freely to all. This is clearly implied 
in the parable of the Wedding Feast, but our naturc is 
such that we “all with one accord begin to make 
excuse.’ Hence all the riff-raff “both bad and 
good” from the highways and hedges are invited 
in our place. The same teaching is found even more 
expressly in the parable of the Pharisee and the 
Publican. For morality is no passport to religion ; 
on the contrary, there can be no real morality without 
religion, for try as one may, one cannot be wholly 
and consistently moral until some form of religious 
experience has entircly changed onc’s desircs. Unless 
man desires the highest good he only deceives himsclf 
if he tries to obtain it against his inmost wishcs, 
and, in Christian terminology, it is only the Grace of 
God which can create that desire. In other words, 
while desire is simply concerned with the conflict 
between the opposites man is perpetually confused. 
But if he desires the Christ, the Brahman, the Tao, the 
Sunyata, he will attain salvation whatever his moral 
status. For this new and irrational element will break 
up the logic of the opposites, giving man dominion 
over them instead of being no more than the ball which 
is tossed between. 
68 


MORALITY IS NOT RELIGION 


Unfortunately, howcver, it is not clear how far this 
is realized by the leaders of modem Christianity. So 
far as its evangelical work in the West is concerned it 
appears that cspecially among certain Protcstant sccts 
teligious questions are given second placc to moral 
questions. So much is said about the evils of war, of 
unemployment, of the alleged immorality in matters 
of sex, that there has long been the most absurd con- 
fusion between morality and religion. Presumably the 
Churches wish modem man to become morc rcligious, 
but to effect this they must offer Christ and not the 
Sermon on the Mount or any other system of cthics. 
A man is not religious becausc he abstains from theft 
drink, adultery, gambling, fighting and telling lies; 
indeed, he may be anything but religious, and if any- 
one imagincs that the West is to be recalled to Christi- 
anity by an appeal to morality he is surcly trying to 
“* make the tail wag the dog.” But there are additional 
difficulties. Christianity seems to be deficicnt in rcligious 
technique. That is to say, it is too much inclined to 
offer supposed historical facts as a means of salvation. 
For there is a perfectly legitimate type of nind which 
cannot find any enthusiasm for someonc, however 
great, who lived and died two thousand ycars ago and 
now exists in somic indcfinitc and discmbodied state. 
It does not understand how the death of that person 
can have any connection with the soul’s redemption. 
After all, thousands of others were crucificd as well, 
many of them just as undescrvedly. In short, it cannot 
conceive that any series of historical events can have 


69 


THE FRUIT OF THE TREE 


any important relationship with the inner life of some 
one living in a different time and a differcnt place. 
Certainly one may read the Gospels and try to follow 
the example of Christ, but this is no morc than imita- 
tion. In a sense the story is as vivid to-day as cver, 
but the Church is not sufficicntly clear when it offers 
Christ as to what it offers othcr than an admittedly 
tematkable story. Morcover, a whole number of im- 
portant matters such as the Virgin Birth and the Resur- 
rection are removed to the realms of history and eschato- 
logy, whereas what so many of us want to know in this 
time is how Christ is to be born in us, to make the 
sacrifice in us and to rise again in us. In fact, if the 
Church would place the cmphasis on the Christ story 
as an inner experience for each man instead of on a 
primarily historical basis, it would be found of infinitely 
greater valuc. The difficulty is that not only the his- 
torical emphasis but also the accepted technique of 
prayer is for some people simply a means of putting 
Christ at a distance. For some, praycr is a perfectly 
suitable way of approach, but it must be understood 
that for various types of mind various forms of mysti- 
cism are required, and of these prayer is only one. 
Moreover, it creates the dualism of the one who prays 
and the one who is prayed to, and it is necessary to come 
closer than that, even to a union between Chnist and 
the soul. In the words of St. Paul: “I am crucified 
with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ 
liveth in me” (Galatians ii. 20). It is as if the centre of 
consciousness were shifted from the ego to the Christ, 


70 


THE MEDIATOR 


and this should be distinguishcd from a wuion with 
God, for Christ is the siediatur between God and man 
and so represents that third principle which reconciles 
the part with the whole, man with the universe. Thus 
Christ is both Son of God and Son of Man, the Holy 
Child that is bom from the two. Once again, if we 
would understand more of this Divine Incarnation, if 
we would find the technique which Christianity lacks 
in its present form, we must tum to Asia for further 
knowledge of the Middle Way. 


71 


TI. THE SON OF GOD AND MAN 


IHERE is a saying that the child is father to the 
man, and this is true not only in the sense that 
the child grows into manhood and that in his infancy 
he plants the seeds that bear fruit in maturity. For 
the child is father to the man in the deeper sense that 
without him the division of our kind into man and 
woman would have no meaning. If the male is of no 
account without the female, still less are both male and 
female of any account without the child, who is in this 
sense both their cause, their raison d’étre, and the product 
of the relationship between them. So also a symphony 
is born of thc male sound and the female silence, being 
a rhythm of notes sounded and silenced. By itself, 
sound is nothing, for it is unknown without silence, 
and in the same way silence by itself is unknown, 
Moreover, there is nothing in merc silence and mere 
sound unless the two are united by a meaning, which 
is the symphony. This Meaning, therefore, which 
unites, brings forth and is brought forth by the opposites 
is what is called in St. John’s Gospd the Word (Logos), 
and in the Eastern religions the Dharma and the Tao. 
Therefore St. John writes : 


In the begmning was the Word, and thc Word was with God 
and the Word was God. .. . He was in the world, and the world 
was made by him, and the world knew him not. He came unto 
his own, but his own received him not. But as many as received 


72 


THE WORD MADE FLESH 


him, to them gave he power to become the sous of God... . And the 
Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us. 
If these words arc considered apart from thc historical 
context with which thcy are usually associated, we may 
begin to understand something of this symbol of thc 
Incamate Word, the Christ, and of the tremendous 
number of its implications. Indeed, it would be no 
new thing in Christian history if the historical contcxt 
were given a sccond placc, for St. Paul himsclf appears 
to be far more interested in Christ as a spiritual cxperi- 
ence than as the person who worked and taught in 
Judaea a little before his own time. For St. Paul hardly 
ever quotes the parables and precepts recorded in the 
Gospels, and it secms almost as if Jesus of Nazarcth was 
wholly unknown to him, but for his use of the name 
Jesus and for his references to the Passion and Resur- 
rection. These latter, however, were no new ideas in 
the Near East; the cross was no new symbol and the 
death and resurrection of the God werc certainly as old 
as the myth of Osiris. This is not to cast any doubt 
on the Gospel story ; it is only to show that if indecd 
there was a Jesus of Nazarcth who was bom of a virgin 
and lived as the Gospels record and was what the Gospels 
claimed, then He was the living symbol of what must 
happen in every man who follows the life of the spirit. 
Throughout St. Paul’s Epistles there arc constant 
references to the birth of Christ in man which would 
secm to bear out the words of St. John, “ But as many 
as received him, to them gave he power to become 
the sons of God,”’ or as St. Paulsays cven more explicitly, 
73 


THE SON OF GOD AND MAN 


he who receives comes “ unto a perfect man, unto the’ 
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.” It 
follows, thercfore, that Christ is not just some separate 
Deity to whom we should offer prayers for Grace and 
forgiveness, but something which we must ourselves 
become, or rather, something which, in union with life, 
we must produce just as man and woman produce the 
child. 

The original conflict which resulted in the Fall of 
Adam was this opposition between man and the universe, 
and Christ as the redeemer of the Fall must signify the 
restoration of harmony bctwecn these two. In this 
connection Christ represents the Meaning of the two 
opposites, man and the universe, the part and the whole. 
Tt is said that the whole is greater than the sum of its 
parts, but the relationship between parts and whole is 
best understood if we remember that there are two 
wholes : one which is just the sum of the parts, which 
is the universe, and one which is greater, the Christ. 
That is to say, there is nothing in the parts taken separ- 
atcly and nothing in the parts taken together to form 
a whole unless there is a relationship, a mcaning, between 
each and all which makes up the meaning of the whole 
organism. Ifa whole is just to be described as the sum 
of its parts, then we may say that playing a violin is 
a mere matter of scraping cats’ entrails with horsehair. 
But the whole which is greater than the sum of its 
parts is the meaning, the music, the raison d’étre of that 
interaction of cats’ entrails and horsehair which is called 
playing a violin. And just as both bow and strings 

74 


THE BIRTH OF MEANING 


move in rhythm with the mcaning which is music, so 
man and the universe can move in rhythm with that 
meaning which is the Tao. Thus Chuang Tzu says: 

If metal and stone were without Tao, they would not be capable 
of emitting sound. And just as they pussess the property of sound, 


but will not cmut sound unless struck, so surcly is the same principle 


applicable to all creation. 
(Trans. Giles.) 


Therefore, from man’s pout of vicw, if the Christ or 
the Tao is to be realized, there must first be a union 
between himself and the universe to give that realiza~ 
tion birth. This, however, must not be understood as 
the absorption of the soul into a panthcistically con- 
ceived God. Ifa book is to be read with mcaning it 
is of no use cithcr just to look at it and think onc’s 
own thoughts or to allow onesclf to be completely 
absorbed and carricd away. There must be a union 
between one’s own thoughts and the thoughts expressed 
in the book, and then only will there be a meaning in 
both reading and writing it. Similarly no onc has ever 
seen an cgg composed of a cock and hen rolled into onc 
and put inside a shell, or even a clock in which all the 
parts are so perfectly in union with the whole that thcy 
cease to be distinguishable. 

But if man is to resolve this primary conflict between 
himself and the universc, he must first come to a full 
understanding of the pairs of opposites. In psycho- 
logical terms this is called “* acceptance of lifc,” and this 
means acceptance in all its aspects, just as the plant 
welcomes light and air with the flower, and slime and 


75 


THE SON OF GOD AND MAN 


dirt with the roots. In other words, we deceive our- 
selves if we imagine that the purity of the flower or all 
those aspects of life which are noble and beautiful have 
no positive relationship with the slime. At the same 
time, there is no need to seek out the slime with the 
flower and the sun with the roots, because the ugliness 
of the slime does not in any way detract from the 
beauty of the flower. Thus it cannot be argued that 
the psychological doctrine of the Unconscious reduces 
human nature to nothing but filth, even though some 
psychologists seem a little anxious to prove that it does. 
The point is that there is both beauty and filth, and 
neither is any more essential than the other. Hence 
Heyer says in his Organism of the Mind : 


One who has risen out of the “lees” but remains thankful to 
his maternal menstruum and is in no wise revolted by the know- 
ledge that his roots strike deep into it, is a human being who has 
undergone a natural and healthy development out of the earthly 
sphere. Defective and inadequate, on the other hand, has been the 
development of him who is ashamed of his roots—preciscly because 
he has never achieved the requisite freedom from them. (p. 165.) 


In Taoism this acceptance of life is known as wu-wei 
(lit. ““non-assertion”’), or giving up the attempt to 
make the universe subservient to the self. In the words 
of Chuang Tz : 


For the perfect man employs his mind as a mirror. It grasps 
nothing ; it refuses nothing. It receives, but does not kesp. And 
thus he can triumph over matter without injury to himself: 

(Trans. Giles.) 


It is interesting to compare this with a letter written to 


76 


THE FLOWER HAS ROOTS IN MUD 


Jung by one of his patients and quoted by him in his 
commentary to The Secret of the Golden Flower : 

Out of evil, much good has come to me. By keeping quiet, 
repressing nothing, remaining attentive, and hand in hand with 
that, by accepting reality—taking things as they are, and not as I 
wanted them to be—by doing all this, rare knowledge has come 
to me... . I always thought that, when we accept things, they 
overpower us in one way or another. Now this is not true at all, 
and it is only by accepting them that one can define an attitude 
toward them. So now I intend playing the game of life, being 
receptive to whatever comes to mez, good and bad . . . also my 
own nature with its positive and negative sides. (p. 126.) 


Before the Christ can be bom there must be acceptance 
both of the external world and of the unconscious depths 
of one’s own soul. Certainly the ego will resort to a 
thousand cunning devices to avoid this acceptance, not 
the least of which is to pretend that as the opposites 
are maya they can just be ignored. Thus the fallacy of 
Christian Science and so much of that so-called opti- 
mistic philosophy of New Thought is that it simply 
avoids death, evil and pain by treating them as illusions. 
But the paradox is that evil can only be overcome by 
the fullest acceptance, and hence the preccpt of Jesus, 
* Resist not evil.” As this precept is often made the 
excuse for absolute pacifism, it is relevant here to remark 
that in the same way war is not overcome by avoiding 
it but only by accepting it as an integral part of our 
nature. For the pacifist is inclincd to ignore wholly 
his own unconscious desires for war, though for this 
he compensates by the highly aggressive way in which 
he advocates his peaceful views. 


77 


THE SON OF GOD AND MAN 


The refusal to accept, which is the primary conflict 
between God and Adam, is in a sensc the refusal to 
allow the universe to live, for it involves resistance to 
the two factors which are essential to life, namely, the 
opposites and change. For if we arc to allow the 
universc to give us life, we must also allow it to give 
us death. This is not only a matter of welcoming death 
merely because it makcs life possible ; it is also weleom- 
ing death as an essential part of life—not so much of 
life as we understand it, opposed to death, but rather 
of that Greater Life which is made up of living and 
dying just as a symphony is made up of the sounding 
and silencing of notes. Because there is no change 
without death, and no life without change, he who 
would not change, who would not die, is already dead. 
For he denics life by desiring the etcrnity of its forms, 
of himself and of the things and people he loves and 
values. But such love is not love of the living person ; 
it is just love of the pleasing effect which that person 
has on oneself at a certain time; it does not welcome 
his right to change and die which is the absolute con- 
dition of his being alive in any sense at all, which is 
indeed just the thing that makes him live. For life is 
more than its forms, and if this were not so the work 
of life would come to an cnd in each created thing. 
If the flower did not dic, the seeds would not ripen and 
be scattered; if man were immortal he would need 
no children to preserve his kind. Hc would be finished, 
complete, an unmoving perfection of as little intcrest 
or value as if he were frozen into stone. If forms were 


78 


WE LIVE BECAUSE WE DIE 


~imumortal, life would die, for life is precisely an ever- 
lasting re-creation out of death. Like Chuang Tzu’s 
perfect man it goes forward for ever receiving and not 
keeping, being received and not being kept, and in this 
is its freedom and its undying wonder. Thus to the 
Taoist sages perfection never meant conclusion. 
Therefore it is the experience of everyone that the 
moment we try to make our happiness secure it vanishes, 
and that the more we try to hold on to youth and beauty, 
the morc we feel them slipping away. For in denying 
the approach of age we deny our very existence, for 
existence is not a matter of remaining fixed but of 
moving on. The denial of life is like trying to grasp 
water in one’s hands, for the harder onc grips, the 
faster it slips through one’s fingers. Or again, if one 
tries to shut the wind in a box, at once it ceascs to be 
wind and in time becomes foul and stagnant air. In 
the same way a beam of sunlight can never be caught 
in a room by pulling down the blind, for whatever 
is cut off from the living whole vanishes away. It is 
just this cutting off which stands in the way of rccon- 
ciliation between man and the universe, for it will be 
remembered that in the myth our fallen state originally 
began by cutting off a fruit from the Tree. For cutting 
off, dissection, is done to corpses, and not to living 
bodies if they are to remain alive. In this, thercforc, is 
the whole fallacy of matcrialism which claims to prove 
that there is no Divinity in the universe and no soul in 
man by mere analysis, by taking them to picccs and 
failing to discover any parts which answer to the names 
LAs 79 G 


THE SON OF GOD AND MAN 


“God” and “soul.” It is like taking a watch to pieces 
to tell the time or expecting a post-mortem to reveal 
the sccrets of a woman’s beauty. 

Nowhere is this attitude of wu-tvei more clearly re- 
flected than in the paintings of those Chinese and Japanese 
artists whose work was influenced by Taoism and Zen 
Buddhism. It is often said that they painted the soul 
of the object rather than the object itsclf, and this is 
true so long as the word “ soul”’ does not call to our 
minds any impression of a formless and airy being 
with no particular characteristics. By soul in this con- 
nection we must understand meaning or Tao, although 
this is something which can never be fully expressed 
in any shapes or words. Therefore the painter indicates 
rather than explains, suggests rather than describes, for 
his object is not to convey to others a complete repre- 
sentation which finishes with the painting and leaves 
the beholder nothing to do but admire. Rather he 
wishes to start a movement which is to be continued 
in the beholder’s mind; he desires a co-operation 
between himself and those who look at his work, and 
therefore he leaves empty spaces, unfinished forms and 
hints of colour. He gives enough to excite and too 
little to satisfy, and thus he extracts a positive response 
of the imagination from others which, together with 
his own suggestion, creates the full meaning or, in other 
words, bearsa child. Hence the masterpieces of Chinese 
painting are never ends in themselves; they are never 
what we should call perfect or faithful representations, 
for the artist has no desire to fix any living subject in 

80 


THE TAO IN CHINESE ART 


a'dead and rigid form of paint. Jt is, as it werc, that 
he docs not want to capture a bird on his silk, but to 
make it fly off it. In this connection there is a story 
concerning the Japanesc painter Kanaoka. Some farmers 
living near him found that on several occasions thcir 
crops had been roughly trampled down during the 
night. When someone entercd the local temple carly 
one morning, he was surprised to find the painting of 
a horse which Kanaoka had put there covered with 
sweat and clouded with steam. The artist was immcedi- 
ately summoned, and, having drawn in a post and a 
rope tethering the horse to it, the farmers were given 
no further trouble. 

But the influence of Taoism and Zcn is cxhibited to 
a greater degree in a form of painting with which the 
West is somewhat unfamiliar. This is regarded by 
Far Eastern comnoisscurs as the very highcst branch of 
art next to calligraphy, from which it is derived, and 
most of the cxamples of this kind of work arc now 
in private collections in Japan. Jn Japan it is known 
as Sumiye, which is to say painting in black ink on a 
plain white surfacc, usually a thin, brittle paper or 
sometimes silk. The interesting feature of both mcdia 


1 Only some six or seven examples were shown at the Inter- 
national Exhibition of Chinese Art in London in 1935-6. A fine 
series of reproductions, however, may be found in Emst Grosse’s 
Die Ostasiatische Tuschmalerci, Bruno Cassirer Verlag, Berlin, 1923. 
Grosse has prefaced them with a full account of the connections of 
this branch of painting with Taoism and Zen. Further examples 
may be found in Dr. D. T. Suzuki’s Essays in Zen Buddhism, Vols, 
II and IM, London and Kyoto, 1933 and 1934. 


81 


THE SON OF GOD AND MAN 


is that the lines must be drawn swiftly and without 
hesitation or the ink will blot, and further that it is im- 
possible to erase any error. Thus the artist had to 
commit his inspiration to paper in the few moments 
while it was still alive, for there could be no question 
of making a rough skctch and then slowly filling in the 
details after the maimncr of Western painters. In Sumiyc 
the act of painting of a bird in flight is as living as the 
bird itself. For the bird does not stay poiscd in the 
air to adjust the curve of its wing; it cannot go back 
in time to correct the movement of its flight; and, 
unless it is stuffed and put in a glass case, it is here one 
moment and gone the next so that there is no time to 
study and analyse it. Hence in a similar momentary 
flash the artist commits it to paper as irrevocably as its 
own coming and going. If he stops to think, an ugly 
blot appears and the inspiration has gonc. For he must 
go forward with his work as unhcsitatingly as life itself 
is moving. To change the metaphor, he must sing in 
time with the music; to stop to consider a note, to 
hold it for longer than its time, to sing a phrase over 
and over again until it is correct, this is to losc touch, 
to wander off into a world which the music of life has 
left behind. Thus the result of his work is a painting 
which lives in the truest sense of the word ; there is no 
hint of the glass case such as one may find in Thorburn 
and other European bird painters. Similarly, when his 
subject is a spray of flowers, a branch of bamboo or a 
twisted pine, there is nothing of the monumental fuxity 
of so many European flower-pieces, symmetrically 
82 


IN TIME WITH CHANGE 


arranged in their vases. Each lcaf of the bamboo is 
drawn with one rapid sweep of the brush, and as it 
sways in the wind this technique gives it a vitality which 
no adagio painting can attain. Yet it is not simply a 
mattcr of speed ; in fact, spced is the result rather than 
the cause, for the artist brings himself into such dircct 
contact, such perfect harmony, with his subject that he 
moves as it moves and creates his picture as Nature 
expresses herself in the flying bird. 

This, therefore, is somcthing of what is meant by a 
union of man with the universe. It is chicfly a matter 
of keeping one’s mind in the same rhythm, as with 
music, of accepting each change as it comes without 
wanting to go back, without wishing to hold and kcep 
anything that may come. It is just this holding which 
destroys the union, for it is the conflict of the ego with 
the world, the desire to dissect the living body, to 
explain away the music as a series of pleasant and un- 
pleasant noises. Thus Chuang Tzu says again: “ The 
Master (Lao Tzu) came because it was his time to be 
bom; he went, because it was his timc to die. For 
those who accept the phenomenon of birth and death 
in this sense, lamentation and sorrow have no placc.” 

But so far we have considered this attitude mainly 
in relation to the external world, from what Jung might 
call the “ extraverted ” point of view. It applies cqually 
to that internal world which we apprehend as somc- 
thing other than the conscious ego, to the Unconscious 
—the internal reflection of the extcrnal universe. For 
just as man is inseparably bound up with the universe 

83 


THE SON OF GOD AND MAN 


from without, just as he derives life from earth, rain, 
air, sun, father and mothcr, so he is bound up to the 
universe from within. For here, according to Jung, is 
a vast concourse of mental tendencics inherited from 
our ancestors, linking us up with the racc, with animals, 
and, perhaps it will in time be shown, with plants and 
rocks, Our minds contain all the characteristics of life, 
and we bring to consciousness just as much as we desire. 
Yet here again there is conflict between the ego and 
the universe, and, as in its outcr aspect, the conflict has 
two general forms. On the one hand, the ego may so 
isolate itself from the world as to ignore its existence 
except as a convenient or inconvenient personal appen- 
dage ; on the other, it may be so overwhelmed by the 
pressure of circumstances that self-confidence and self- 
respect are destroyed. In each casc it is necessary to 
achicve a point of balance, a poisc, between the two. 
Thus we find some who so far ignore the Unconscious 
as to deny its existence, who trust ovcrmuch in their 
own reason; others are so overcome by its impulses 
and phantasics that thcy find dreams morc real than 
concrete facts. 

In this realm it is perhaps more helpful to turn to India 
than to China, for to some extent we may say that the 
technique of Yoga is introverted and the technique of 
Taoism extraverted. While the Chinese looks at Nature 
and the ordinary affairs of life, the Indian looks into his 
own mind, and in this we may find reason for the 
general superiority of the Chinese in art and craftsman- 
ship, and of the Indian in philosophy and psychology. 

84 


TAOISM AND YOGA 


Yet so far as psychology is concerned, the difference 
is of quantity rathcr than quality. Indian psychology is 
more claboratc, morc technical, whercas the Chincse is 
subtle without being complex. It is profound know- 
ledge contrasted with a simplicity which is as obvious 
as one’s own nose and yet unnoticcd just because it is 
so close. Thus, gencrally speaking, the Chinese arc 
subtle because thcy see what others miss by looking too 
far afield; but the Indians go farther aficld than any- 
one else and, as it were, come back to the Chincsc by 
going round the world. 

However, seeing that generalizations are notoriously 
unsafe, it may be bettcr to replacc tlie terms “ Indian ” 
and ‘‘ Chincse”’ by “ Yoga" and “ Taoism,” for un- 
questionably Yoga, as a technique of meditation, com- 
prises the most claborate science of the “inner life” 
known to Asia, even to the world. Yet there is Karma 
Yoga, the Yoga of action, and Taoist Yoga, thc Taoism 
of meditation, for cxtraverts and introverts cam never 
correspond exactly with the divisions betwecn peoples. 
Each philosophy is sufficiently catholic to adapt itsclf 
where necessary to different types of mind. It is alinost 
certain, however, that Taoist Yoga was derived in great 
measure from India, and it is hcre that we must look 
for the greater wealth of information. 

At the present time there is a large ammount of litera- 
ture on Yoga in European languages, a large proportion 
of which, if not erroneous, is distinctly dangerous. For 
apart from any psychological harm that may be done 
by wrong use of this science, serious physiological 

85 


THE SON OF GOD AND MAN 


damage may result from certain exercises in breathing 
and posture which require the personal guidance of an 
expert teacher. Many sclf-styled “teachers” are to be 
found in Europe and America who advertise their 
“knowledge ” and propose to sell it for money. But 
of this one may be sure: that no genuine teacher 
(guru) will cither advcrtisc himself or accept payment, 
nor will he attempt to impose on another any system, 
practice or belief which he has no particular desire to 
know. Moreover, he will never describe Yoga as a 
means of obtaining wealth and power, nor encourage 
the development of psychic faculties as ends in them- 
selves. Unfortunately in certain “‘ thcosophical” and 
“occult” circles there is an absurd love of “ guru 
hunting,” of trying to find a Master who, for the mere 
asking, will impart divine understanding to mercly 
curious, self-seeking or deluded enquirers. There is, 
however, the pertinent Eastern saying, “ When the 
pupil is ready, the tcacher will appear.” Thus it is no 
onc’s concern to scck, desire or trouble himself about 
a teacher in this particular scnse. In this present stage 
of our evolution so few are even ready for a teacher 
that the question should never entcr our thoughts ; 
our task is simply to go on with our work as we find 
it, seeking what knowledge we require from sources 
which bear directly on that work. That is to say, it 
is not our concem to explore high states of conscious- 
ness and psychic conditions until we have mastered those 
lower strata of the mind which will provide us with 
more than enough work for many years to come. We 
86 


FROM IDENTITY TO UNITY 


tannot pass on to ecstatic contemplations, to “* cosmic 
consciousness,” or any other form of what is known 
in Yoga as samadhi, until we have come to terms with 
those very “ earthy” impulses, fears and “ complexes ” 
which lurk unknown in the depths of the mind. This 
applies especially to modern man of the West with his 
intellectual, humanist traditions, and it is precisely his 
particular problem which we have set out to considcr. 
Certainly there are those among us who are different, 
who are nearer to the “primitive” and for whom this 
question does not yet exist. But in modern civilization, 
those who form the intclligsntsia, who interest them- 
selves in religion, philosophy and psychology, arc for 
the most part unfamiliar with and often obstinately 
blind to their unconscious depths. The primitive, on 
the othcr hand, is so close to those depths that he is 
almost identified with them, that there exists betwcen 
him and the Unconscious what Levy-Briihl has termed 
the participation mystique, the union with Nature whiich 
modem man sometimes mistakes for a higher state of 
life than his own. But it is not a truc union, and 
perhaps in this conncction it would be better to use 
the term “identification,” because there can be no 
productive union until there has first been differentia- 
tion. The state of the primitive is, as it were, the 
primaeval Chaos which existed before heaven and earth 
were divided. There came the estrangement of carth 
from heaven through Adam, but in Christ they are 
again brought together. In the samc way, modern 
man is estranged from Nature. One might almost say 


87 


THE SON OF GOD AND MAN 


that the primitive is Naturc, but both in mind and* 
external circumstanecs modern man lives in an artificial, 
intellectual and mechanical world. This is a necessary 
stage in his devclopment, for it must precede a union 
which is not a return to the primitive condition, not 
an identification, but a co-operation in which unity and 
difference are cqually balanced. This is organism as 
distinct from both undifferentiated fluidity and con- 
flicting division. 

Thus it is not a question of “ returning to Nature” 
or leading “the simple life.” None of the gains of 
civilization need be cast aside in favour of a rctum to 
the earth or to the animal freedom of the Unconscious ; 
no complete reversal of civilized manners, customs and 
traditions is involved, no abolition of machincry, no 
lowering of culture to primitive levels. For what is 
necessary is a relating of civilization to Nature, not thic 
substitution of Nature for civilization. But it is impor- 
tant to distinguish herc between the participation imystique 
of the primitive and the psychology of Chincsc and 
Indian mysticism. For in the golden ages of Chinese 
and Indian thought their culture was somcthing far 
removed from savagery. The neccessary clement of 
artificiality, of differentiation from Nature, was pro- 
vided for the Chinese in the Four Books of Confucius 
and for the Indians in Manu, and these in no way corre- 
sponded to the claboratc system of taboos which com- 
pose the greater part of primitive social order. For 
the taboo springs from an unreasoning fcar, whcreas 
the laws of Manu and the Four Books arc founded on 

88 


TO UNITE ONE MUST FIRST DIVIDE 


reason and a high scnse of moral and aesthetic values. 
Hence the Dharma and the Tao were cvolved by people 
as civilized in their own way as ourselves, and they 
represent not the return to Nature but the union of 
Art and Nature, understanding “Art” in its widest 
sense. 

But before modern man can attain the greatest heights 
of Chinese and Indian mysticism, he must first becomc 
conscious of Nature in and around him, though not 
identified with it. For this, not only modern psycho- 
logy, but also Christianity itself, have in some measurc 
prepared the way in revealing the Unconscious and the 
reality of Original Sin. There can be no union until 
one is first fully aware of the opposite factor with which 
union is to be made, and because the East had already 
achieved that awarencss, its philosophy is concerned 
mainly with the act of union. In Yoga, however, 
there are described a number of mcthods by which the 
irrational forces of the mind may be brought to light, 
in order, it is said, to show the disciple just how great 
are the powers with which he must come to terns. 
Thus Patanjali opens the sccond book of his Yoga Sutra 
by saying, “ The preliminary exercises for those who 
wish to practise Yoga include discipline or relaxation 
of tension.” Each aphorism in this sutra is, as it were, 
a summary of a whole body of teaching, and the whole 
work is one of the most remarkable examples of saying 
much with the minimum of words. It may seem 
peculiar to us to speak of disciplinc as “ relaxation of 
tension,” but in Yoga relaxation is the cssential pre- 

89 


THE SON OF GOD AND MAN 


liminary to all cxercisc and many methods arc taught, 
for achieving it in both body and mind. 

Relaxation implies the loosening of all artificial strain, 
and so involvcs a weakening of those intcllcctual forces 
which strive to hold the Unconscious in check. There- 
fore it is not surprising that nearly all authoritics on 
Yoga refer to the innumerable desires, fears and im- 
pressions which rush to consciousness as soon as the 
disciple begins to meditate. This is recognized as a 
perfectly natural stage, so much so that one of the 
exercises prescribed is just to let the mind think what 
it likes, and to obscrve and note the undreamed-of 
things which rise to its surface. Thus Vivekananda 
writes in his Raja Yoga: + 


The first lesson is to sit for some time and let the mind nm on. 
The mind is bubbling up all the time. It is hke the monkey jump- 
ing about. Let the monkey jump as much as he can; you simply 
wait and watch. Knowledge is power says the proverb, and that 
is true. Untl you know what the mind is doing you cannot con- 
trol it Give it the full length of the rcins ; many most hidcous 
thoughts may come into it; you will be astonished that it was 
possible for you to think such thoughts. But you will find that 
each day the mind’s vagaries arc becoming less and less violent, 
that each day it is becoming calmer. 


1 This passage is taken from p. 67 of the 1901 cdition. It has 
since been reprinted by an Indian publisher. The book consists of 
lectures originally given in Chicago, and though the bulk of the 
information is sound, various practiccs relating to the control of 
the breath are described which would be extremely dangerous for 
most Westerners. Later in his life Vivekananda regretted that he 
had ever published these. 


go 


LETTING GO 


It is important to note here the differentiation between 
the thoughts and the ‘‘ Scer” who observes them. The 
mind is allowed to run wild, but at the samc time an 
objective attitude is maintained towards it so that the 
Unconscious is realized once again, but without the 
participation mystique. Similar methods arc used to-day 
in psychothcrapy. Sometimes the patient is made to 
lie relaxcd and to say whatever comes into his mind, 
and if the cxperiment is successful, he finds that his 
Icsistance to unconscious impressions is dwindling and 
that he reveals facts of great importance to his treatment, 
facts which no amount of deliberate and reasoned think- 
ing would have produced. Somewhat the same method 
is found in Jung’s technique of “active imagination,” 
in which the paticnt relaxes and simply Icts himself 
create a phantasy, a day-dream, which he aftcrwards 
describes to the doctor. Or again, the method of 
“unconscious drawing” may be uscd, in which the 
paticnt paints or draws these impressions as they come 
freely to consciousness. Thereafter he studics them 
objectively, so avoiding the participation mystique and 
preparing for the act of union which will bring conscious 
and wiiconscious into a balanced and creative relationship. 
For the samc reason every school of modern psycho- 
therapy gives careful attention to dreams, for in sleep 
the same relaxation of artificial restraint is achieved. 
But there is this difference: that in the dream the 
unconscious processes take possession of the conscious 
and there exists a participation mystique similar to the 
waking state of the primitive. Thus it is significant 
gI 


THE SON OF GOD AND MAN 
that the primitive finds it hard to distinguish betweer 


dreams and reality. 

It is therefore interesting to compare the passage 
quoted above from Vivekananda with the following 
from Jung (Secret of the Golden Flower, pp. 90-91) : 


The key is this: we must be able to let things happen in the 
psyche... . Consciousness is forever interfering, helping, correct- 
ing and negating, and never leaving the simple growth of the psychic 
processes in peace... . It consists solely in watching objectively 
the development of any fragment of fantasy... . These exer- 
cises must be continued unnl the cramp in the conscious is released, 
or, in other words, until one can let things happen; which was 
the immediate goal of the exercise. In this way, a new attitude 
is created, an attitude which acceprs the irrational and the unbeliey- 
able, simply because it is what is happening. This atutude coals 
be poison for a person who has already been overwhelmed by things 
that just happen, but it is of the highest value for one who, with 
an exclusively conscious critique, chooses from the things that 
happen only those appropriate to his consciousness. 


Jung is especially wise in pointing out the danger of 
this technique for those who are overwhelined by psychic 
‘‘ happenings,” but this condition is gencrally found in 
modern civilization among those neurotic cases wherc 
there is a regression to the primitive state. Among 
the majority of thinking people, however, this technique 
is necessary before the main work of Yoga can be 
started. And this is precisely the task of achieving 
between the conscious and the unconscious, as between 
the ego and the external world, that new centre of being 
which we have called the Christ or the Tao, known 
in Yoga as the Purusha. This is clearly set forward 
92 


THE EGO AND THE SELF 


m the second book of Patanjali’s Yoga Sutra (IL 21, 22, 
23, 48): 


Nature (the world of opposites) has no ulterior purpose of her 
own. The only reason for her existence is the perception of her 
by the Purusha. 

Yet there is objective reality in the universe, for it is the common 
source of all experience, and does not cease to exist because one 
soul ceases to be bound by it. 

The self-identification of the Purusha with phenomenal experi- 
ence is inherent in che mature of things Although it is the eause 
of obstacles, yet it is necessary in order to kindle the spark of Sclf- 
consciousness into full activiry. ... 

The fruit of right poise is the capacity to remain balanced between 
the pairs of opposites. 


In these four aphorisms he has put forward the essence 
of our whole position: that the meaning and raison 
détre of the opposites is the Tao or Purusha; that the 
opposites cannot be called unreal and set against the 
Purusha (as real); that the real Self is confused with 
the false self, the ego, false because only one of the 
opposites, that the ego tries to make itself the centre 
instead of the Purusha, and that this conflict is a neces- 
sary stage in our evolution ; finally, that the union of 
the opposites when achieved again is not fusion but 
balance. Further, Patanjali says, “The Purusha is 
necessary, because the mind cannot be aware of itself 
as an object... . The identification of the conscious- 
ness with the Self or Purusha brings awareness of the 
mind as an object” (IV. 20 and 22). That is to say, 
the mind as just conscious and unconscious cannot, as 
we have seen, solve its own problem, but if a new centre 


93 


THE SON OF GOD AND MAN 


of consciousness is attained above and between these 
two opposites, both can then be controlled. Onc must 
be carcful herc not to be misled by Patanjali’s tcrmino- 
logy. For when he spcaks of an identification of 
consciousness with the Purusha, this docs not mean 
that the conscious, as distinct from the unconscious, 
becomes the Purusha. The conscious in that sense 
means simply the ego which is known in Indian 
philosophy as the Lower self. In thc same way the 
unconscious does not signify somcthing into which no 
form of consciousness can cnter. Here we arc sadly 
limited by language and the accepted terminology of 
modern psychology, and the position can only be 
grasped if we can recognize a consciousness which 
can know both the cgo and the “ unconscious.” 
The term “unconscious” means only that which 
is unknown by the ego, but Yoga implics a Higher 
Self which is not cut off from the unconscious in this 
way.! 

The Purusha, however, is always approached through 
the ego, for at this stage our consciousness is centred 
in the ego and it is from there that we take all initiative. 
Or so we imagine, for with our present knowledge we 
cannot say how far this initiative is prompted by the 
unconscious. In any event, the apparent process is an 


1 This “ Higher Self” should on no account be confused with 
what Freud terms the “ Super Ego,” which is almost equivalent 
to “conscience.” It refers to the moral code, the inhibitions, 
implanted in man during his earlicst childhood, thereafter becoming 
largely unconscious or what might be called instinctive. 


94 


THE SECOND BIRTH 


aScent from the ego to the Purusha combined with a 
proportionately growing knowledge of the unconscious. 
For the very first act of relaxing the ego, of accepting 
the unconscious, implies the birth of something between 
the two, of the desire to come to terms. It is almost 
as if the Purusha had itself prompted the desire, just 
as some say that the love between man and woman is 
caused by the child’s yearning to be bom. This is 
true even in terms of materialism, for love is simply 
an instrument of Nature’s urge to create children. 
And just as man and woman were oncc themsclves 
children, so conscious and unconscious arc now the 
twin sexed, differentiated, forms of what was just the 
child in primitive man, in whom the two were fused. 
This, then, is the meaning of the Second Birth, for the 
first was when the human race was in the child-state, 
when conscious and unconscious were undifferentiated. 
The race became adult, and the two were split ;_primi- 
tive culture developed into civilization. Thus the task 
of civilization is to bring about the second birth, to 
“become again as little children” though not in the 
sense of a mere return. 

In Yoga the task of bringing to birth the new Self, 
of realizing the Purusha, follows naturally from the 
first step of relaxing the ego and watching the mind. 
For as the yogi watches he begins to feel that it is not 
just the mind which is watching the mind, for it can- 
not see itself any more than onc can scc one’s own 
eyes. He bcgims to scnsc something beyond his con- 
scious thoughts, somcthing which is morc than himself 

LA 95 H 


THE SON OF GOD AND MAN 


as he understands himself. He realizes gradually that 
it is not himself but this Other which is bringing the 
unconscious to light. As the rush of thoughts begins 
in time to grow quiet and the unconscious flows forth 
less violently than at the first bursting of the dam, he 
begins to see both aspects of his mind together. The 
one is made up of things peculiar to himself, being 
his character, his mental personality ; it is distinguished 
from the other aspect just as his body is distinguished 
from the material universe. The other is a vast collec- 
tion of things which may be called the mental universe, 
hitherto for the most part unconscious. It contains 
what Jung describes as the “ archetypes,” the bases of 
all myths, and all those tendencies and impressions 
which belong to humanity in general. He can know 
these two aspects together because, through the accept- 
ance of the one by the other, the Purusha has been realized 
standing, as it were, above and between them, and look- 
ing down on both. 

In this way the yogi attains the state of kaivalya, of 
complete spiritual freedom and detachment. The world 
of opposites does not cease to exist, but, centred in the 
Purusha, he is no longer bound by it. In the words 
of the Bhagavad Gita (V. 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11): 


He should be known as a perpetual sannyasin who neither hateth 
nor desireth; free from the pairs of opposites, O mighty~armed, 
he is easily set free from bondage. . . . 

He who is harmonized by Yoga, the Self-purified, Self-ruled, 
the senses subdued, whose Self is the Self of all beings, although 
acting he is not affected. 

“T do not do anything,” should think the harmonized one, who 


96 


AT THE CENTRE OF THE WHEEL 


knoweth the Essence of things ; secing, hearing, touching, smelling, 
eating, moving, sleeping, breathing. 

Speaking, giving, grasping, opening and closing the eyes, he 
holdeth: “The senses move among the objects of the senses.” 

He who acteth, placing all actions in the Eternal, abandoning 
attachment, is unaffected by sin as a lotus leaf by the waters. 

Yogis, having abandoncd attachment, perfiorm action only by 
the body, by the intellect, by the intuition, and even by the senses, 
for the purification of the self. 


He acts and feels, as it were, only in the ower part 
of himself; the rim of the whecl revolves, but the 
hub at its very centre remains unmoved. In the same 
way we find it said in the Vimalakirti Sutra of Mahayana 
Buddhism : 


Meditation (lit. “ sitting quictly ”) should mean that while re- 
maining in supreme contemplation, onc is able to do the various 
bodily movement such as walking, standing, sitting or reclining. 
It should mean that without deviating from the Dharma, one is 
able to discharge various temporal duties. It should mean that onc 
abides neither within nor without. . . . It should mean that with- 
out exterminating klesas (defilements or contacts with the world of 
opposites), one may enter Nirvana. 


Hence Nirvana in Buddhism is the equivalent of kaivalya 
in Yoga. It is not just a complete absorption into the 
Infinite, with eyes closed and body immobile and all 
thoughts cleared from the mind. For the passage quoted 
above was supposed to have been Vimalakirti’s reproof 
to Saraputra when he found him sitting in a wood 
absorbed in a state which may best be described in 
Saraputra’s own words, ‘‘ This precisely is bliss—that 
there is no consciousness.” Indeed, the idca that Nir- 
vana consists in mcre unconsciousness is not only found 
97 


THE SON OF GOD AND MAN 


in the West. For we find the Chinese Buddhist sage 
Hui Neng correcting the same mistake in a collection 
of sermons delivered during the T’ang dynasty :4 

The capacity of Mind is wide and great ; it is like the emptiness 
of space. To sit with a mind cmpticd makes one fall into empti- 
ness of indifference, Space contains the sun, moon, stars, con- 
stellations, great earth, mountains and rivers. All grasses, plants, 
good men and bad men, . . . Heaven and hell—they are all in 
empty space. The emptiness of (Self-) nature as it is in all people 
is just like this. It contains in it all objects; hence it is great. All 
objects without exception are of Sclf-nature. Seeing all human 
beings and non-human beings, as they are, evil and good, . . . it 
abandons them not, nor is it containinated with them ; it is like 
the emptiness of space... . There are people who conceive this 
to be great when they have their minds emptied of thoughts— 
which is not right. The capacity of Mind is great; when there is 
no life accompanying it it is small. 


It is probable, however, that in realizing the Purusha 
or Nirvana there are various levels of attainment. For 
in all things thcre arc deeper and deeper “ layers” of 
meaning. Thus we of the West may find a Purusha 
in the ordinary affairs of life by applying the principles 
of Eastern psychology on our earthly plane of being. 
But this does not neccessarily involve the attainment of 
Buddhahood—a task so tremendous that it is impossible 
for us to conceive it. To understand the ultimate, 
universal Purusha it is necessary to know levels of 
consciousness and being of which we have no inkling. 
This knowledge is the object of the more advanced 
exercises in Yoga and of the various forms of Eastern 

1 From the Tan-Ching (Platform Sutra), 24 and 25, translated by 
D. T. Suzuki 

98 


ONE WORLD AT A TIME 


otcultism with which it is allied. For the present, 
however, we have no means to affirm or doubt the exist- 
ence of these supra- and sub-mundane realms which 
are mentioned so freely in the sutras. What must 
concern us is the principle and not the level of its applica- 
tion. That is to say, we must apply it to the world 
we know before we try to discover any new world 
by the development of psychic faculties. The animal 
applies the Tao in sex but not in music, and because 
a man applies it in music it does not follow that he 
can apply it in his ordinary life. But beyond what we 
know as ordinary life, there may well be planes as 
unknown to us as literature to horses. Buddhahood 
implies the capacity to apply the Dharma, the Tao, on 
all planes, and thus it is a question which at the present 
time simply does not enter into our lives and concern- 
ing which we are quite incapable of giving any opinion. 
The sutras enter into it very fully, but much of this 
is purely unintelligible to us ; it is a knowledge which 
the East has reached in the fullness of its years. For 
ourselves, any attempt to copy or deny it is an imperti- 
nence; it is like assuming equality with Ciccro when 
one has only mastered the first Declension. The supc- 
tiority of the East in these matters is often scorned by 
our ‘wise men,” but every great scientist exhibits a 
profound humility not only on what he does not under- 
stand, but also on what he thinks he knows. He has 
to change his opinions so often that he avoids the pride 
of knowledge as his worst enemy. In the words of 
Chuang Tzu, “He who knows he is a fool is not a 
99 


THE SON OF GOD AND MAN 


great fool.” Let us remember, therefore, that for us 
the important thing in Asia’s legacy is not the “ signs 
and wonders” offered to us by irresponsible writers 
on Yoga, but the underlying principle of the Middle 
Way, of the redemption of our ordinary life through 
understanding of the Tao. 

This, then, is the birth of the Holy Child, and once 
again we find a new meaning in the Christian symbol. 
For Jesus said, ““ Except a man be born of water and 
the spirit, he cannot see the kingdom of God.” The 
Church preserves this in the sacrament of Baptism, 
which for some strange reason is administered to new- 
born babes—a remarkable instance of confusing the 
letter with the spirit. For the little child to which Jesus 
referred comes after, not before, the adult, and it seems 
that water and the spirit signify the opposites out of 
which the Christ is bom. We are told in the book 
of Genesis that before the world was made “the Spirit 
of God moved upon the face of the waters,’ and that 
out of these two, formless in themselves, was created 
the world of forms as if the spirit had entered into the 
water and reared up waves. For spirit is the active 
male, and water the passive female, meaningless in 
themselves and yet given meaning by that which is 
produced from their union. In the same way, pure 
energy is nothing, for it expands infinitely and to no 
purpose. Pure matter is nothing, for it is shapeless 
and dead. But when the two are brought together, 
matter places a check upon energy, and energy moves 
matter, with the result that the two give birth to form. 

100 


OF WATER AND THE SPIRIT 


Hence it is of the greatest significance that Christ was 
born of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, for it 
cannot be merely by chance that Mary suggests mare 
(Lat. ‘“‘sca”’) and the phrase “virgin matter.” The 
Buddha, also, was miraculously conceived, and curiously 
enough his mother was called Maya. Thus, descending 
from the Sanskrit root ma-, the words mater, materia, 
Maya, mare, Maria (Gk. Magy), present a suggestive 
group. But even if their similarity is purcly fortuitous, 
the meaning of the symbol in its context is clear. The 
Spirit enters into the virgin woman, and woman is 
matter, the female principle, the mother of the world, 
and from the union of the opposites is born the Christ. 

Therefore it is only from the position of the Christ 
that the problem of the oppositcs can be solved, that 
the curse of Adam can be redeemed. In this way man 
can be released from the spiritual and moral impasse 
of a life considered simply in terms of good and evil, 
conscious and unconscious, life and death. For he 
acts no longer in accordance with onc or other of the 
opposites, but with the meaning, the Tao, which trans- 
cends them. His virtuc is more than virtue as it is 
generally understood, which is to say, contrasted with 
vicc. Ordinary virtue is at pains to emphasize that it 
is virtuous, but in the words of Lao Tzu: 


The superior virtue is not conscious of itsclf as virtue ; 
Therefore it has virtue, 
The inferior virtue never Icts off virtuc ; 
Therefore it has no virtue. 
(Trans. Ch’'u Ta-kao.) 
IOI 


THE SON OF GOD AND MAN 


From the standpoint of Tao there is no question of 
actions being good or evil; in fact the Chinese word 
here translated “virtue” is Té, which signifies Tao 
working in man. For the man of Tao is not concerned 
with making good triumph over evil; his whole atten- 
tion is absorbed in working out a meaning. To return 
once more to the reading analogy: what concerns 
him is not how well or how badly he concentrates on 
reading a book, but the actual work of reading. Thus 
he concentrates well, yet that is not his object; it is 
merely incidental. 

This is demonstrated further by the attitude of Yoga 
to concentration. Obviously the attainment of the 
Purusha or the Tao is no easy task. Paradoxically, it 
requires a tremendous force not only to make the 
first relaxation of the ego but to maintain it and over- 
come the ego’s long ingrained habit of trying to make 
itself supreme. For this reason Yoga contains innumer~ 
able exercises in concentration and self-discipline. But 
these are entirely defeated if looked upon as ends in 
themselves, and for this reason the guru will frown 
upon any desirc to practise Yoga simply for the power 
of concentration which it gives. For concentration is 
no matter of asserting the ego, of trying to force one’s 
attention on a given subject. This simply aggravates 
the conflict between the ego and the world, perpetuating 
the discord of the two opposites good and bad concen- 
tration. Thus the more one thinks of oneself trying 
to read, the less one succeeds in reading. In the same 
way, the man of Tao does not trouble as to how well 

102 


WHEN FAILURE COMES OF TRYING 


or how badly he is living life ; he just lives life. That 
is not to say that he drifts on circumstance any morc 
than he is uttcrly carried away by what he reads in 
his book. Life for him is the relationship, the mcaning, 
between himself and the world; it is the proccss of 
himself working in the universe and the universe work- 
ing in him. He is so absorbcd in this that he forgets 
himself as a separate thing and thc universe as a separate 
thing, just as a musician will forget both himsclf and 
his instrument and think only of the tune. Here again, 
those who make a great cffort, who try to be surc that 
they are playing the instrument well, spoil the tune by 
their self-consciousness. The sccret is to think of the 
tune and let it play itself; that the player plays well 
follows as a conscquence and does not come first as a 
cause. Hence therc is no virtue without Grace, without 
Christ being born in the soul. 


103 


IV. THE SECRET OF THE BEARDED 
BARBARIAN 


LTHOUGH we nv longer bow down to wood 

and stone, and even though we regard it as a 

form of idolatry to worship ourselves, we still have our 
idols. As idols, they are little better than wood and 
stone, and somewhat worse than ours¢lves. Obviously 
the maker is more than what he makes, and to worship 
an image of stone fashioned by one’s own hands is 
clearly folly, whereas to take pride in oneself for making 
it is understandable. The things we create have our 
own limitations with this added disadvantage : that once 
created they cannot of themselves overcome those limita- 
tions. For man’s works are his mirror, and if he worships 
them, he worships what is less than himself—his own 
reflection. There is little difference, therefore, between 
the man who makes himself an idol of stone and he who 
makes an idol of thought. Everyone is well aware of 
the evils of making a God of one’s belly, but it does not 
seem to be understood that it isan equal folly to make a 
God of one’s mind. For both are our servants and serve 
us well when treated as scrvants. But as masters they 
lead us to ruin. Much is said of the folly of allowing 
our senses to run away with us, but it is seldom that any- 
one says the same thing of our sense. In the capacity 
for rational thought we see “the means of Grace and 
the hope of Glory,” and so much do we rely on it that 

104 


IDOLS OF THOUGHT 


we are as much the victims of our ideas as the olan 
of his appetites. That is not to say that they arc n& 
good ideas ; the sculptor may make a good image and 
the glutton may also be something of a gourmet, but 
the difficulty is that the better the ideas, the better the 
image and the better the meal, the greater is the temp- 
tation to idolatry. Modern man has evolved a remark- 
able number of good idcas, but just because they are so 
good he is especially inclined to forget that thcy are his 
own creations and not his creator. It is often said that 
many of our problems in this age are causcd by lack of 
thought ; it would be morc correct to say that they arc 
caused by too much thought, for we deccive ourselves by 
ourown cleverness. In thought wc have found a proccss 
capable of the most astonishing achicvements, just as the 
glutton finds in his belly a source of the most delicious 
sensations ; the achievements and thc sensations are both 
perfectly legitimate so long as they are kept under control. 
But the more astonishing the achievements and the more 
delicious the sensations, the more the mind and the belly 
take on the aspect of divinity; we bow to them in 
gratitude and adoration, whereupon our lives are sur- 
rendered to our servants. Instead of thinking our 
thoughts, our thoughts think us, and in ideas, systems, 
organizations and technique we see the salvation of the 
world. 

It is, however, in religion that the worship of the idea 
attacks us in the most subtle form and that our minds 
are especially apt to run away with us. For the more 
skilfully we work out the philosophy of our religion, 

105 


THE SECRET OF THE BEARDED BARBARIAN 


the more we are tempted to rely on it. It is one thing” 
to satisfy one’s intellect with well-constructed ideas, or 
to satisfy one’s emotions with sublime rites and symbols, 
but quite another to transmute ideas or feelings about 
Truth into Truth iwelf. It is the difference betwcen 
thinking (or feeling) and being ; between talking about 
religion and living it Moreover, it is not simply a 
question of practising what one preaches. One may 
practise for years, in the sense of following out some 
technique, without coming any nearer to the Goal. For 
religion docs not consist in actions any more than it 
consists in thoughts and feelings so long as they are only 
“about it and about.” That is t say, the Tao, the 
Holy Child, is not brought to birth by deep philosophical 
understanding or by any effort of action or emotion, 
although it is necessary and inevitable that one of these 
attempts should precede the birth The birth itself, 
however, only takes place when the futility of the 
attempt has been fully realized, and that realization can 
only come through malsing the attempt. For the 
paradox is that we are living thc Tao all the time, and 
that to search after it is like looking all over the house 
for the shoes on one’s feet. That is to say, the conflict 
between the opposites is maya, illusion. However much 
we may imagine ourselves cut off and separated from 
life as a whole, however much we may imagine a con- 
flict between ourselves and the universe, the truth is that 
we are life, that in every thought and action we are 
unconsciously expressing the Tao ; otherwisc we should 
simply cease to exist. We exist because we live and 
106 


“BECOME WHAT YOU ARE” 


die, because there is a universe as well as oursclves; 
from these opposites and from all others life proceeds 
and life isthe Tao. Therc is no avoiding it, no coming 
to meet it; it fs. 

Thus religion is a matter of “ becoming what we are,” 
and while thought, fecling and action may Icad us sonic 
way towards it as in the Three Yogas, we realize cven- 
tually that in spite of all our cfforts there was rcally 
nothing to strive for, that we have becn at the Goal all 
the timc. But although there is in fact no division 
between oursclves and the Tao, we must undcrstand the 
division before we can understand the unity. To usc 
an analogy, it is like a man who has never secn his own 
face ; he cannot look at it becausc it is his own, and then 
somicone holds up a mirror beforc him. At first he 
thinks someonc clsc is looking at him from the mirror 
and begins to be mystified and worried. At length he 
discovers that it was himself all the time and realizes 
that after all it was absurd to be so concerned about the 
creature in the mirror. In the same way, philosophy 
is the mirror which shows us a difference between our- 
selves and the Tao, which makcs us think about estab- 
lishing a union between the two. Thus we begin to 
search in philosophy for this mysterious Tao, when 
suddenly we find that we have it all the time. But therc 
is this difference between the time before we had the 
moitror and the time after our realization: that before, 
our union with the Tao was purely unconscious, that 
our life was purely instinctive (participation mystique) ; 
when the mirror is held up, an apparent division is made 

107 


THE SECRET OF THE BEARDED BARBARIAN 


—we are conscious but in conflict ; but after the realiza* 
tion the union becomes conscious. Hence the words of 
St. Paul: “ For now we see through a glass, darkly ; 
but then face to face : now I know in part; but then 
shall I know even as I am known.” 

Therefore there comes a time in the pursuit of religion 
when we realize that ideas and words can carry us no 
farther. We see that all our efforts to know the Tao 
are of no avail, for the more we try to know it, the more 
our very effort to know stands in the way. For the 
actual consciousness that one is trying at once presupposes 
a distinction between oneself and the Tao. Philosophi- 
cally we may understand that Tao is the meaning, the 
relationship, between ourselves and the universe and 
between all other opposites, and we know that to live 
in harmony we must concentrate on this meaning. But 
it seems impossible to concentrate, for not only does the 
effort turn our attention back on ourselves, but also the 
Tao itself seems so ill-defined, so elusive, so abstract. 
But perhaps the reason is mainly that we are looking 
for the Tao in the wrong place. Philosophy has to 
express it as a third concept mediating between opposites, 
but this is misleading because it still makes us think of 
it as something outside and apart from ourselves. But 
we have to understand that the Tao is in no way apart 
from the opposites, that, indeed, it is the opposites, but 
the opposites considered together in meaningful relation- 
ship. In short, Tao is no abstraction, no “ spiritual 
essence,” no “‘ inner light ”—all these terms mislead and 
make it something other than oursclves. Someone came 

108 


USUAL LIFE IS TAO 


fo a Chinese sage and askcd, “‘ What is the Tao? "— 
“ Usual life,” he replied, “‘is the very Tao.”—“ If that 
is so,” he was asked again, “ how do we bring ourselves 
into accord with it.”—“‘ If you fry to accord with it, you 
will get away from it.” This is, perhaps, not very 
helpful, but the sage has mentioned something of every- 
day experience, a problem which all have to face. 
This problem is the difference between ‘* What” and 
“* How,’ between what to do and how to do it. That 
is to say, you can teach a person the technique of painting, 
but you cannot teach him how to be a Leonardo. You 
can tell him exactly what he must do, you can provide 
him with all the text-books in the world, but not one 
will teach him the secrct of great art. Inthe same way, 
you may provide him with all the books on religion 
and philosophy in the world but none will teach him 
wisdom. Technique gives one the means of expressing 
what one already has within ; it does not give one the 
thing to be expressed and no artist, musician or sage 
can find any words to convey to others that unknown 
quantity which makes their work more than mere 
technique. And so often does one meet with religion 
that is mere technique, mere observance of the moral law, 
mere intellectual understanding, mere emotion, mere 
fruitless cffort. It scems tragic that there should be so 
much earnest searching and so little enlightenment. 
This problem has faced cvery civilized people, and 
Christianity has provided somcthing near to a solution— 
the gift of Divine Grace, freely given to. all who ask in 
sincerity and humility. This gift makes religion some- 
109 


THE SECRET OF THE BEARDED BARBARIAN 


thing more than technique, and cnables ordinary mortals 
to achieve somcthing of the religious gcnius of Christ. 
Therc is absolutely no doubt that for many this solution 
has been wholly effective ; whcther there is or is not a 
Loving God, certain people have asked Him for Grace 
in this way, and whether from Him or ffom out of 
themselves, they obtained something which transformed 
their lives, which madc their religion real. There 
appear, however, to be two difficulties in the way of this 
solution. The first, which has already been considered, 
is that it rests upon belief and thus excludcs those who 
either cannot believe or believe differently. The second 
is that, though in the cnd the solution may be fully 
effective, the belief complicates it unneccssarily and is 
apt to distort the religious experience. We only say 
this because in Asia there was evolved an equally if not 
more effective solution which does not require any 
particular belief, which apparently produces as near as 
possible a pure religious experience independent of any 
form of theology or philosophy. 

That is not to say that it does not matter what one 
believes, but before the question of belief can be under- 
stood we have to distinguish between theology and 
religion. Religion in itself is a pure experience which no 
form of words or ideas can embrace or convey to others. 
Theology interprets that experience just as science inter- 
prets the experience of our ordinary senses. But 
theology can no more produce the experience than 
science can make us fcel the beauty of a flower. Theo- 
logy cannot give us Divine Grace, and can no more 

IO 


THEOLOGY AS SCIENCE 


describe Grace than physical beauty can be described in 
scientific terms. Moreover, it is as unwisc to mix 
religion with theology as beauty with scicnce, for just 
as our perception of beauty may be dimmed by absorp- 
tion in “reflex actions,” “scnse mechanisms” and 
“nervous responses,” so also our understanding of 
religion may be obscured by prc-occupation with idcas 
about the Trinity, the Last Judgemicnt and the nature 
of the soul. In the words of Prof. Whitelicad : 


When you understand all about the sun and all about the atmo- 
sphere and all about the rotation of the carth, you may still iiss 
the radiance of the sunset. There 1s no substitute for the direct 
perception of the concrete achievement of a thing in its actuality. 
We want conerete fact with a high light thrown on what is relevant 
to its preciousness. 


But thcology is important as scicnce is important. 
For its value is in intcrpreting religious cxpericnce, in 
showing its relation to the rest of lifc, in cxplaining its 
necessity to right living, in deriving from it, as far as is 
possible, a hypothctical explanation of universal mys- 
terics to satisfy man’s innate and legitimate curiosity. 
But, in the course of its history, the Christian rcligious 
experience has become too involved with thcology ; the 
discovery of the fact has been made too dependent on 
belief in the theory. In othcr words, thinking of the 
experience in terms of thcology has distorted it in the 
same way that science may distort our vicw of beauty. 
Our appreciation of Bach is not perceptibly increased 
by an analysis of the audic nerve and the structure of 

1 Science and the Modern World (London, 1933), p. 244. 

L.A. IIL I 


THE SECRET OF THE BEARDED BARBARIAN 


the brain, nor does botany tell us why we find arty 
particular charm in the daffodil. But if we are so 
absorbed in science that we can only think of beauty 
in terms of brain-cells or artistic technique, we shall 
resemble those who are so absorbed in theology, in 
belicf, that they can only think of the religious experience 
in terms of dogma or philosophy. In this condition the 
belief becomes an idol instead of a servant ; we begin to 
fear anything which might shake it, and abstain from all 
mental adventure ; we refuse experiences that contradict 
it, not because there is evidence against them, but because 
there is a theory against them. Yet thought follows 
experience, and it is vain to imagine that we shall be 
made wise for our much thinking. 

Yet whereas the Christian religious experience is 
achieved in terms of a belief about something beyond 
this world, there is a particular Buddlist experience 
achieved in terms of this life as we know it. Christianity 
has found it almost impossible to prescrve its original 
experience from the distortion of mis-applied theology, 
whereas there is still a form of Buddhism which has 
passed on the Buddha's Enlightenment without any 
philosophical or symbolic intermediary. In the end 
both Christianity and Buddhism arrive at the same Goal, 
but the former goes by a roundabout route and the latter, 
in this particular instance, direct ; it grasps the experience 
immediately, understanding it without allowing any ideas 
about it to come between the knower and the known. 
This is perhaps the most unique of Asia’s contributions 
to religion. All other cults present the religious ex- 

112 


THE LIVING BUDDHISM 


Perience in some particular guise, in terms of somc 
special practice or belief outside our cveryday expericnce. 
But this one alone points directly at life, lcaves theology 
out of consideration, and finds the sccret which we 
looked for afar lying right at our feet. This cult is 
known by the name of Zen (Chincse: Ch’an), and it 
is generally regarded as a form of Buddhist quictisin, as 
somcthing of use only to those who can spare the time 
to retire from the world and devote thcir lives to decp 
contemplation. But this misunderstanding is in part 
the result of a mislcading namc, for the word Zen is the 
Japanesc cquivalent of the Sanskrit Dhyana, always 
understood as a state of profound meditation. For the 
word is usually associated with the practice of Yoga, 
with sitting cross-legged in meditation and entering into 
what is looscly described as a trance. Yoga practices 
are certainly found in Zen, but in a strictly subordinate 
capacity. But to understand Zen as a method of imcdi- 
tation is wholly crroncous. Only in recent years has the 
history of Zen becn made known to us, and this is duc 
in the main to the work of Dr. D. T. Suzuki of Kyoto 
who has taken the trouble to trauslate many of its texts 
into English aid to give the West some sort of intcr- 
pretation of a subject which would otherwise have 
remained an impenetrable mystery. 

In the light of Dr. Suzuki’s work there can be no doubt 
whatever that Zen Buddhism has had more influence 
than any other cult in the shaping of Far-Eastern culture. 
The supreme creations of Chiticse and Japanese art did 
not owc their inspiration mercly to the cthics of Con- 

113 


THE SECRET OF THE BEARDED BARBARIAN 


fucius nor cven to the subtle mysticism of Lao Tzu. 
The West knew of Confucius and Lao Tzu long before 
it knew of Zen, not because they were morc important, 
but because Zen in comparison seemed incomprehensible. 
It was regarded as a highly abstrusc system of metaphysics 
which could only have had a limited following. But 
now we know that Zcn was anything but mctaphysics, 
and so far from having only a limited following, it was 
not only the inspiration of T’ang and Sung art but the 
popular religion of the Japancse samurai for several 
hundred years. Far-Eastern culture without Zen is 
almost as unintelligible as European culture without 
Christianity. It is not simply a form of Buddhism ; 
rather it is the fruit of Buddhism, the finak development 
of the Mahayana, the Chincse synthesis of Buddhism, 
Confucianism and Taoism. Buddhism began with the 
Buddha’s Enlightenment, with a spiritual experience 
which he could not describe in words, which was the 
secret of his genius. It developed as a complex system 
of ideas about this cxpericnce and practices calculated 
to achieve it. It was completed in a return to the source 
from which it came, to the purc expericnce freed from 
all its trappings. For Zen is just that Enlightenment, 
or what the Christian understands as Grace, with this 
difference : that whereas Grace has a theological associa- 
tion, Zen is just Zen and cannot be understood in any 
philosophical terms. 

At the beginning of the Christian Era Buddhism was 
gradually entcring into China and was influencing and 
being influenced by the two native religions—Con- 

114 


ZEN 


fucianism and Taoism. In A.D. 405 Kumarajiva was 
translating the scripturcs of Mahayana Buddhism from 
Sanskrit into Chincsc, and in the following ycars the 
pilgrim Fa-hien visited India and collected further scrip- 
tures. There was at first persecution of the new religion, 
but its popularity increased. As Buddhism began to dic 
out through persccution in India, inany of its adherents 
took refuge north of the Himalayas—in Tibct and 
China, until finally in 527 the Buddha’s twenty-cighth 
successor arrived in China, the Patriarch Bodhidharma. 
From all accounts it is clear that Bodhidharnia must have 
been an unusually remarkable person. Other teachers 
might be profound philosophers or models of righteous- 
ness, but here was somcone who had truce religious 
insight, who knew the secret of Enlightenment itself. 
Of Bodhidharma we know little, but his greatness must 
be judged from the cficcts of his teaching. For the 
Chinese must have cncountered this problem of bridg- 
ing the gap between merc philosophy and true Enlighten- 
ment, and in Bodhidharma they saw one who had the 
secret which no words can convey. The Chinese, being 
a practical people, were determined to Icarn this secret ; 
they recognized it as the one thing, lacking which, 
scriptures, ritcs, observances and idcas were just empty 
forms. Hence onc of the stock questions which Zen 
disciples ask thcir mastcrs is: ‘* What was the sceret 
message of the Bearded Barbarian (Bodhidhatma) 2” + 


1“ Barbarian” was of course a term applied by the Chinese to 
all foreigners. The well-defined features and bearded fees of che 
Indians naturally appeared somewhat yrotesque to che Chinuse mind, 


115 


THE SECRET OF THE BEARDED BARBARIAN 


At first there were only a few who were anxious to 
learn this secret, and, when he had obtained sufficient 
proof of their earnestness, Bodhidharma accepted them 
as disciples. One of them learnt the secret and became 
his successor, and so it was passed down through a line 
of six Patriarchs. By this time the fame of Bodhidharma 
had spread, and the last few Patriarchs had collected 
together large communities of disciples, so much so that 
the sixth, Hui Neng, managed to pass it on to several 
others. From that time forward it spread rapidly. Hui 
Neng died towards the end of the T’ang dynasty, and 
in the following periods of Sung and Yiian (713-1367) 
the Zen School attained tremendous strength. This 
period of the supremacy of Zen coincided with the 
Golden Age of Chinese culture when art and literature 
were in their prime and had not descended into the 
elaborate prettiness of the Ming and later dynasties. 
Towards the end of the Twelfth Century Zen passed on 
to Japan, to be followed in a few decades by a similar 
awakening of culture. 


and hence all the pictures of Bodhidharma by Chinese and Japanese 
artists represent him as a fierce and uncouth creature with a bushy 
beard. In his fierce appearance there is, however, something char- 
acteristic of Zen as will be secn from the following pages. 

1 For full details of the influence of Zen on the culture of the 
Far East see Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, Vol. WM, last chap., 
London and Kyoto, 1934; Suzuki, Buddhism and the Japanese Love 
of Nature, London, 1936 ; Suzuki, Buddhism in the Life and Thought 
of Japan, London, 1937; Emmst Grosse, Die Ostasiatische Tusch- 
malerei, Berlin, 1923 ; Okakura, The Book of Tea, Edinburgh, 1919 ; 
Binyon, The Flight of the Dragon, London, 1922; Gatenby, The 


116 


LOOKING FOR THE OX 


* But what was the sccret message of Bodhidharma 
which had such astonishing results? Perhaps it will 
be best to give the answer in the words of the Zcn 
masters themselves. One of them simply answered, 
“ The cypress tree in the courtyard.” Another said: 

“Wait until therc is nobody around us and I will 
tell you.” 

Master and disciple then walked around the ficlds until 
they were alone. Then the disciple asked : 

““ Nobody is around here now ; pray tell mc, O master, 
about the sccrct of Bodhidharma.” 

The mastcr pointed at a baniboo and said, ‘‘ How tall 
this bamboo is,” and pointing at another, “and how 
short that onc!” 

A question to the same cficct is ‘* What is the first 
principle of Buddhism 2” or “ What is the Buddha : ” 
or simply a request for instruction. Thus Master 
Hyakujo (Chinese: Pai-chang) was askcd : 

“ T have been sccking for the Buddha, but do not yet 
know how to go on with my research.” 

Hyakujo replicd: “It is very much like looking for 
an ox when you arc riding on one.” 

Kwaido (Hui-t’ang) was once asked about Zcn by a 
Icamed Confucian. He replied that there was a saying 
of Confucius’ which gave the answer: “‘ Do you think 
Iam holding something back from you, O my disciples ? 
Indeed, I have held nothing back from you.” 


Cloud Men of Yamato, London, 192¢ > Cranmer-Byng, Tle Vision 
of Asia, London, 1935 3 Watts, The Spirit of Zen, Chap. V, London, 
1936; Chiang Yee, The Chinese Eye, London, 1935. 

117 


THE SECRET OF THE BEARDED BARBARIAN 


The Confucian was sadly puzzled, but some time 
afterwards they were walking togcthcr in the mountains, 
and as they passed a swectly scented bush of wild laurcl 
Kwaido asked, “Do you smell it?” 

When the Confucian answered that he did, Kwaido 
exclaimed, “There, I have kept nothing back from 
you!” And at that moment the Confucian understood 
the whole secret. 

Joshu (Chao-chou) was once asked : ‘* When the body 
crumbles all to pieces and returns to the dust, there 
eternally abides one thing. Of this I have been told, 
but where does this one thing abide :” 

Joshu answered : “ It is windy again this morning.” 

The following story is interesting as an cxample of 
the Zen attitude to ideas, to teachings in books. 

Yeh-hsien was asked: ‘“‘Is it advisable to read the 
scriptures or not ?”” 

He replied : ‘‘ There are no by-roads, no cross-roads, 
here; thc hills all the year round are fresh and grecn ; 
east or west, in whichever direction, you may have a 
fine walk.” 

Master Wén was intervicwing a new disciple and 
asked : 

“Where do you come from ? 

“From Ta-yang.” 

“ ‘Where were you last summer ?” 

“ At Ta-kuei.” 

“Where is your home?” 

“ At Hsing-yiian Fu.” 

Suddenly Wén held out his hand and asked: ‘* How 

118 


te] 


“ALL IS PERFECTLY OPEN TO YOU” 


ws it that my hand is so much like the Buddha’s 
hand : ” 

The disciple did not know what to say, so the master 
continucd : * So far your answers have been splendidly 
natural and casy; and what obstructions do you feel 
now that I ask you about my hand resembling the 
Buddha’s :”’ 

“T fail,” said the disciple, “to sce the point.” 

“ All is perfectly open to you, and there is nothing 
specially for you to perceive.” 

At these words the disciple suddenly grasped the whole 
truth of Zen. 

Master Tao-wu was asked by a disciple: “ Since I 
came to you, I have not been insteucted at all.” 

The master replied : ‘‘ Ever since you came to me, 
I have always been pointing to you how to study.” 

“In what way, six?” 

“When you brought mea cup of tea, did I not accept 
it? When you served me with food, did T not partake 
of it? When you made bows to me, did I not return 
them 2 When did I ever neglect in giving you instruc- 
tions 2” 

The disciple was more mystified than ever, so Tao-wu 
said again: “If you want to see, sce directly into it; 
but when you try to think about it, it is altogether 
missed.” ° 

This must seem a peculiar, if not nonsensical, way of 
teaching religion, and yct from records which there is 
good reason to trust and from the cxpericnce of people 
living to-day we may know that it “works.” For 

119 


THE SECRET OF THE BEARDED BARBARIAN 


these apparently fatuous remarks now and then succeed 
in passing on the secret of Bodhidharma, the Enlighten- 
ment which he had inherited from the Buddha himself. 
The result is that the disciple has his whole attitude to 
life changed, that he lives in the freedom and fullness of 
the spirit. Yet it hardly seems possible that these sayings 
have anything to do with religion. For in answer to 
religious questions the masters make remarks about 
ordinary mundane affairs, about the weather, eating and 
drinking, the trees and the flowers. There is little 
reference to the Buddha, to Nirvana or to any of the 
accepted principles of the Buddhist religion. One 
master even went so far as to make the following extra- 
ordinary statement: “ Nirvana and Enlightenment are 
dead stumps to tic yourdonkey to. Thetwelve divisions 
of the scriptures are only lists of ghosts and sheets of paper 
fit to wipe the dirt from your skin. And all your four 
merits and ten stages are mere ghosts lingering in their 
decaying graves. Can these have anything to do with 
your salvation?” In fact, Zen sccms to turn the accepted 
idea of religion upside-down ; whatis usually considercd 
worldly and trivial it seems to exalt ; what is considered 
divine and holy it scems to ignore. Perhaps our first 
reaction, if it is not to dismiss the whole thing as lunacy, 
is to look for some dcep symbolic meaning in these 
sayings. But this will not help, for though symbolism 
is sometimes used it is only superficial. For their mean- 
ing is really obvious, so obvious in fact that it is difficult 
to see. ‘It is like looking for an ox when you are 
riding on one.” The disciple asks a serious religious 
120 


“TO LIVE IS CHRIST” 


Question, expecting some profound answer, whereat the 
master points at something straight in front of him. It 
may be that after some time the master is able to make the 
disciple sce what he means, and at that moment he 
expericnees sifori—the sudden flash of Enlightenment 
which reveals the whole mystery of life. He suddenly 
finds that what he has been seeking in ideas, in books, 
in good conduct, in meditation, has been with him all 
the time, that he has been like a stupid dog chasing its 
own tail. ‘‘ Nothing is left to you at this moment,” 
writes a Zen master, “* but to have a good laugh.” 

St. Paul remarks in the Epistle to the Philippians, “ For 
to me to live is Christ” and in the same way a Zen 
master has sail, “ Usual lift is the very Tao.” Or 
again, another has said that Zen means simply “ Eat 
when you are hungry, sleep when you are tired.” The 
disciples are bewildered and ask, “Is that all?” For 
they are too proud: they imagine religion as something 
abstruse and difficult, that they have to make themselves 
unustally clever and wise and good before they can 
understand it. But Christianity also says that if you 
imagine that the Grace of God is offered to you because 
you are especially good, you sulfer from one of the 
greatest sins—spiritual pride. Zen does not want us to 
think at all about the “1”? who must come into accord 
with the Tao, for this at once makes a division between 
the two. It wants us to understand that to live is Tao, 
and that the moment we seck the Tao we go round in 
circles like the dog after its tail. In fact, it is perhaps 
misleading to bring the idea of this Tao into the matter 

121 


THE SECRET OF THE BEARDED BARBARIAN 


at all, for it so easily becomes a form of idolatry. Thus 
the Zen masters do not talk about the Tao; they just 
demonstrate it. It is as if, instead of telling us to listen 
to a tune, they just play it; one thing is of importance 
—the tune, the Tao, life—and any idea of oneself 
listening or oneself living immediately separates one 
from it. 

Master Goso once said to a disciple: ‘‘ You are all 
right, but you have a trivial fault.” 

The disciple asked what this was, and Goso replied : 

“ You have altogether too much of Zen.” 

“Why,” the disciple objected, “if one is studying 
Zen at all, don’t you think it the most natural thing 
for one to be talking of it?” 

“ When it is like an ordinary everyday conversation,” 
said Goso, “it is somewhat better.” 

Someone who was standing by asked : ‘‘ Why doyou 
specially hate talking about Zen?” 

“ Because it turns one’s stomach.” 

Thus when the master replied to a question, “ Itis 
windy again this moming ” here was an ordinary every- 
day conversation—a remark full of Zen, expressing the 
greatest truth of religion. When we dress in the mom- 
ing, eat our breakfast, shake hands with a friend, walk 
upstairs, this is all full of Zen. It is worth morc than 
all the sacred scriptures in the world put together, for 
what are they other than enormous commentaries about 
and about this one thing which is life: At this very 
moment all of us are living Zen, and the only difference 
between ourselves and the great sages is that they realize 

122 


GOING STRAIGHT AHEAD 


it and we do not. Hence the words of the Zcn poct 
Hokoji (P’ang-yiin) : 
How wondrously supernatural 


And how miraculous this,— 
T draw water and 1 carry fuel ! 


Inthe same way Master Riuzai (Lin-chi) has said : ‘‘ The 
truly religious man has nothing to do but go on with 
his life as he finds it in the various circumstances of his 
worldly cxistenee. Ic rises quictly in the morning, puts 
on his clothes and gocs out to work, When he wants 
to walk, he walks; when he wants to sit, he sits. Le 
has no hankering after Buddhahood, not the remotest 
thought of it. How is this possible: A wise man of 
old has said, ‘If you strive after Buddahood by any 
conscious contrivances, your Buddha is indeed tlic source 
of cternal misery.’ But to think that Zen is just not 
thinking about things is to go wrong again, for choughts 
are just as much life and Tao as anything clsc. Icnee 
when a master was asked, ‘* What is satori 2’” he replied, 
“Your everyday thoughts.” In short, it is quite uscless 
to try to define Zen at all; Zcn is lifc, and to try to 
definc it is to stand away fronvit, to stop while the living 
streain moves on, leaving us high and dry. Here again 
we sce that if our immediate task is to play a tune, thie 
moment we begin to analyse it, to think about ourselves 
playing it, it is lost. Morcover, it docs not help us much 
to find the tune if we begin to talk about it, to philoso- 
phize, to think about the nceessity of devoting our whole 
attention to it. It is here that ideas fail, and here that 
Zen succceds, for Zcn just demonstrates the tune. 
123 


THE SECRET OF THE BEARDED BARBARIAN 


What puzzles us so much when we are confronted 
with Zen is that we are shown the Tao itself and do not 
recognize it when we see it. It is as if we went into a 
concert hall expecting to hear the orchestra discussing 
the right way to play a symphony and were astonished 
to hear music. We may rcad a hundred books on 
Beethoven without having the least idea of his Scventh 
Symphony, and when we hear it we may well be some- 
what at a loss to find any connection between it and 
what we read in the books. In the same way we may 
have a hundred ideas, a hundred feelings, about life and 
yet know nothing of life itself. To return to the analogy 
of the mirror : the Zen master holds a mirror up in front 
of our faces and we do not recognize them, never having 
seen them. Again we see that religion is a matter of 
becoming what we are, and if we are to succeed we must 
forget the becoming in looking at the “ are.” Our diffi- 
culty is that we are at once utterly right and utterly 
wrong ; we say, “I live’ and the Zen master also says, 
“T live.” The differcnce is that we have a barrier be- 
tween the “I” and the “live” whereas he has not. 

But it is useless to pursue the subject any farther 
with words. Words mean different things to differ- 
ent people; two people may mean the same thing 
and yet misunderstand each other through looking for 
each other’s meaning in the words used. If the secret 
of great art cannot be conveycd in words, how much 
less can the secret of Zen. ‘‘It is like drinking water,” 
says a master, “and knowing for yourself that it is cool.” 
We may look all over the world for Zen; we may 

124 


THERE IS NO SECRET 


anderstand that ordinary life is Zen, but we may yet 
fail through looking for Zcn in ordinary life. For that 
is like looking for a stonc in a stone. If we scck the 
Tao in life we miss it because while we arc so busily 
searching for the Tao we miss lifc, which is the Tao. 
Perhaps we arc thicn just to sit still and look for nothing 
atall. But cven if we look for Zcn in that, we shall not 
find it. Zcn says neither “Look!” nor “Do not 
look!” ; it docs not divert our attention from the 
Tao by telling us to find by not sccking, for this is 
only another way of trying to find. To explain life 
only confuscs it, because it is already perfectly clear, 
and the sccrct is that there is no sccrct. 

This, then, is the chicf Eastern alternative to the 
Christian doctrine of Grace. For in answer to the qucs- 
tion “ How shall I find the secret?” it points, not to 
a supernatural Being, but to the life of everyday cxperi- 
ence. Instcad of asking us to cmpty ourselves that we 
may be filled with the Grace of a God in whoni we may 
or may not belicve, it asks us to make the same act of 
relaxation, of “ Letting go,’ to the familiar life in and 
around us. This is to reccive the Tao, for Tao is all or 
nothing and can only be realized by saying “ Yes” to 
all experience. The paths, though different, lead to a 
common Goal, and while the same experience is found 
in perhaps lesser degree in all the great mystical rcligions 
of Asia, only in Zen is it sct forward alone, free from all 
syinbolic and philosophical associations. That it should 
baffle and mystify those who are accustomed to under- 
stand it in the guise of rcligious terminology is only to 

125 


THE SECRET OF THE BEARDED BARBARIAN 


be expected. But its very independence of religious 
forms is its supreme value, for whatever religion one 
may follow one can apply Zen. Whether we believe 
in God or not, whether we are atheists, pantheists or 
polytheists, it is all the same to Zen because our idea of 
the Divine is only a symbol, and Zen passes beyond the 
symbol. For the Divine becomes as natural as being 
alive, or in the words of a Zen master: ‘‘ When we 
really attain to the doubtless Tao, it will be as clear as 
the vastness of the sky. What is the necessity of calling 
it in question then?”’ So many forms of mysticism 
only go as far as seeing in all created things the symbols 
of God. “If thy heart were right,” said Thomas 4 
Kempis, “ then every creature would be a mirror of life 
and a book of holy doctrine ” or, as it is sometimes said, 
‘sermons in stones and God in everything.” This is 
near to Zen, but Zen just goes one step farther. Let 
us remember again that famous Zen saying: “To him 
who knows nothing of Buddhism, mountains are moun- 
tains, waters are waters and trees are trees. When he 
has read the scriptures and knows a little of the doctrine, 
mountains are to him no longer mountains, watcrs no 
longer waters, and trees no longer trees (i.e. they become 
mere symbols, mere appearances, of the One Reality). 
But when he is thoroughly enlightencd, mountains are 
once again mountains, waters once again waters, and trecs 
once again trees.” Before and after Enlightenment the 
world is, as the Italians say, 1a ca so, na ca anno—not the 
same, yet not another. Or as it was shown by a Zen 
master : 
126 


THE MASTER RAISED HIS STICK 


““ How were things before the Buddha came into the 
world :”” 

The master raised his stick. 

“And how were they after the Buddha came?” 

The mastcr raised his stick. 

Jesus said the same thing when he dcclarcd that after 
all our efforts to grow up we must become again as little 
children. Indeed, “ my end is my beginning,” but the 
whole world lies between. 


127 K 


V. THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 


T has been said that there are two kinds of religions, 
those of Enlightenment and those of Service. At 
first sight it would seem that the religions of the East 
belong to the former and of the West to the latter, that 
in the meditating Buddha we see the ideal of vast Know- 
ledge and in the crucified Christ the ideal of Love. The 
one appears to concentrate on the creation of mighty 
individuals, to offer man a destiny of which the West 
has never dreamed, and the other to humble the indivi- 
dual in the service of all, just as Jesus washed His disciples’ 
feet. It is curious, therefore, that in the East, where 
religion is supposed to be impersonal, the Goal should 
be an exaltation of the individual, whereas in the West, 
where personality is so valued, the individual must 
account his virtue as nothing beside the goodness of 
God. It would seem that the ideal of the East is to 
become God, and the ideal of the West to realize one’s 
very distance from God, according all that is divine and 
right to Him alone. If religion is a reaction to circum- 
stances, it might be said that the Asiatic is offered the 
destiny of Buddhahood because in ordinary life the 
individual is accounted nothing, whereas the European 
is offered humility because he is naturally individualistic. 
The meditating Buddha is nothing if not dignified and 
regal, whereas in the Ceucificon we see the Christ 
suffering the lowest indignity—the punishment of a thief 
128 


THE BODHISATTVA IDEAL 


among thieves. But such generalizations can only be 
made through lack of knowledge. The West is familiar 
with the contemplating figure of Buddha, but as yet 
it knows little of the Bodhisattva idcal of sclfsacrifice 
beside which the gencrally acccpted meaning of the 
Crucifixion must secm a little pale) As a rule the 
Bodhisattva is undcrstood as just a lesser kind of Buddha ; 
in Chinese and Japanese paintings we sce thesc beings 
standing in attendance round the figurcs of the grcat 
Buddhas, and perhaps this does not help us much to 
understand the tremendous idcal which they represent. 
But the terms Buddha, Bodhisattva and Arhat arc uscd 
somewhat looscly, and to imaginc that they refcr to 
various grades of spiritual attainment is as mislcading as 
to imaginc that the Christ is a lesser form of God. For 
although the idea of a Buddha docs not correspond to 
the Christian idea of God, the Bodhisattva is to the 
Buddha as the Third Person of the Trinity is to the 
First. That is to say, no diffcrence is made in Christian 
theology betwecn the Father and the Son; there arc 
three Persons, but one God, for God is at once the 
Father of the universe, thc Redeemer of man through 
the Flesh, and the Comforter of man through the Spirit. 
To save mankind, God took upon Himself human form, 
suffered all the pains to which that form is subject—even 
death—whercafter He brought it back to life as a sign 
that he would do the same for all men. In short, God 
redeemed humanity by becoming human. For preciscly 
the same purpose a Buddha becomes a Bodhisattva ; he 
takes upon himself a human body and all thc limitations 
129 


THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 


attached to it in order that he may likewise save the 
world. Hence the Buddhist text ; “ In all the world there 
is not one spot even so large as a mustard-seed where he 
has not surrendered his body for the sake of creatures.” 
But before we can understand just what is implied 
by the Bodhisattva ideal, we must rid ourselves of this 
false antithesis between Enlightenment and Service. In 
the first place, Enlightenment as understood in the Eastern 
religions is not something which one can attain like a 
prize for oneself. For of all the dangerous traps in religion 
the most dangerous comes at the end of the search for 
wisdom ; it is the conceit that one has found it. It is 
so easy to deceive oneself into the belief that one is the 
possessor of Grace, of safori, of Enlightenment, to imagine 
that through some kind of spiritual experience one is 
specially unique among human beings. In the second 
place, Service is the corollary of Enlightenment, for like 
all things which arc alive and given to us by nature 
Enlightenment can no more be kept to oneself than a 
candle can be put under a bushel and continue to bum. 
To attain Enlightenment is to pass it on to others or to 
lose it, just as water will become stagnant if it does not 
flow and as blood will clot if it does not circulate. 
Thus the great obstacle to man’s union with the Tao 
is the very thought “I am the Tao.” For just as trying 
to find the Tao separates one from it, so also the idea 
that onc has found it creates again that dualism of “I” 
and‘‘ Tao” which destroystheunion. The reason is that 
the concepts of “ trying” and “ having” both direct the 
attention away from the Tao to oneself'and encourage the 
130 


“YOUR LIFE IS NOT YOUR OWN” 


perilous imagination that one’s effort to achieve ar one’s 
realization of the Tao is an cxaltation of the self. It is 
like two men listening toa symphony, the one directing 
his whole attention to it and thinking of the symphony 
alone, and the other thinking to himself how enlightened 
he is to be listening to such good music. The latter will 
naturally hear considerably more ofhis own thoughts than 
ofthe symphony. Theonesces the Tao directly, whereas 
the other looks at its reflection on himself, imagining that 
hehasthe Tao in its reflection. Yet he loses it just as the 
dog in Asop’s fable lost its reflected meat in the pool. 
Therefore Chuang Tzu tells the following story : 


Shun asked Ch’eng, saying, “‘ Can one gee ‘Tio so as to have it 
for one’s own?” 
“Your very body,” replied Ch’eng, “is noe your owe. Tow 
should Tao be?” 
“If my body,” said Shun, “is not my awn, pray whose is ice” 
"Te is the delegated image of Tao,” replied Ch'ene. “Your hie 
isnot your own, It is the delegated harmony of ‘Tan. Your ube 
viduality is not your own. It is the delegated adaptability of ‘Pao. 
You move, but know not how. You are at rest, bur heow 
not why... . Theseare the operation of che hiws of Tao, Haw 
should you then get Tan su as to have it for your own?” 


It is onc thing to sce the Tao in its reflected glory on one- 
self, but quite another to look straight at it, In Yoyra 
it is taught that in full concentration there prevails a union 
between subject and object, seer and seen, just as in 
listening to music one’s thoughts simply are the tune. 
Hence there isno room for the thought * Jam the tune.” 
Once that enters the tune becomes separate from the 
“T,” and the two wander of intu diHerent: worlds, 
13K 


THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 


Therefore in listening one forgets that one is listening 
but remembers the sound. In the same way, to live in 
Tao is to forget that one is living and to remember life. 
Indeed, “ he that loseth his life shall find it.” 

The very thought that one is attaining the Tao, being 
contrary to the great paradox that one has had it all the 
time, puts one farther away from it than ever. For to 
imagine that one has become the Tao is to deny it; it 
is to forget that Tao is universal, that oneself and others 
have had it always. In the same way, to believe that 
one has, through especial righteousness, earned the Grace 
of God is to blaspheme; for it makes one’s own 
righteousness the cause of the gift of Grace, whereas in 
truth it is offered to saint and sinner alike freely, and to 
it we Owe our existence, not to mention the very capacity 
for being righteous. To think of oneself finding the 
Tao or earning the Grace of God is the supreme vanity ; 
it is given alike to the worms and to the dust. To seek 
after it for oneself is to deny it to them, to deny that it 
is given universally. It is as much an insult as to ignore 
a friend’s gift and to try to make for oneself what he has 
given. As is said in the Tao Té Ching: 

The great Tao pervades everywhere, both on the left and on the 
right. 

By it all things came into being, and it does not reject them. 

Merits accomplished, it does not possess them. 

It loves and nourishes all things but does not dominate over them. ... 


Because it never assumes greatness, therefore it can accomplish 
greatness. 


(Trans. Ch'u Ta-kao.) 
In the same way, he who lays no claim to Tao, who in 
132 


TO CLAIM IS TO LOSE 


fact renounces it for himself, is he who is truly in accord 
with it. For it is by giving it away that we really have 
it, just as Tao is always giving itsclf away. 

If we are to understand the Tao as the relationship, 
the mcaning, the centre of powcr, between the opposites, 
we must avoid the idca that it is in any way apart from 
the opposites. This laying claim to Tao is no morc 
than creating yct another opposition, another conflict. 
For he who imagincs that in attaining the Tao hc has 
conquered the world of oppositcs simply makes himsclf 
its victim; he scts himsclf up as God as distinct from 
the world, and this is to fall back into the old illusion of 
the world—that one opposite can triumph over another. 
Thus any thought of victory, of attainment, of having 
in any way surpassed the world of life and death, creates 
again another conflict between onesclf and that world, 
and the curse of Adam returns with all its strength. 
Hencc Buddhist and Taoist sages say that in Nirvana and 
Tao there is nothing to bc attained ; Nirvana is Sanpsara 
and Tao is the Yin and the Yang. Therefore attainment 
is no victory over the world ; it is just sccing the world 
as it iss He who is truly enlightcned claims no victory 
and keeps nothing specially for himsclf at all; he sur~ 
renders himsclf and all tliat he has to the world, and in 
that momient he truly becomes the Tao, for Tao is pre- 
cisely that giving, that passing on, that circulation and 
movement which is life. “* Mcrits accomplished, it docs 
not possess them.” It is only by giving ourselves that 
we can live; whatever is withheld dics, just as the sun 
would ccase to shine if it held back its rays. To live 

133 


THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 


in the Tao is like breathing : to attain it is to renouncé 
it and to renounce it is to attain; to fill the lungs is to 
empty them and to empty them is to fill, for unless we 
are willing to release our breath having taken it we shall 
become inflated till we burst. 

It is of peculiar interest to note how the modem 
psychologist, travelling along a different path, can arrive 
at the same understanding as the Buddhist and Taoist 
sages, to see how, beneath cold scientific study, the ancient 
doctrine of renunciation appears again with all its force. 
For in this lies the full significance of Adler's study of the 
“inferiority complex” and his teaching that most 
psychological disease is caused by the desire to attain 
power over others. Thus he who is especially anxious 
to seem superior is he who is uncomfortably aware of his 
inferiority. In pride, in all special claims for oneself, 
Alder sees the symptom of absence of any foundation for 
those claims. The more one is at pains to cmphasize 
one’s virtue, the less actual virtue there is ; the more one 
emphasizes one’s superiority over circumstances, the 
more one is their slave. Hence cure of this disease can 
only come from renouncing the claim to superiority 
and giving the rights of others equal recognition to one’s 
own. To quote the Tao Té Ching again: 

The man of highest ‘‘ power ” does not reveal himself as a possessor 
of “ power” ; 
Therefore he keeps his “' power.” 


The man of inferior “ power” cannot rid it of the appearance of 
“ power ” ; 


Therefore he is in truth without “ power.” 
(Trans. Waley.) _ 
134 


LAO TZU, ADLER AND JUNG 


If we would bring Adlcr’s teaching into line with the 
Christian doctrine of Grace, here is Parkcr’s translation 
of the samc passage : 


The highest Grace makes no pose of Grace, and for this reason 
really is Grace ; whilst the lower quality of Grace may never divest 
itself of Grace, and yct never feels like true Grace. 


For in these words we have the essence of the whole 
matter; they represent a principle which applics alike 
on every planc—the principle that to attain is to renounce, 
and to renounce is to attain. It is therefore instructive 
to quote the passage translating it word for word from 
the Chinese : 


High T? not Té and thus has Té, low 'Té not lose "I? and chus 
no Té 


One is inclined to feel that the litcral Chinese is far 
supcrior to all “ finished ” translations. ‘@ has no onc 
equivalent in English ; it may be rendered as “ Grace,” 
“Power,” “ Virtue,” “ Wisdom,” “ Enlightenment,” or 
any cxaltcd quality onc may choose, for basically it is just 
the Tao realized in man. If it does not lose ivsclf, it is 
not real. 

But, as might be expected, of all our leading psycho- 
logists it is Jung who has gonc most decply into this 
particular question.1 Whercas Adler treats it in the 
main as the problem of adjusting onesclf to the cxtcrnal 
world, to socicty, Jung looks inwards and applics the 


1 Two Essays ont Analytical Psychology (trans. H. G. and C. P. 
Baynes. London, 1928), Part II, Chap. IV. 


135 


THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 


very same principle to the adjustment between Conscious 
and Unconscious. Having described the technique for 
bringing the contents of the Unconscious to light (see 
Chap. II), he introduces the primitive idea of the mana 
personality. For mana is the occult power of the magi- 
cian, the medicine man, which Jung uses in relation to 
“autonomous complexes,” to those contents of the 
Unconscious which override our conscious will These 
are the powers which impose on us unwanted moods, 
which compel us to act in absurd and irrational ways, 
which are at the root of all those obsessions and impulses 
which no mere act of conscious reason can defeat. The 
primitive projects these psychic factors into the forms of 
gods and demons, whereas civilized man tries to forget 
that they exist, to regard them as mere weaknesses of his 
conscious ego which manifest themselves when he “ for- 
gets himself’ Thus after coming to terms with them, 
after recognizing them for what they are, thcy begin 
to lose their power. They rule us only when we fear 
or oppose them, but if we give them recognition 
and allow them to “ speak” their mystery and strength 
vanish away. The primitive believes that to kill a mana 
personality is to take possession of his mana oneself, and 
in the same way the ego which comes to terms with the 
Unconscious, which overcomes its autonomous psychic 
factors through recognition, deprives them of their mana 
and takes it to itself. But here is the danger, for if the 
ego takes possession of this mana it becomes inflated ; 
in mystical terminology, it conceives itself as God, as 
a great sage or magician who is lord of himself Yet 
136 


THE MANA PERSONALITY 


in this it has only become the victim of another and 
deeper mana personality, another archetype or ‘‘ collective 
image” which is the hero, the powerful man, of all the 
ancient myths. According to Jung there are, as it were, 
hierarchies of these images within the Unconscious, and 
unless one is careful the recognition of the lesser may 
easily become possession by the greater. To identify 
oneself with God means sanply that one has not come 
to terms with the mana-image, with the vain dream of 
being a powerful magician, a master of the world, an 
inhuman superman. For there is all the difference be- 
tween living in God and being obsessed by the God- 
image ; the one is indecd Enlightenment while the other 
is the most pemicious cgoism. Thercfore he who, 
through acceptance of the Unconscious, breathes in its 
mara must also breathe it out; otherwise he must suffer 
spiritual inflation. Jn Jung’s own words : 


If the ego arrogates to itself power over the unconscious, the 
unconscious responds with a subtle attack, in this case with the 
mana personality dominant, the cnormous prestige of which casts 
a spell over the cgo. The only protection against this is the fullest 
confession of one’s own weakness over against the powers of the 
unconscious. We sct up no power in opposition to the uncon- 
scious, and consequently we do not provoke it to attack. 


In short, he who makes a victory and does not surretidcr 
it, becomes obsessed by the victory-idca, the illusion of 
himself asa great conqueror. This arouscs conflict again, 
and he is if anything a little worse off than he was at the 
start. Indced, there is no defeat like Ictting victory 
defeat you. 

: 137 


THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 


This brings us back to the ideal of the Bodhisattva, 
the answer of Mahayana Buddhism to the question, 
‘* Having attained Enlightenment, what then :” In the 
imagery of Buddhism the attainment of Nirvana consists 
in gradually liberating oncself from the ties of the world 
of life and death (Sangsara). While there is any attach- 
ment to forms, any possession by the things of the world, 
man is drawn back to them again and again simply by 
the power of his own desire. Thus death is no release ; 
it is only the exhaustion of the present physical instrument 
of that desire—the body. In time the desire creates for 
itself another body and so is reborn in the world to 
continue to work itself out. For to wish to possess the 
forms of the world is to be possessed by them, to be 
enthralled and bound as if by a magician’s spell Bud- 
dhism claims to be the way of release from that bondage, 
the severing of attachments, and in truth this is not a 
denial of life, but an affrmation of life by allowing it to 
live. For the desire to possess and keep for onesclf the 
forms of the world is to kill them ; they only live because 
they change and vanish. Thercfore the sinccre Buddhist 
is represented as one who, through countless lives, labours 
steadily to dissolve these attachments. Aftcr it may be 
“millions of acons” he at last cuts the final bond and 
attains the threshold of Nirvana, the right to deliverance 
from rebirth, to cnter into cternal rest and bliss. He 
“* possesses nothing and is not posscssed by anything” ; 
he is free to do what he wills ; he has, figuratively spcak- 
ing, slain the magician who had enthralled him, the world 
of form, and now holds his mana. A Zcn master was 

138 


“CAST IT AWAY!” 


asked, “‘ What would you say to one who comes to you 
with nothing :”’ and the immediate reply was, “ Cast it 
away!” This is preciscly what the Bodhisattva must 
do when nothing holds him back to the world ; he must 
cast away his attainment. Thus he is described as being 
presented on the threshold of Nirvana with a choicc : 
either to enter into ctcrnal bliss, or to surrender that right 
and offer it to ‘‘all scnticnt beings”’ for thcir welfare. 
The Bodhisattva is hc who accepts the latter alternative, 
for he is said to vow that he will never accept the right 
which he has carned until the whole universe sharcs it 
with him; he prcfcrs to return to the world and to 
labour again through another vast cycle of lives, undcr- 
going all the pains to which human forin is subjcct, 
in order that the whole Universe may be liberated. 
“Never will I scck nor reccive private, individual 
salvation; never will I cntcr into final peace alonc ; 
but forever, and cverywherc, will I live and strive 
for the redemption of every creature throughout tlic 
world.” 

Hence the Bodhisattvas are somctimcs known as the 
** Buddhas of Compassion,” and in this conception we 
must scc, not the desire of humanity for loving gods to 
help it out of its difficultics, but the logical development 
of Buddhist philosophy—the discovery that Enlightcn- 
ment is meaningless without Scrvicc. The Bodhisattva 
ideal is sometimes described as the revolt of the human 
soul against a purcly cold and abstract philosophy, as if it 
were the effort of Easter man to make the best of an 
inadequate religion. But this is as much beside the point 


139 


THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 


as to say that the softness of the fruit is a revolt against 
the hardness of the branch. Even so, it is a remarkable 
“ best” that Eastern man has made of his religion, and 
it would be nearer the point to say that such a large 
fruit needs a particularly tough branch to bear it. For the 
great renunciation of the Bodhisattva is inconceivable 
unless preceded by the sternest discipline and the most 
absolute disregard of self. As yet it is almost impossible 
for us to imagine what the Bodhisattva’s vow involves, 
for the ideal was brought forth by India in the maturity 
of her spiritual insight and it is not easy for us to under- 
stand the meaning of this sacrifice to those who for 
centuries had been accustomed to the idea of rebirth 
through immeasurable periods of time. What is more, 
whereas ordinary men forget their previous lives, the 
Bodhisattva remembers. If India’s sages were not hum- 
bugs, and if their psychic knowledge is not pure self- 
deception, it is probable that men such as Nagarjuna, 
Asanga, Ashvaghosha and Santi-deva, the men who first 
understood the Bodhisattva ideal were those who were 
most aware of what rebirth involves. Such knowledge, 
however, is at present outside our scope, for we have 
no means of testing its truth. But the importance of the 
Bodhisattva ideal for us, in common with the other chief 
principles of Eastern philosophy, is that it can be applied 
at every stage of our development. For it is a principle 
which concerns not only those who have severed the last 
attachment to this world, but also those who live right 
in the midst of it. In the words of the Hermetic 
aphorism, “ As above, so below,” for the Bodhisattva’s 
140 


THE IDEAL OF NO PURPOSE 


Vow is only the right conduct of life “ writ large”? upon 
a cosmic scale. 

Thercfore so far as we are concerned the Bodhisattva 
ideal involves two things: what the Bhagavad-Gita 
describes as ‘‘ renunciation of the fruit of action,” and 
love for the world in all its aspects, or what has already 
been referred to as ‘‘ acceptance of life.” For just as 
he renounces Nirvana, just as hc works on without any 
thought of the ultimate reward, so to those who are 
bound to the world this must imply action without 
thought of any lesscr reward. In Taoism this is known 
as “‘ purposclessness,” as in the saying “‘ the sccret of life 
consists in using purpose to achicve purposelessncss.’” 
For the Taoist would distinguish between purpose and 
meaning. To purpose he would give the narrower sense 
of merely personal or cgoistic motive, whercas meaning 
can only be realized when there is so close a relationship 
between the ego and the world that the former no longer 
makes plans to outwit the latter. It has been said that 
the perfect act has no result, whiclt is to say that, for the 
doer, the deed and its result are onc, that the only result 
he seeks from his action is the action itsclf rightly per~ 
formed. In mystical language this is known as “ living 
in the eternal Now,” as being detached from both past 
and future. As is said in the Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch : 


If we allow our thoughts, the past, the present and the future 
ones, to link up in a serics, we put ourselves under restraint. On 
the other hand, if we let our mind attach to nothing at all times 
and towards all things, we gain cmancipation. 

(‘ Tan-Ching,” Trans. Wong Mow-lam.) 


141 


THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 


To return to the analogy of music, action with 
** purpose” is like making plans about the sixty-fourth 
bar when one is playing the fiftcenth ; the result is that 
the tune suffers, for to play correctly the mind must 
move with the tune. This is not the same thing as just 
“ living in the present,” which is to say, looking neither 
behind nor forward for fear of what may be seen. 
Rather it is the devclopment of a certain poise which is 
ready for cverything that comes. Thus in fencing, the 
moment one begins to think about the possible moves 
one’s opponent may make, one’s guard slackens and he 
has a chance to thrust home. The attention must ncver 
for a second wander from the movements of his sword, 
and one’s own position must be rclaxed and poised, ready 
to thrust or parry at any moment without having to 
overcome strain in an opposite dircction. Hence the 
great Japanese fencing-mastcr, Takuan, said : 


When the hands are clapped, the sound issucs without a moment's 
deliberation. The sound does not wait and think before it issues 
There is no mediacy here ; one movement follows another without 
being interrupted by one's conscious mind If you atc troubled 
and cogitate what to do, seeing the opponent about to strike you 
down, you give him room, that is, a happy chance for his deadly 
blow. Let your defence follow the attack without a moment’s 
interruption, and chere will be no two separate movements to be 
known as attack and defence. 

This immediatencss on your part will inevitably cnd in the 
opponent’s self-defeat. It is like a boat smoothly gliding down the 
rapids; in Zen, and in fenang as well, a mind of no-hesitation, 
no-mediacy, is highly valued. So much refcrence is made in Zen 
to a flash of hghtning or to sparks issuing from the impact of two 
flint-stones. If this is understood in thc sense of quickness, a 


142 


THE UNHURRIED LIGHTNING 


frievous mistake is committed. The idea is to show immediateness 
of action, an uninterrupted movement of hfe-energy. Whenever 
room is left for interruption from a quarter not at all in vital rela- 
tion with the occasion, you are sure to lose your own position. 
This of course docs not mean to desire to do things rashly or in 
the quickest possible time. If there were this desire in you its very 
presence would be an interruption. 
(Trans. D. T. Suzuki.) 


Thus the mind moves with the opponent’s sword, with 
the music, with life, and right action depends less on plans 
for the future than on correct poise and full awareness 
in the present. Suzuki has said that Buddhism is a 
philosophy of time rather than space, and by this we 
must understand that it is a philosophy of kccping time. 
Or as Cranmer-Byng writcs in his Vision of Asia: “‘Itis 
rather the doctrine of the right opportunity, of acting on 
the inevitable hour, of striking the timcly note that passes 
into harmony with others and produces a perfect chord.” 

Therefore the question of results, of purposes, of striv— 
ing for a reward, does not enter here, for the highest form 
of action is spontaneous ; pastand future do not concem 
it, and when presented with opportunity in the prescnt 
it acts so immediately that there is no room for motive 
or purpose to come betwecn actor and action. But this 
spontaneity can only be achieved when there is considcr- 
able mental balance, for just as in fencing there can be no 
immediate action from an incorrect poisc, so in life there 
can be no “ purposelessness ” unless the will is in accord 
with the Tao. That is to say, “ purposcless” action is 
effected by a pure decision of will independent of motive, 

1 Essays in Zen Buddhism, Ul, p. 319. 
LA. 143 L 


THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 


and the decision is wise in proportion to the will’s 
harmony with the Tao. In the same way, because of his 
accord with Christ, St. Paul was able to dispense with the 
Law, for when he acted, Christ acted. The will is thus 
set free from the struggle between stronger and weaker 
motives for its mastery, and for the first time free-will 
is attained in its fullness. This can only become effective 
when the Tao or Christ is our will, ‘‘ whose service is 
perfect freedom.” But before so great an accord be- 
tween will and Tao is attained, the principle is to accept 
and respond to each opportunity as it comes, considering 
the effect of one’s response upon others and renouncing 
any reward it may bring to oneself. But when accord 
between will and Tao has been achieved, there is no need 
to consider the effect on others, much less on oneself, for 
“Tao benefits all things and does not contest place with 
them” —in short, Tao is love. Therefore this first applica- 
tion of the Bodhisattva ideal cannot be understood without 
the second, his love for the world in all its aspects. 

For the Bodhisattva haskinship, not only with gods and 
angels, but with demons, trees, grass and dust ; all these 
are included in his vow. He is pictured as the saviour 
of the whole animate and inanimate universe, not only 
as the saviour of men, for it is said in one of the sutras, 
“Trees and grass—all these shall become Buddha,” and 
again, ‘‘ When every phase of mind is in accord with the 
mind of Buddha, there shall not be even one atom of dust 
that does not enter into Buddhahood.” For us this must 
mean just the acceptance of the world in all its forms 
and aspects. In the words of the Zen poet Wu-men : 

144 


THE LOUSE AND THE BUDDHA 


Hundreds of spring flowers ; the autumnal moon : 


A refreshing summer breeze; winter snow : 
Free thy mind of all idlc thoughts, 
And for thce how enjoyable is every scason. 


This may scem just the sentimental love of Nature when 
she is pleasant, but, as a sharp contrast, here is a poem 


by the Japancse poet Ryokwan which arises from the 
same feeling : 


O lice, lice, 

If you were the insects 
Singing in the autumn fields, 
My chest would really be 

For you the Musashino prairie. 


In this there is a hint of that peculiar sense of humour 
which the Chincse and Japanese have found in Buddhist 
philosophy, for there is something delightfully incon- 
gruous in the thought ofa louse being a potential Buddha, 
something which lcads onc to believe with Chesterton 
that there is a closcr bond between cosinic and comic 
than the mere likeness of the words. 

The point, however, is that the Bodhisattva regards 
nothing as unworthy of the Tao. He knows that 


The highest goodness is like water. Water is beneficent to all 
things but docs not contend. It stays in places which others despise. 
Therefore it is near to Tao. 


(“ Tao Té Ching,” 8. Trans. Ch'n Ta-kao.) 


Therefore just as the Tao “ loves and nourishes all things 
but docs not dominate over them,” the Bodhisattva 


145 


THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 


accepts with reverence even the lowest of created things. 
In the East this attitude is sometimes carried to what we 
should consider absurd extremes : in Buddhist monas- 
teries not even a rag is supposed to be cast carelessly aside, 
and a usc is always found for what we should consider 
waste material. This attitude is also at the root of the 
curious and delightful Japancse custom of paying kuyo 
(Sk. puja) or homage to a catch of fish, the weeds about 
to be removed from the garden, the cnemics’ dead 
lying on the battlefield and to all things animate and 
inanimate which benefit humanity at thcir own cxpense. 
But cven if these outward signs of respect sccm far- 
fetched to us, the attitude of gratcful acceptance of the 
world, of life in all its stages—spring, summer, autumn, 
winter—is an essential characteristic of thc Bodhisattva. 
Thus Santi-deva writcs in his Bodhichar yavatara (V) that 
the Bodhisattva will be the disciple of all men, whilc 
Asanga says : “ If another does harm to the Bodhisattva, 
he endures with paticnce the worst injurics with the idea 
that it is a benefit he has received. To think that the 
offender does one a service, that is to conduct oneself 
in accordance with thc example of the Perfect Ones.” 
It is perhaps here that we find the closest unity betwecn 
Buddhism and Christianity, for this attitude of gratcful 
acceptance of both good and cvil is onc of the most 
important factors in the Christian life. While the Bud- 
dhist regards all things that come to him as means of leam- 
ing the Tao, as teachers of the Dharma, the Christian is 
thankful even for adversity, seeing in it a mcans of Grace 
sent from God. For in our ordinary life the Bodhisattva 
146 


THE ANALOGY OF BREATH 


is just one who is at home in the world, its pains causing 
him no rancour and its pleasures no corruption. In him 
the attitude of hostility and defensiveness which marks the 
spiritually diseased is altogethcr absent. Indeed, diseased 
is the right word, for even though he has difficulties 
greater perhaps than other men the Bodhisattva is funda- 
mentally at ease. His attitude is relaxed and welcoming ; 
in Taoist imagery, he makes himsclf a vacuum so that the 
whole world is drawn to him, while what he cmpties 
from himself he offers frcely and indiscriminately to all 
who come. It is not surprising, thercforc, that in the 
East calm, deep and casy breathing is considered indis- 
pensable to meditation, for it is the physical analogy of 
the Bodhisattva’s attitude to life. There is no gasping, 
no stoppage, no hostile sniffing, no withholding, for tlic 
breathing of those who are ill at ease with the world is 
always spasmodic and forced, and in slecp thcy lic tense 
and curled-up with the blanket over their hcads. Thus 
in Buddhist and Taoist writings the sage is described as 
breathing “‘ from the ankles” and sleeping “ with legs 
fully stretched.” Like Jesus, 


he is found in company with wine-bibbers and butchers ; he and 
they are all converted into Buddhas. Barc-chested and bare-footed, 
he comes out into the markct place ; daubed with mud and ashes, 
how broadly he smiles !_ There is no need for the miraculous power 
of the gods, for he touches, and lo ! the dead trees are in full bloom. 


1 From the commentary to the Cowherding Pictures, illustrating 
the “ Ten Stages of Spiritual Cowherding,” reproduced and trans- 
lated by Dr. D. T. Suzuki in his Manual of Zen Buddhism (Kyoto, 
1935), pp. 150-61. 

147 


THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 


But “ acceptance,” or even “ grateful acceptance,” is 
in fact too weak a term to describe the Bodhisattva’s 
attitude to life. For acceptance is founded ultimately 
on love, and because the Bodhisattva loves the world the 
realization of the Tao is born between them. Indeed, 
the coldness of Buddhism is no more than superficial. 
There is a familiar proverb that cold hands mean a warm 
heart, and the secret of Buddhism is that though, to out- 
ward appearances, it seems to rise away from the world 
like some vast, hard and frozen mountain, yet, unseen 
to those who live on the surface, it penetrates downwards 
even farther to the burning centre of the earth. For the 


Buddha said : 


As a mother, even at the risk of her own life, protects her son, 
her only son, so let the disciple cultivate love without measure 
towards all beings. Let him cultivate towards the whole world— 
above, below, around—a heart of love unstinted, unmixed with 
the sense of differmg or opposing interests. Let a man maintain 
this mindfulness all the while he is awake. . . . This state of heart 
is the best in the world. 


And again : 


Just as whatsoever stars there be, their radiance avails not the six- 
teenth part of the radiance of the moon, that takes all those up into 
itself, outshining them in radiance and glory ; just as in the last 
month of the rains, at harvest time, the sun, mounting up on high 
into the clear and cloudless sky, overwhelms all darkness in the 
realms of space, and shines forth in radiance and glory ; just as in 
the night, when the dawn is breaking, the morning star shines out 
in radiance and glory: just so all the means that can be used as 
helps towards doing right avail not the sixteenth part of the emanc- 
pation of the heart through love. 


148 


THE PROBLEM OF “HOW 2” 


Yet here again we have to face the problem of “ How 2” 
For it is of little use to make the command “love thy 
neighbour ” a precept to be obeyed by a mere decision 
of the reason. One cannot learn how to love the world 
out of a text-book on religion any morc than onc can 
leam to love one’s wife or husband out of a text-book 
on matrimony. It is another instance of “‘ scek and find 
not,” for love can no more be “ forced ” than Enlighten- 
ment. If we would know the Tao, the only means is 
to think of the Tao and not of oursclves trying to know 
it; in the same way, if we would love the world, the 
only means is to think of the world and not of ourselves 
trying to lovcit. Inthis conncction we may say the samc 
thing of love which Zen says of Enlightcuiment—to 
him who knows nothing of the world, man and nature 
may seem beautiful and worthy of love; when he 
knows a little of the world, man and nature reveal their 
evils, and beauty is seen to have its roots in filth; but 
when he really knows the world, man and nature are 
once again beautiful and worthy of love. Only the 
very few can study the world long and intimatcly without 
being oppressed by its underlying ugliness, stupidity, 
pain and vanity, but the only cure for this despair is to 
follow one’s study through until it comes out on the 
other side. A Zcn master was asked, “‘ What is the 
Tao 2” and answered simply, “ Walk on!” For the 
only way to sce the Tao in life, to love the world, just 
as to concentrate on a book, is to go on looking at it 
until, of a sudden, the whole thing comes. For in our- 
selves we have hidden away all the qualitics of the 


149 


THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 


outside world, in some of us morc deeply buricd than in 
others. It may take long to appreciate the beauty of a 
certain picture or tune, but when, after continued looking 
or listening, its beauty suddenly appears, it has at last 
called out the kindred quality in ourselves. So also, if 
we see it as ugly, it is because of thc kindred uglincss in 
ourselves. When this is understood we can truly say, 
humani nihil ame alienum puto. For we find that our own 
souls arc, as it were, mirrors of the world and, conversely, 
that in looking intently at the world we scc our own 
reflections, partly beautiful, partly ugly. Even then we 
have to go on looking at both until we can love the 
ugliness in both as well as the beauty. For there is just 
this difference between ugliness and sin: that whereas 
the ugliness of dirt is necessary for the beauty of the 
flower, sin is to put the flower in the dirt and thc roots 
in the air. To love uglincss is to put it in its proper 
place, and then sin vanishes of itsclf. To put it in its 
proper place is to give it meaning, and the inverted plant 
is the absence of mcaning. Now meaning is Tao, and 
while all other creatures live unconsciously in accord 
with it, man alone, having consciousness, sins through 
setting himself against it. For only man would or could 
plant a tree with its roots in the air. Thus man has 
rightly been called “ that great orphan,” but in time he 
will return to his Father, for “ prodigal” would be a 
better word. But in the parable it was the prodigal for 
whom the fatted calf was slain, for only he who has 
sinned can know the full depth of his Father’s love. 
Before one can unite, one must first separatc ; before one 
150 


ROOTS IN THE AIR 


tan know one’s own face, one must first look in a mirror, 
and go on looking until it is understood that face and 
reflection are one ; before one can appreciate the Tao, 
one must first lose it. For the meaning means nothing 
to us until we know its value. “ Likewise joy shall be 
in heaven over one sinncr that repenteth, more than 
over ninety and ninc just persons, which need no repent- 
ance.” 

What is truc of the Bodhisattva is true also of the 
Christ, if we read correctly the symbol ofhislife. For the 
Nativity is mcaningless without the Crucifixion ; the Holy 
Child is an abomination unless he surrenders his lordship 
over the world. That isto say, when the Tao is brought 
to birth it is no Tao at all if it is considered as somcthiing 
apart from the world of oppositcs, as somcthing, having 
which, we can claim superiority to that world. For if 
we discriminate between ordinary life and the Tao, we 
create simply anothcr pair of conflicting opposites. Thus 
when we overcome the discord betwcen ourselves and 
the external world, between plcasurc and pain, life and 
death, good and evil, through thc realization of the 
Tao, we must renounce our victory remembering that 


Tao 


. acts without depending upon them (the things of the world), 
and raises without lording it over them. 
When merits are accomplished it does not lay claim to them. 
Because it docs not lay claim to them, therefore it docs not lose them. 
(“Tao Té Ching,” 51. Trans. Ch’ Ta-kao.) » 


1 In other translations the last two sentences will be found at the 
end of Chapter IL 


151 


THE GREAT RENUNCIATION 


Therefore, although his Divine Incarnation gave him 
power over the world, to become a Messiah and found 
an earthly kingdom, Christ didnot claimit. But because 
he surrendered kingship and accepted the death of a 
thicf, his power became real, and this is the meaning of 
the Resurrection. Yet we must not understand his 
surrender of kingship simply as the surrender of dominion 
over the Jews, or even of the destiny of a Julius Caesar 
.or an Alexander. For if we would grasp the full mean- 
ing, the “ carthly kingdom ’’ must mean morc than that. 
The Buddhist who does not renounce his Nirvana be- 
comes, in the deepest sense, an earthly king, for he has 
done no more than to claim victory over the world, to 
possess himself of its powcr, to become inflated with its 
mana. But in truth he has not overcome the world at 
all, for in claiming victory, victory has claimed him and 
involved him in the worst of all conflicts—the conflict 
between victor and vanquished. But Christ could only 
say, ‘I have overcome the world” because he was not 
its conqueror but its Saviour, and only the Bodhisattva 
has Nirvana because he does not make it in any way 
different from the world of life and death, because he 
renounces it for the salvation of all beings that live and 
die. 

Therefore it may have seemed to many that God might 
have redeemed the world simply by the exercise of 
Divine magic, by cntering into the souls of men by 
storm. But though this is the way of the King, it is not 
the way of the Saviour, for thc Saviour redeems the 
world by accepting it, by loving it however great its evil 

152 


THE SUPREME PARADOX 


For this reason Christ did not claim dominion; he 
hallowed humanity by becoming human, and pain by 
suffering it in its keenest form. Thus the Cross which 
was once the symbol of contempt, of punished crime, 
has become the symbol of divinity, and in the Crucifix 
we may see two things: firstly, that the Divine Son 
accepts the whole of lifc, even the fate of malefactors, 
and secondly, that the living form of Tao, the Incarnate 
Word, is glorificd by being spread and nailed upon the 
archaic symbol of the opposites. And over his hcad were 
placed the words: ‘Jesus Natus Rex Iudacoruim,” to 
which the Jews objected, saying that he was not their king 
but only claimed to be. But the whole meaning of his 
life was that he renounced that claim, and whether or not 
Pilate knew this, whether he saw that Christ by renounc- 
ing kingship was truly king, or whether he wrote those 
words mercly to show his contempt for the Jews, know- 
ing or unknowing hc stated the very truth and the 
supreme paradox. For by giving the highest title to 
the figure of the Jowest wretch Pilate completed the 
symbol, and through stubborn contempt or decp insight 
refused any change, saying, “ What I have written, I 
have written.” 


153 


CONCLUSION 


O write of the deepest principles of life is to be 
reminded always of a chain: if one link is raised 

all the others follow. For one cannot understand the 
things of the spirit by separating lifc into bits and pieces, 
and no part can be seen truly unless at thc same time one 
has regard for the whole. As life is such a chain, so also 
are Christianity and the religions of the East. The Fall 
cannot well be thought of apart from the Incamation and 
Crucifixion, while the pairs of opposites are likewise 
meaningless without the Tao which binds them. Thcere- 
fore each chaptcr in this book has in some measure 
necessarily overlapped the others. To usc the language 
of music, they have been less the distinct movements of 
a symphony than a number of variations on a theme, 
which is the Middle Way, the Tao, the Christ, thc Mean- 
ing or the Reconciling Principle of reason and nature, 
good and evil, man and the universc, and of all those 
opposites upon which the movement of life depends. 
In order to grasp the problems occasioned by the conflict 
between these various opposites we have consulted the 
wisdom of the two great divisions of humanity—East 
and West. We have discussed Christianity, Psychology, 
Buddhism, Taoism and Vedanta in onc anothcr’s terms. 
But our object was neither simply to compare, nor yet 
to prove that these seemingly different faiths are in fact 
one. In the union of man and woman which produces 


154 


CONCLUSION 


the child each remains different but, by reason of the 
child, is given greater meaning. In the samc way our 
object has not been to discuss the wisdom of the East 
and the West separately, nor even to compare them 
standing in isolation. It has been to show how both 
may be transformed, not just by contact with one another, 
but by reason of the fruit of contact. Ii other words, 
it has becn to bring them together and to think of cach 
in the light of the mcaning given to it by the results 
of that union. 

But with those results we do not wish to try to found 
an altogether new philosophy, cxisting apart from the 
parent faiths. For thc meaning is in no way apart from 
the opposites ; we spcak of it as some new and third 
factor, but tlus may casily mislead if we do not undcr- 
stand that it cxists in the opposites and cannot cxist 
without them. Here we must be carcful of our analogy 
of the child. The child may appear to be something 
new, and we may suppose that when it is born it is so 
much more important than the parents that they deserve 
our attention no longer. But we, who arc Western and 
Eastern pcople, are the parents, and we cannot change 
our nature. As yct we have produced no child race 
which can take to itsclf the child philosophy ; but if 
we can conceive and bear this child philosophy, our task 
is not to substitute it for our own, but to nourish and tend 
it so that it gives ncw mcaning to our own. The child 
depends on its father and mother, and it would not be 
helpful if its parents decided to be children themsclves. 
But in watching over the child they must neverthcless 

155 


CONCLUSION 


become in some degree children themselves ; they must 
play the games of children and enter into the thoughts 
of children, and this without any feeling of superiority. 
What is important, however, is the way in which the 
care of the child transforms and gives new meaning to 
their own lives. That is to say, if we tried to make a new 
religion from a synthesis of Buddhism and Christianity, 
we should fail because our absorption in the synthesis 
would lead to neglect of the two vital supports on which 
it must stand. For we ourselves are those supports ; we 
cannot deny our traditions, and the forms and symbols 
of our native religions are deeply ingrained in our souls. 
Thereforc we have not set out to compare East and West 
as one might compare the mental and physical peculiari- 
ties of woman with those of man Nor has our object 
been to amalgamate the two ; it has been to find in this 
idea of the Middle Way a child which gives new meaning 
toeach. We do not ask fora new Religion of the Middle 
Way ; we only ask that Westerners and Easterners should 
think of it, develop it and nurture it, and understand 
it in terms of their own traditions. 

If, therefore, our ideas of Christianity, Buddhism, 
Taoism and Vedanta have erred somewhat from the 
orthodox path, the reason is that we have interpreted 
the meaning of cach in the light of this Middle Way. 
Because this book has been written in the main for 
Western people, we must finally state in brief how an 
understanding of the Middle Way affects Christianity. 
But first we must say that among Christians this Way 
is not wholly new ; in the past many have scen its chief 

156 


CONCLUSION 


significance, which is that the Christian story from the 
Fall to the Resurrection is less important as history than 
as a symbol of what each must experience for himself. 
It is not easy to grasp this fully in the light of Christianity 
alone, and for this reason it is important that we should 
study religions which are psychological, which are ways 
of living rather than ways of belief. For we have to live 
the Christian story, and this is not done simply by re- 
membering its events on the days of the year set apart 
foreach. The task is not so much to think of the present 
meaning of what happened in the past, as to think of 
those past events as symbols of what is happening in the 
present. In this way the Fall becomes our own conflict 
with the world and the Incamation becomes a symbol 
of mutual understanding between the two, of the 
ascent to a position from which we can see both the 
personal and the universal meaning of all that comes to 
us. And lest we should imagine that this ascent has made 
us into gods, into superior beings who have mastered 
the world and broken its spell, the Crucifixion becomes 
the symbol of our acceptance of all those conflicts and 
pains, of our renunciation of divinity. For by this means 
we find that divinity does not consist in our attitude to 
life but in life itself. Thus the Incarnation is the birth 
of this new attitude and the Crucifixion the understand- 
ing that it is no cause for pride. For Ged is no God if 
He stays in His high heaven and scparatcs Himself from 
the worms and the dust. 

But the East does not only help us in understanding 
our symbols. It has something further to offer which 

157 


CONCLUSION 


isreally beyond symbols. We devoted a chapter to Zen, 
and it seems that this is a subject which must be 
approached in a differnt way from any other Eastern 
cult. For it is not specifically Eastern and it does not 
use the alien terms and forms of exotic faiths but the 
language of ordinary life. In substance it appears to be 
the pure religious experience apart from any creed, and 
in form the pure everyday experience common wt all 
men apart from any nation or race. As the supreme 
vision of the mystic which no words can describe, Zen is 
found all over the world. But as a specific cult it comes 
nearer than any other to the bedrock of religion, because 
it points uncompromisingly to our ordinary experience 
of life, telling us to find there what others seek in the 
distant realms of philosophy and symbolism. Ideas and 
symbols are necessary, for their study is like the Prodigal’s 
journcy into a far country. In the end we return to the 
home from which we started, but it comes before our 
eyes 11 a new light, and Zen is just this returning home. 
It begins where philosophy ends, just as historically it 
represents the fulfilment of Buddhism. To avoid any 
prejudice or misunderstanding it is best to remove it from 
its Chinese associations, to forget the label “ Zen,” to 
retum to our own religions and consider this: that 
between the greatest height of spirituality and the most 
ordinary things of the world there is no division. We 
shall study every philosophy, search through all the 
scriptures, consult every teacher and practise all spiritual 
exercises until our minds are swollen with the whole 
wisdom of the world. But in the end we shall return 
158 


CONCLUSION 


to the surprising fact that we walk, eat, sleep, feel and 
breathe, that whether we are deep in thought or idly 
passing the time of day, we are alive. And when we can 
know just that to be the supreme experience of religion 
we shall know the final secret and join in the laughter of 
the gods. For the gods are laughing at themselves. 


159 M 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Notz.—The number of works on Eastern thought 
and mysticism is now so great that the gencral 
reader will require a selection of the more im- 
portant and readable works on each subject. The 
Bibliography is divided into six sections : Gencral, 
Vedanta, Buddhism, Taoism, Yoga and Miscsl- 
laneous. With the exception of thc first and the 
last, each of these is subdivided into two scctions 
—Original Texts and Gencral Works by modern 
commentators. 
GENERAL 

The Pageant of Asia. Kenneth Saunders. London, 1934. 

The Heritage of Asia. Kenneth Saunders. London, 1932. 

The Story of Oriental Philosophy. L. Adams Beck. New 
York, 1931. 

Mysticism of East and West. W.L. Hare. London, 1923. 

Mysticism of East and West. Rudolf Otto. London, 1932. 


INDIA 


Indian Philosophy. Sir S. Radhakrishnan. London, 1929. 
The Legacy of India. Various authors. London, 1937. 
Ancient India and Indian Civilization. Oursel, Grabowska 
and Stern. London, 1934. 
Six Systems of Indian Philosophy. Max Muller. London, 
1899. 
CHINA 
Three Religions of China. W. E. Soothill. London, 1913. 
History of Early Chinese Philosophy. D.T. Suzuki. London, 
1914. 
161 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


The Vision of Asia. L, Cranmer Byng. London, 1935. 

The Historical Development of Religion in China. W. J. 
Clennell London, 1926. 

Confucianism and its Rivals. H. A. Giles. London, 1926. 

The Religions of China. (Confucianism and Taoism de- 
scribed and compared with Christianity.) J. Legge. 
London, 1881. 

Studies in Chinese Religion. E. H. Parker. London, 1910. 


JAPAN 


History of Japanese Religion. M. Anesaki. London, 1930. 
Japan: A Cultural Survey. G. B. Sansom. London, 1936. 


VEDANTA 


Texts 


Vedanta Sutras. Trans. G. Thibaut. First 2 vols. with 
Sankara’s commentary, third vol. with Ramanuja’s. 
London, 1890, 1896, and 1904. 

The Ten Principal Upanishads. Shree Purohit Swami and 
W. B. Yeats. London, 1937. 

The Upanishads. 2 vols. Trans. Max Muller. London, 
1879-84. 

Taittiriya Upanishad (Sankara’s commentary). Trans. A. M. 
Sastri. Mysore, 1903. 

Isha-Upanishad. Trans. Sir Aurobindo Ghosc. Calcutta, 
1924. 

The Mandukyopanishad (with Gaudapada’s Karika and San- 
kara’s commentary). Trans. M. N. Dvivedi. Bom- 
bay, 1909. 

The Bhagavadgita (with the Sanatsugatiya and Anugita). 
Trans. Kashinath Trimbak Telang. London, 1908. 
The Song of the Lord (Bhagavadgita). Trans. E. J. Thomas. 

London, 1931. 
162 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


General 


Vedanta. Sir S. Radhakrishnan. London, 1928. 

Philosophy of the Upanishads. Sir S. Radhakrishnan. Lon- 
don, 1935. 

Vedanta Philosophy. Max Muller. London, 1924. 

Outline of Vedanta. P. Deussen. London and New York, 
1907. 

System of Vedanta. P. Deussen. London, 1912. 

Comparative Studies in Vedantism. Rabindranath Sircar. 
London, 1927. 

Studies in Vedanta. Kirtikar. Bombay, 1924. 


BUDDHISM 
A Buddhist Bibliography. A.C. March. 2204 items listed. 
Annual Supplements published. Includes all works in 
English. London, 1935. 
Bibliographie Bouddhique. Various compilers. Paris, 1928- 
30. 2 vols. 


Texts 
Complete translations of these are long and nuimcrous, 
and thus of little interest to the gencral reader. These, 
however, may be found in thc publications of : 
The Pali Text Society ; Secretary : Mrs. Rhys Davids, Chip- 
stead, Surrey. 
Further translations (of both Mahayana and Theravada 
texts) will be found in: 
The Sacred Books of the East. Oxford University Press. 
The Sacred Books of the Buddhists. Oxford U.P. 
Bibliotheca Buddhica. 26 vols. In Tibctan, Sanskrit, English 
and Russian. Leningrad, 1897-1930. 
Of interest to the gencral reader are the following ‘texts 
_and selections : 


163 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


The Dhammapada. Trans. Max Muller. London, 1898: 
Reprint, 1924. 

The Buddha’s Way of Virtue (Dhammapada). Trans. Wagis- 
wara and Saunders. London, 1912. 

Some Sayings of the Buddha. Trans. F. L. Woodward. 
London, 1925. 

Buddhism in Translations. Trans. H. C. Warren. Harvard, 
1896. 

Lankavatara Sutra. Trans. D. T. Suzuki. London, 1932. 

Vimalakirti Sutra. Trans. Hokei Idumi. Eastern Buddhist, 
Vols. 2, 3 and 4. Kyoto. 

Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch. Trans. Wong Mow Lam. 
Shanghai, 1930. 

The Diamond Sutra. Trans. W. Gemmell. London, 1912. 

A Buddhist Bible. Compiled by Dwight Goddard. 4 
Mahayana sutras. Thetford, Vermont, U.S.A., 1932. 

Manual of Zen Buddhism. Compiled and trans. by D. T. 
Suzuki. Kyoto, 1935. 


General 


The Pilgrimage of Buddhism. J. B. Pratt. London, 1928. 

Buddha and The Gospel of Buddhism. A. Coomaraswamy. 
London, 1916. 

What is Buddhism ? The Buddhist Lodge, London, 1931. 

History of Buddhist Thought. E.J.Thomas. London, 1933. 

Buddhism : its History and Literature. T. W. Rhys Davids. 
New York and London, 1926. 


THERAVADA (HINAYANA) 


Manual of Buddhism. C. A. F. Rhys Davids. London, 1932. 
Die Lehre des Buddha. G. Grimm. Munich, 1925. Eng 
Trans. Leipzig, 1926. 
The Wisdom of the Aryas. Ananda Mettcya. London, 1923. 
164 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


‘Buddhism: its Birth and Dispersal. C. A. F. Rhys Davids. 
London, 1934. 

Outlines of Buddhism. C. A. F. Rhys Davids. London, 
1934. 

Buddhism and its Place in the Mental Life of Mankind. Paul 
Dahlke. London, 1927. 


MAHAYANA 
Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism. D. T. Suzuki. London, 
1907. 
Introduction to Mahayana Buddhism. Wm. McGovern. Lon- 
don, 1922. 


Japanese Buddhism. Sir Charles Eliot. London, 1935. 

Les Sectes bouddhiques japonaises. Steinilbcr-Obcrlin and 
Matsuo. Paris, 1930. 

Essays in Zen Buddhism. 3 vols. D. T. Suzuki. London 
and Kyoto, 1927, 1933 and 1934. 

Studies in the Lankavatara Sutra. D. T. Suzuki. London, 
1930. 

Buddhism in the Life and Thought of Japan. D. T. Suzuki. 
London, 1937. 

Introduction to Zen Buddhism. D. T. Suzuki. Kyoto, 1934. 

The Spirit of Zen. A. W. Watts. London, 1936. 

Zen, der Lebendige Buddhismus in Japan. Ohasama and 
Faust. Gotha, 1925. 

Tibet's Great Yogi, Milarepa. Evans-Wcntz and Dawa 
Samdup. London, 1928. 

Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines. Evans-Wentz and Dawa 
Samdup. London, 1935. 

The Buddhism of Tibet. L. A. Waddell. Cambridge, 1934. 

Initiations and Initiates in Tibet. A. David-Necl. London, 
1931. 

The Religion of Tibet. J. E. Ellam. London, 1927. 

16§ 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


TAOISM 


Translations of the ““ Tao Té Ching’’ 

Ch’u Ta-Kao. London, 1937. 

Arthur Walcy. (The Way and Its Power.) London, 1935. 

E. H. Parker. Reprinted from the Dublin Review. Lon- 
don, undated. 

Stanislas Julicn. (Lao Tses Tao Te King. Le Livre de la 
Voie et de la Vertue.) Paris, 1842. 

C. S. Medhurst. Chicago, 1905. 

Lionel Giles. (Sayings of Lao Tzu.) London, 1926. 

Richard Wilhelm. (Laotse-Taoteking. Das Buch des Altem 
vom Sinn und Leben.) Jena, 1923. 


Translations of Chuang Tzu 
H. A. Giles. London and Shanghai, 1926. 
Richard Wilhelm. (Dschuag Dsi.) Jena, 1923. 
Yu-lan Fung. Shanghai, 1923. 
Lionel Giles. (The Musings of a Chinese Mystic.) London, 
1920. 

The last two are selections. 

Translations of one or other or both of the above, together 
with other texts are: 


The Texts of Taoism. 2 vols. Trans. J. Legge. London, 
T1891. 
Taoist Texts. F. H. Balfour. Shanghai, 1884. 
Taoisme. 2 vols. Leon Wieger.’ Paris, 1913. 
Other texts are: 


Taoist Teachings (Lich Tzu). Trans. Lionel Giles. London, 
1925. 

Das Geheimnis der Goldenen Blite (The Sccret of the Golden 
Flower). Wilhelm and Jung. Munich, 1929. Trans. 
London, 1931. 

166 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Tao the Great Luminant. (Huai Nan Tzu.) Trans. Evan 
Morgan. London and Shanghai, 1933. 
The Classic of Purity. (Ko Hsuan.) London, 1934. 


General 


The Inner Life and the Tao-Teh-King. C. H. A. Bjerre- 
gaard. New York, 1912. 

Chinesische Mystik. A. Forke. Berlin, 1922. 

Lao Tse und der Tavisoms. R. Wilhelm. Stuttgart, 1925. 


YOGA 


Patanijali’s “‘ Yoga Sutra’ 


Rajendralala Mitra. Calcutta, 1883. 
M. N. Dvivedi. London and Madras, 1934. 


General 


Yoga as Philosophy and Religion. Surendranath Dasgupta. 
London, 1924. 

Introduction to Yoga. C. Bragdon. London, 1933. 

Yoga and Western Psychology. Geraldine Coster. London, 
1934. 

Raja Yoga. Swami Vivekananda. Almora, 1930. 

Bhakti Yoga. Ditto. 

Gnana Yoga. Ditto. 

Karma Yoga. Ditto. Calcutta, 1926. 

Swami Vivekananda, Collected Works. Mayavati Mcmorial 
Edn. 

Kunstform snd Yoga. Heinrich Zimmer. Berlin, 1926. 


MISCELLANEOUS 
Psychological Types. C. G. Jung. London, 1933. 
Two Essays on Analytical Psychology. C.G.Jung. London, 
1928. 
Modern Man in Search of a Soul. C.G.Jung. London, 1936. 
j 167 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Der Organismus der Seele (The Organism of the Mind). 
G. R. Heyer. Munich, 1932. Trans. London, 1933. 

Understanding Hisman Nature. Alfred Adler. London, 1928. 

Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology. Alfred Adlcr. 
London, 1929. 

The Ego and the Id. Sigmund Freud. London, 1927. 

Civilization and its Discontents. Sigmund Freud. London, 
1930. 

Psychology and Morals. J. A. Hadfield. London, 1936. 

I and Me. E. Graham Howe. London, 1935. 

War Dance. E. Graham Howe. London, 1937. 

The World of Man. G. Groddeck. London, 1935. 

Creative Understanding. H. Keyserling. London, 1929. 

The Message of Plato. E. J. Urwick. London, 1920. 

Freedom and the Spirit. Nicholas Berdyaev. London, 1935. 

The End of Our Time. Nicholas Berdyaev. London, 1935. 

Concentration and Meditation. The Buddhist Lodge, London, 
1935. 

Seven Symbols of Life. A. W. Watts. London, 1936. 


The above are recommended as important in throwing 
light on various aspects of the main theme of this book. 


168 


GLOSSARY 
Abbreviations: Ch. Chinese; J. Japanese; P. Palit; Sk Sanskrit. 


Advaita (Sk.): ‘‘ Not two.’ The basic principle of 
Vedanta, i.e. that there is only one ultimate Reality. Al- 
though in appearance the universe is dualistic, made up of 
conflicting opposites (dvandva), and though we discriminate 
between ourelves and the universe, the two are in fact one. 
This doctrine is contained in the saying, Tot tvam asi— 
“That (the One) art thou ’’—for the individual is understood 
not just as a part of the one Reality (Brahman) but as Brah- 
man in its entircty. 

Anatta (P.): “ No-slf.” This is one of the “ Three 
Signs of Being” in Buddhism (v. Anicca and Dukkha). 
It mcans that no individual thing cxists as a thing-in-itself, 
as a complete and autonomous entity apart from the rest 
of the universe. Thus man has no soul which is an cternal 
and separate reality. His soul is his “ meaning,’ and if man 
is considered by himself this docs not exist. 

Anicca (P.): “ Not-permanent.” Another of the 
Buddhist “‘ Three Signs of Being.’’ Its meaning is that no 
individual thing preserves its form for ever; forms only 
exist because they are in a continuous state of change. 

Arhat (Sk.), Arhan (P.): The perfect man in Bud- 
dhism. He who has followed the Path to its cnd and has 
attained the state of Nirvana (q.v.). 

Artha (Sk.): The dutics of citizenship—establishing a 
family, gaining a position in the world, and in cvery way 
“ rendering unto Cacsar the things that arc Cacsar’s.’’ This 
term is uscd in the Code of Manu to designate one of the 
three functions of man’s life. (v. Kama and Dharma.) 


169 


GLOSSARY 


Atman (Sk.) : The Self, the Spirit, in man and all created 
things which is onc with Brahman, the universal Self (q.v.), 
in its entirety. 

Atta (P.) ; As used in Buddhism this must be translated 
“the thing-in-itsclf,’ the individual considered as a real, 
sclf-cxdstent and cternal entity. (v. Anatta.) 

Avatar (Sk.) : A Hindu term for the earthly incarnation 
of Vishnu, that aspect of God which preserves the universe, 
as distinct from Brahma the Creator, and Shiva the Des- 
troycr. These incarnations (e.g. Rama and Krishna) appear 
on earth from time to time to teach mankind the Law of 
life. 

Avidya (Sk.), Avijja (P.): ‘ Not-knowledge’’ or 
Ignorance. The condition which creates our bondage to 
the world of life and death (Sangsara, q.v.), which involves 
us in the conflict of the opposites. This bondage is the 
result of not understanding the true nature of the opposites. 
(v. Advaita.) 

Bhagavad-Gita (Sk.): “The Song of the Lord.” A 
portion of the sixth book of the Mahabharata, generally 
ascribed to the Second Century B.c. The Gita consists of 
a number of poctical discourses put into the mouth of 
Krishna, exhorting Arjuna on the field of battle. This is 
perhaps not only the most popular but the most remarkable 
text of Indian mysticism. (Sce Bibliography, Vedanta 
(Texts).) 

Bhakti (Sk.): Devotion. One of the three forms of 
Yoga (q.v.). 

Bodhisattva (Sk.) : Onc whose essence (sattva) is En- 
lightenment (Bodhi). This term is used in Mahayana Bud- 
dhism to describe onc of the manifestations of a Buddha in 
the world of form. For a Buddha docs not retire into the 
ultimate bliss of Nirvana, shutting himsclf away from the 
rest of creation for all eternity. He renounces this cternal 

170 


GLOSSARY 


peace, and appears in the form of a Bodhisattva in order 
that he may help every living creature to attain Enlighten- 
ment. 

Brahman (Sk.): From the Sk. root Brih-, ‘‘ Breath.” 
The world of opposites, night and day, rest and activity, 
pralaya and manvantara, is descnbed as the inbreathing and 
outbreathing of Brahman, the Sclf-cxistent. Brahman 
corresponds in some ways to the Absolute of Subjective 
Idealism, the One Reality of which all separate things are 
appearances. (v. Advaita.) 

Buddha (Sk.): “ An Enlightencd Onc.’’ The name is 
usually applied to Gautama Siddartha, sage of the Sakya 
clan, a prince of royal birth, who lived between 600 and 
goo B.c. He was the founder of the Buddhist rcligion, but 
in Mahayana Buddhism he is sccn as onc of many Buddhas 
who appear on earth from timc to time in order that the 
knowledge of the Law may never perish. Buddha is really 
a title and not a name, and somcetiines it is uscd to designatc 
the principle rather than the person, i.e. the absolute Essence, 
Reality or Meaning of thc Universe. Hence the saying, 
“All is Buddha.”” Thus Buddhahood is an attainment 
which may be reached by all, and a Buddha is not so much 
what the West understands as a God, but a man who through 
countless lives has reached the fulfilment of human destiny. 

Chuang Tzu (Ch.) : Once of thc three principal sages of 
Taoism, the othcr two being Lao Tzu, its founder (q.v.), 
and Lieh Tzu. His date is about 330 B.c., and the writings 
ascribed to him (in which there are many intcrpolations) 
develop the principles of the laconic Tao Té Ching (q.v.) 
witha wealth of anccdotcand analogy which is both subtle 
and humorous. (v. Bibliography, Taoism.) 

* Dharma (Sk.), Dhamma (P.): This word has many 
shades of meaning. The nearest English equivalent is 
““Law,” and its three main senses are: the fundamental 

171 


GLOSSARY 


Law or Mcaning upon which all the processes af life are 
based, the way in which the universe works ; the La ¥ % 
Teaching of the Buddha; as applied to cach individu! 
thing, its function, the law of its being, or its meaning. It 
also denotes onc of the threc stages or functions of man’s 
life as described in the Code of Manu, i.c. the latter part of 
life when man devotes himsclf to the things of the spirit. 
(v. Artha and Kama.) 

Dhyana (Sk.), Jhana (P.) : In Yoga (q.v.) this significs 
a particular state of consciousness attaincd in profound mcdi- 
tation. It may generally be described as the union of sub- 
ject and object in concentration. i.e. When one has con- 
centrated on a given object for a considerable time, thcre 
prevails a union betwcen oneself and that object. This in 
tum gives way to samadhi (q.v.). In Buddhism four Jhanas 
arc enumcrated, being the four states of consciousness to be 
attained before reaching the final Nirvana (q.v.). 

Dukkha (P.): Another of the Buddhist “ Three Signs 
of Being’’ (v. Anatta and Anicca). The usual translation 
is “ suffering,” but this is too narrow, for it involves not 
only physical and mental pain but any sort of discord. The 
saying sabbe sankhara dukkha—* All compounds are dukkha”’ 
—docs not mean that they arc suffcring pain so much as 
that, through ignorance, they are involved in the conflict 
of opposites. 

Gnana (Sk.): The intellectual aspect of knowledge or 
wisdoin. Onc of the three forms of Yoga (q.v.). 

Hinayana (Sk.): “ The Little Vehicle’’—i.e. the lesser 
incans of bringing man to Enlightenment. A term coined 
by the followers of the Mahayana (Great Vehicle, q.v.) to 
describe those who acknowledge only the version of the 
Buddha’s teaching recorded in the Pali scriptures. This 
version is said to be ncarcr to the original tcaching of the 
Buddha than the morc elaborate Sanskrit scriptures. By 


T72 


GLOSSARY 


its own followers the Hinayana is known as the Theravada 
(P.) or “ Way of the Elders.” It is now found in Ccylon, 
Burma and Siam. 

Kaivalya (Sk.): Used by Patanjali (q.v.) in his Yoga 
Sutra to describe the state of complete spiritual freedom from 
the world of form and the conflict of the opposites. 

Kali (Sk.): The bride of Shiva, the Destroying aspect 
of God (Hinduism). Is said to take delight in destruction, 
being the absolute female (i.e. negative) principle. In 
various cults she is worshipped with debascd orgics in which 
human sacrifice is often used. The victims often come of 
their own wish, desiring only complete annihilation. 

Kama (Sk.) : Passion, the emotional nature, or the art 
of pleasing the senses. Onc of the three functions of man 
in the Code of Manu. 

Karma (Sk.): “Action.”” Used also to mican 
“ destiny,’’ as in, “It is my karma that this has happened to 
me,” or in other words, “ It is my own doing.” Both in 
Vedanta and Buddhisin, all that happens to us comes by 
reason of our own condition. We attract certain circum- 
stances to ourselves by reason of what we arc, by reason of 
the results of past actions aud thoughts. The term also 
denotes another of the three forms of Yoga (q.v.). 

Lao Tzu (Ch.): “ Young-Old’”’ or “ The Old Boy,” 
the founder of Taoism, said to have lived c. 600 B.c. and 
to have written the Tao Té Ching (q.v.). Some authorities 
hold that he is only a legendary figure, and Walcy believes 
that his name was only associated with the Tao Ié Ching 
after the Second Century s.c. Usually represented in art 
as riding on a water-buffalo, one of the ficrcest animals, 
which his calm spirit has tamed. 

Mahayana (Sk.): “ The Great Vehicle.” The forin of 
Buddhism now found in China, Japan, Tibet, Mongolia and 
Korea, flourishing in a great varicty of sccts. Originally 


173 


GLOSSARY 


based on the Sanskrit version of thc Buddha’s teaching, its 
chief carly exponents were Ashvaghosha, Nagarjuna, Asanga, 
Vasubandhu and Santi-deva. It compriscs many doctrines 
which, though not found in early Buddhism, are the 
logical development of thc Buddha’s original teaching. 
The most important of these are the Bodhisattva doctrine 
(q.v.) and the Trikaya, the Trinity, or the Three Bodies of 
the Buddha. 

Maya (Sk.): Illusion. The false view of the world 
obtained as a result of avidya (q.v.). 

Neti, neti (Sk): ‘ Not this, not this...’ The for- 
mula describing the negative way of approach to the ulti- 
mate Reality, ic. denying Reality as any particular form. 
(v. Sunyata. 

Nirvana (Sk.), Nibbana (P.): The “ waning out” of 
the flame of trishna (q.v.), of selfish craving, which results 
in liberation from the conflict of the opposites. Nirvana is 
a negative term, but the Buddhist scriptures describe it posi- 
tively as a state of absolute frecdom, calm and bliss. 

Patanjali (Sk.) : The author of the Yoga Sutra, a collec- 
tion of tersc aphorisms on Yoga practice (q.v.), divided into 
four books. He is sometimes regarded as the founderof 
Yoga, but Yoga existed long before his time (Sccond Cen- 
tury B.c.), and it is probable that he was the first to collect 
and arrange its principles in literary form. 

Purusha (Sk.) : The Soul or Self which is the Seer, the 
Spectator, in all actions, thoughts and emotions, without 
being itself involved therein. Ignorance, says Patanjali, is 
the result of identifying the Scer (Purusha) with the instru- 
ments of seeing—the mind, the body and the scnscs which 
together comprise the physical personality. 

Sakayaditthi (P.): The heresy of scparatencss. The 
idea of the soul as a sclf-cxistent reality, separate from the 
rest of the universe. (v. Anatta, Atta and Atman.) 


174 


GLOSSARY 


*Samadhi (Sk.): The state of consciousness achicved in 
meditation which follows after dhyana (g.v.). If dhyana is 
the union of subject and object, samadhi is the state in which 
subject and object are forgotten and only the mcaning which 
relates them remains. Various grades of samadhi arc men- 
tioned in the books of both Yoga and Buddhism. 

Samurai (J.) : The warrior of feudal Japan. They were 
the retainers of the various daimyo (feudal lords), For an 
account of their code of honour (bushido) and their conncc- 
tion with Zen in its influcnce on judo, kendo and other mili- 
tary arts, see E. J. Harrison’s Fighting Spirit of Japan (London, 
1913), Nukariya’s Religion of the Samurai (London, 1913) 
and A. W. Watts’s Spirit of Zen (London, 1936). 

Sangsara (Sk.) : The world of opposites, the alternation 
of birth and death, somctimcs known as the Whcecl of Lift 
(Bhavachakra). Sangsara is the pairs of opposites considered 
apart from the meaning which relates them, i.c. the opposites 
in conflict. As this conflict is illusion (maya), Sangsara is in 
fact Nirvana, and to understand this is to attain liberation. 

Sanyassin (Sk.) : A homeless secker of Enlightenment. 

Satori (J.): The term used in Zen for the sudden ash 
of Enlightenment which somctimes follows prolonged con- 
centration on some problem (ko-an). Satori, however, 
comes at other times as well, and many instances are recorded 
of satori resulting from one of those curious answers to ques- 
tions (mondo) with which Zen litcrature abounds. Examples 
in Chapter IV. 

Sunyata (Sk.): “Emptiness’’ The negative way of 
describing the ultimate Reality. It is called Emptiness of 
No-thingness because it is not any particular thing or form. 
When it is understood that no individual cxists as a thing-in- 
itself, then the whole universe is seen as empty of self- 
existent things. But this is not a denial of the universe, for 
to say that Sunyata is No-thing is to say that it is All-things, 

La. 175 N 


GLOSSARY 


or rather that it is the meaning, the relationship between the 
whole and the parts, neither of which exists without it 

Sutra (Sk.), Sutta (P.): A sacred scripture. In Bud- 
dhism the term is generally applied to the recorded words 
of the Buddha. In Vedanta and other Indian systems it is 
applied to the works of outstanding sages, while commen- 
taries on these sutras are known as sastras. 

Tantra (Sk.) : A “‘ web” or “ warp,’ hence a continuous 
series and hence a rule or ritual. Tantra is found in both 
Hinduism and Buddhism, and though its forms are many, 
it is concerned mainly with the sexual aspect of religion 
There are exalted and debased forms, and all make use of 
magical and symbolic rites and practices relating to the 
generative principle. 

Tao (Ch.): Originally Tao meant “ speech.” Thus the 
first linc of the Tao T? Ching reads: “ The Tao that can be 
tao-cd is not the eternal Tao.’ Many translations have been 
suggested—the Way, God, Reason, the Logos, the Law, 
the Spirit. These fail because the Tao contains a multi- 
plicity of ideas. Wilhclm has translated it as “‘ Meaning ’’ 
and perhaps this is the nearest we can come. Like Dharma 
(q.v.), Tao is used in thrce main senses : as the Mcaning or 
Way of the universe; as the art and science of Taoism, as 
following the Way ; as thc meaning, function or way of 
any particular thing. 

Tao Té Ching (Ch.): “ The Book of Tao and Te.” 
This is perhaps the greatest of all the mystical books of 
China, not only because of its profundity but also because 
of its manner. It is laconic, witty and humorous, and the 
wniter had a most remarkable sense of analogy and insight 
into natural phenomena. The work is usually ascribed to 
Lao Tzu (q.v.), although Waley gives its datc as about 240 
B.c. There is no particular sequence of thought running 
through it ; rather it is a series of aphorisms and observations 


176 


GLOSSARY 


written down from time to time without any attempt at 
logical arrangement. (v. Bibliography, Taoism.) 

Té (Ch.): Like Tao, Té is untranslatable. The usual 
rendering is “‘ virtue,’ but it should not be understood as 
mere observance of the moral law, for Taoism has no moral 
law. Rather it is the Tao working in man, and the man 
of Té is he who has realized Tao in his way of living. 

Trishna (Sk.), Tanha (P.) : ‘ Thirst.’ Although the 
usual rendering is “‘ desire,’ this is too wide a term, for 
trishna is a particular kind of desire : viz—the desire to hold 
on to oneself or any other changing form as an afta or thing- 
in-itself. It resists change, because change removes things 
from our grasp, and hence it is a denial of life. For things 
cannot live unless they change, and cannot even exist if they 
are isolated from the universe. Thus trisha is the desirc 
to isolate and possess certain objects for onesclf, the chicf 
of these being one’s own person. 

Wu-wei (Ch): “Non-action”’ or “ non-asscrtion.” 
This should not be understood as doing nothing, for it is 
the principle of overcoming the world by acceptance, by 
yielding oneself. It is a Taoist term describing the prin- 
ciple of victory by gentleness excmplificd in judo or jrejutsu, 
whereby the opponent is defeated by yielding to him and 
using his own strength to bring about his downfall. Thus 
water cannot be cut, however much it yiclds to the knife ; 
in fact, it is invulncrable because it yields. 

Yajnavalkya (Sk.) : A name which occurs in some of 
the principal Upanishads as the tcacher whosc doctrine they 
record. Nothing is known of him outside the Upanishads, 
but Geden writes, “ Iftlic name represents a rcal individuality, 
and is not mercly a title under whose shiclter many con- 
vergent thoughts and rcasonings have found expression, 
Yajnavalkya may claim a place with the greatest thinkers 
of the world or of any age.’ 


177 


GLOSSARY 


Yin and Yang (Ch.) The female and malc, dark and” 
light, negative and positive principles. A Taoist term for 
the two aspects of the Tao. 

Yoga (Sk.): Literally a yoke or disciplinc. Sometimes 
said to be called a yoke becausc it is the mcthod of joining 
man and the universe. There are three basic forms of Yoga 
—Gnana, Bhakti and Karma, Thought, Devotion and Action, 
being the three main ways of approach to Enlightcnment. 
Raja Yoga is an eclectic form comprising not only thesc 
three, but a fourth, Hatha Yoga, which consists of various 
neuro-physical exercises. The chief treatise on Raja Yoga 
is Patanjali’s Yoga Sutra, while a further cxposition is found 
in the Bhagavad-Gita (q.v.). The object of Yoga technique 
is to discriminate between the real Sclf (Atman or Purusha, 
q-v.) and the false self. The latter is the personality, com- 
poscd of body, mind and senscs, with its three qualitics 
(gunas) of energy, inertia and balance. The former, the 
real Self, uses the false as its instrument, and if the instrument 
is to be employed aright, it should not be identified with 
the user. 


178 


INDEX 


INDEX 


Acceptance of life, xvi, 75, 77, 
148, 152 

Action, 141 

“* Active imagination,” 91 

Adam, Fall and Curse of, 43, 54, 
IOI, 133 

Adler, Dr. Alfred, 134 

Advaita, 58, 60, 63 

Analysis, Principle of, 79 

Anatta, 55 

Anicca, 55 

Antiquity, Classical, 1 

Archetypes, 96 

Arhat, 129 

Aristotle, 3, 7 

Art and Nature, 89 

— Chinese, 31, 80 ff., 113 

— Eastern, 2 

— Japanese, 80, 113 

— Mediaeval and Humanist, 

10 

Asanga, 146 

Atman, $7 

Atta, 55 

Avidya, 24 


Balance, 84 

Baptism, roo 

Beauty, 150 

Belicf, 22, 110, 112 
Bhagavad-Gita, 96, 141 
Blasphemy, 132 


Bliss, 97 
Bodhicharyavatara, 146 
Bodhidharma, 115, 116 
Bodhisattva, xvi, 37, 129,138 ff., 
144, 152 
Boredom, 13 
Brahman, 58 ff. 
Breath, Analogy of, 134, £47 
Buddha, the, 21, 24, $4, 114, 128, 
148 
Buddhahood, 98, 123 
Buddhism, 21, 26, 27, 56, 97, 
115, 143, 146 
and Christianity, 112 
Development of, 29 
and Love, 148 


Calligraphy, Chinese, 81 
Calvin, 45 

Calvinism, 11 

Catholicism, 3n,20, 41 
Catholicity of Eastern wisdom, 


25 

Ch’an Buddhism, 30 (v. Zen) 

Change, 78 

Chesterton, G. K., 58, 145 

Child Principle, the, xvi, 40, 61, 
71, 72ff, 95, 100, 151, 
155 &. 

China, Buddhism in, 30 

Chinese Art, 31, 80ff., 113 

— Mentality and Indian, 84 


181 


INDEX 


Chinese Art, International Ex- 
hibition of, 2, 81 n. 
Chrestos, the, 4 
Christ, the, 43, 68, 70, 73, 77» 
IDD, IOI, I2I1, 128, 144, 
151 ff. 
Christianity, 89, 109, 121, 146, 
156 ff. 
and Buddhism, 112 
and Morality, 68 
Christian Science, 77 
Chuang Tzu, 48, 64, 75, 76, 83, 
99, 131 
Church, the Catholic, 41 
Civilization, 95 
“ Collective image,” 137 
Compassion, 139 
Complexcs, 136 
Concentration, 102, ro8 
Conflict, 53, 78 
of Opposites, 45 
Psychological, 19 
Confucianism, 30 
Confucius, 2, 88, 114 
Conscicnce, 94 n. 
Consciousness, 92, 97 
Cosmic Consciousness, 87 
Cowherding Pictures, The Ten, 147 
and n. 
Cranmer~Byng, L., 143 
Cross, the, 153 
Crucifixion, the, 128, 151 ff., 157 
Curse of Adam, 54 
Cynicism, Taoist, 65 


Damnation, 45 
Death, 78 


Denial of Life, 79 : 
Descartes, I0 

Desire, 24, 55 
Determinism, 12, 14 
Deusscn, P., 6r 
Dhyana, 113 
Discipline, 20, 89, 102 
Discord, 54 

Draina, European, 10 
Dreams, 41, 91 
Dualhsm, 63, 70 
Dukkha, 54 


Ease, Feeling of, 147 
Education, 1 
Ego, the, $3, $5, 93, 94, 102 
the Super (Freud), 941. 
Energy, 100 
Enlightenment, xv, 114, ITS, 
120, 121, 128 
Escapism, 37 
Eschatology, Christian, 45, 70 
Ethics, Insufficiency of, 69 
Eugenics, 1§ 
Evil, 48 
and Sin, 150 
Extraversion, 83 


Fa-Hien, 115 

Faith, Jung on, 21 

Fall of Man, the, 43, 44., 53, 74 
Fantasy, 92 

Fascism, 15 

Fencing, Analogy of, 142 
Fixation, 79 

Flower, Analogy of the, 75, 76 
Free-will, 14, 46 


INDEX 


Freud, Sigmund, 6, 23, 47, 53 
Functions of Man, the Three, 28 
Futurism, 16 


Genesis, Book of, 100 

Glamour, of exotic faiths, xiv 

Gnosticism, 3, 4 

God, 110, 137, 152, 157 

Good, 48 

Government, 65 

Grace of God, 45, 47, 68, 109 ff, 
IIo, II4, T21, 125, 130, 132, 
135 

Greck Philosophy, 3 

Grossc, Ernst, 81 n. 

Guru, 86 


Happiness, 79 

Heaven, 45 

Hell, 45 

Hero, Image, the, 137 
Heyer, G.R., 42n., 76 
Hinayana Buddhism, 36 
Hinduism, 27, 28 

Holy Spirit, the, 101 
Hui-Nong, 98, 116 
Huinanism, 8 ff., 44 
Humour, Buddhist, 145 


Ideas, 105 

Identification and Unity, 87 

Idolatry, 104 

Ignorance, 24 

Illusion, 35 

Imitation of Eastern wisdom, xv 

Impersonality of Easter wis- 
dom, 34 &., 39 


Incarnation, the, 43, 152, 157 
India, 57 

Indian Buddhism, 30 

— Philosophy, 36 

— Mentality and Chinese, 84 
Inferiority Complex, 134 
Infinite, the, 58 

Inflation, Spiritual, 136, 152 
Intellect, xiv, 12, 25 
Interpreter, Function of the, xii 
Ishia-Upanishad, 58 

Islam, 3 

Isracl, Tradition of, 3 and n. 


Japan, 116 
Buddhism in, 32 
Japanese Art, 80, 113 
Jesus, 73, 100 
Jhanas, the Four, 63 
Judgement, Day of, 45 
Jung, C. G., xiv, 21, 23, 83, 84, 
91, 92, 96, 135 ff. 


Kabala, The, 4 n. 
Kaivalya, 96, 97 
Kali, 6 
Kaina Sutra, 29 n. 
Kanaoka, 81 
Kingship, Spirieual, 152 
Knowledge, 128 

and Faich, 27 
Kumarajiva, 115 


Lao Tzu, 49, Tor, 114 
Laughter, 121, 159 
Law, 14, 50 
Levy-Brihl, 87 


INDEX 


Libertinism, 64 
Libido, 18, 24 
Literature on Eastern Thought, 
xi 
Logic, 23, 25 
Logos, the, 72 
Love, xvi, 128, 144, 149 Ff. 
in Buddhism, 148 


Magician, the, 136 

Mahayana Buddhism, 30, 36, 
37 £., 61, 138, 136 ff. 

Mandukya-Upanishad, 59 

Manu, Code of, 29, 88 

Marxism, 15 

Matenalism, 79 

Matter, 100 

Maya, XV, 35, 375 54, 57, 60, 61, 
63,77, 106 

Meaning, 72, 74, IO1, 150 

Mechanical view of lift, 13 

Mediator, Christ the, 71 

Meditation, 97 

Metaphysics, 25 

Middle Way, the, 39 ff., 61, 66, 
154 ff. 

Mind, 98 

Monasteries, Buddhist, 146 

Morality, 49, 64, 66 ff. 

Taoism and, 65 

Mosaic Tradition, 3 n. 

Music, Analogy of, 103, 123, 
124, 131, 142 

Mysteries, the, 4 n. 

Mysticism, Eastern, 2 


Narcissus, Myth of, 11 


Nature, Love of, 145 
Mastery of, 16 
Return to, 88 
Union with, 87, 88 
Neo-Platonism, 3 
“ Neti, neti,” 59 
New Testarnent, 3 
New Thought, 77 
Nirvana, xv, 36, 38, 97, 120, 133, 
138, 141, 152 


Occultism, 99 

Old Age, 79 

Old Testarmerit, 3 

Opposites, the Pairs of, 39, 45, 
52, 63, 74, 108, 133, 151 

Optimism of Humanism, 44 

Organic Philosophy, 27 

Organism of the Mind, 76 

Original sin, 44 ff, and Freud, 
46, 47 

Osiris, 73 


Pacifism, 77 

Paganism, 41 

Pain, 54 

Painting, Far Eastern, 80 

Pali Canon, 37 

Pantheism, 75 

Paradox, Eastern use of, 22 

Participation mystique, 87, 88, 91, 
107 

Passion of Christ, 22 

Patanjali, 89, 93 

Pendulum, Analogy of, 67 

Perfection, 18, 78, 79 

Personality, 35 


INDEX 


Phallicism, 42 

Philosophy, Oriental, 23 
Western, II, 25 

Pilate, Pontius, 153 

Planning of Socicty, 15 

Pleasure, 54 

Poise, 142 

Politics, Taoist, 65 

Possess, Desire to, 138 

Power, 134 

Prayer, 70 

Predestination, 12, 46 

Pride, Spiritual, 121 

Primitive, the, 87, 136 

Prodigal, Parable of the, 150, 

158 

Prosclytism, xii 

Protestantism, 3, 69 

Psychic Faculties, 99 

Psychology, Modern, xiii, 5 ff. 

Psychological trend of Eastcrn 

wisdom, xiv, 23, 25 

Puritanism, 3 and n. 

Purposelessness, 141, 143 

Purusha, 92, 93, 94, 95, 98 


Raja Yoga (Vivekananda), 90 
Rationalism, 8 
Realism in art, 15 
Reality, the Onc, 35, 57 
Realization, 107 
Reason, xiii, 67 

Age of, 15, 41 
Rebirth, 32, 140 
Redemption, the, 129, 152 
Reformation, the, 3 
Regimentation, 19 


Relationship, Principle of, 74 

Relaxation, 89, 95, 102, 125 

Religion and Theology, 110 

Religious expericnce, 6, 110, 
112, 158 ff. 

Renaissance, the, 8 

Renunciation, 139, 141, 151 

Repression, 51 

“ Resist not Evil,” 77 

Resurrcction, the, 70 

Revelation, the Christian, 7, 22 

Rhys Davids, Mrs. C. A. F., 
36n. 

Rhythm, 83 

Rigveda, 57 

Rinzai, 123 

Romans, Epistle to the, 50 


St. John, Gospel of, 72 

St. Paul, 4n., 50, 70, 108, 121, 
144, and Jesus, 73, 

St. Thomas Aquinas, 9 

Salvation, 22, 44, 68 

Sanadhi, 87 

Sangsara, 36, 38, 133 

Sankara, 58 

Santi Deva, 146 

Sanyassin, XV 

Saraputra, 97 

Satori, 121, 123, 130 

Saviour, the, xvi, 152 

Schizophrenia, 19 

Scholar, Attitude of the, xii, 

23 
Scholasticism, 3 
Schoolmen, the, 7 


Science, 5 ff., 110, III 


INDEX 


Secret of the Golden Flower, xiv, 
77, 92 
Sectarianism, Christian and Bud- 
dhist, 33 
Seer and the Seen, the, 91 
Self, the, 38, 56, $7, 93 
the Higher, 94 
Semitic Peoples, the, 2 
Sennon on the Mount, the, 49, 
69 
Service, 128 
Sex, 42 
Shakespeare, 10 
Shinto, 32 
Sin, 50 
and Evil, 150 
Original, 44 ff. 
— and Freud, 46, 47 
Solomon, 13 
Sons of God, 73 
Sorrow, 54 
Spontaneity, 143 
Sufism, 2 
Sumiye, 81, 82 
Sunyata, 61, 62 
Suzuki, D. T., 62, 113, 143 
Symbolism, Christian, 7, 20, 
4 ff., 157 


Takuan, 142 

Tan-Ching, 98, 141 

Tanha, 55 

Tantra, 6 

Tao, 48, 75, 92, 93, 99, 101, Id2, 
106, 107, 108, 109, I2I, 130, 
132, 144, 145, 149, 150, 151 

Looking for the, 125 


Taoism, 30, 48, 64, 76, 79, 84, 
141 

Té, 102, 135 

Technique, Religious, 22, 69, 
106, 109 ff. 

Theology, 110 

Thomas 4 Kempis, 126 

Tree of Knowledge, 48 

Trinity, the, 129 

Trishna, 24 


Unconscious, the, 10, 17 ff., 23, 
53, 76, 83, 9G, 136 

Unconscious Drawing, 91 

Universulity of Zastern wisdom, 
xv 

Upanishads, 38, 56, $7 


Vacchiagotta, 56 
Vatsyayana, 28, 29 
Vedanta, 27, 58 &f. 
Vimalakirti Sutra, 97 
Virgin Birth, the, 70 
Virgm Mary, the, rot 
Virtuc, 50, 101 
Vivekananda, 90 and n. 
Void, the, 62 


War, 19, 32, 77 

the Great, 44 
Water and the Spirit, 39, 100 
Whitehead, A. N., 111 
Will, the, 18, 143 fF. 
Wisdom, 2 
Wisdom Religion, the, 43 
Wonder, the sense of, 13 


INDEX 


Word, thc, 72, 73 Zen Buddhism, 30, 31, 35, 103 ff. 
Wu- wei, 76, 80 142, 158 ff. 
— and Far Eastern culture, 113, 
Yajnavalkya, 57 11g n. 
Yoga, 26, 27 &., 84, 85 f., 89 A, =—and Grace, 114 
92, 95, 94, 102, 107, T13 — not Metaphysics, 114 
Yoga Sutra, 89, 93 — and Symbolism, 120 


Yin and Yang, 133 — Topsy-turvy, 120 


