Edited by 
MARK WATTS 


TALKING ZEN 


Reflections on Mind, Myth, and the Magic of Life 


TALKING ZEN 


Reflections on Mind, Myth, 
and the Magic of Life 


ALAN WATTS 


Edited by MARK WATTS 


a 
SHAMBHALA 


Shambhala Publications, Inc. 
2129 13th Street 

Boulder, Colorado 80302 
www.shambhala.com 


© 1994 by the Alan Watts Electronic University 

This edition published 2022 

The 2022 edition of this book includes minor edits for gender-inclusive 
language. 


Cover art: Philippe Imbert / Pechane Sumie 
Cover design: Katrina Noble 
Interior design: Howie Severson 


All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by 
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by 
any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing 
from the publisher. 


Shambhala Publications makes every effort to print on acid-free, recycled 
paper. 

Shambhala Publications is distributed worldwide by Penguin Random House, 
Inc., and its subsidiaries. 


LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 


Names: Watts, Alan, 1915-1973, author. | Watts, Mark, editor. 

Title: Talking Zen: reflections on mind, myth, and the magic of life / Alan Watts; 
edited by Mark Watts. 

Description: Boulder: Shambhala, 2022. 

Identifiers: LCCN 2021049684 | ISBN 9781645470960 (trade paperback) 
eISBN 9780834844537 

Subjects: LCSH: Zen Buddhism—Essence, genius, nature. 

Classification: LCC BQ9265.9 .W358 2022 | DDC 294.3/927— 
dc23/eng/20220105 

LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021049684 


a_prh_6.0_140193382_c1_r0 


Contents 


Introduction by Mark Watts 
Picture Without a Frame 


The Psychology _of Acceptance: 
The Reconciliation of the Opposites in Eastern Thought and 
in Analytical Psychology 


Mythological Motifs in Modern Science 
Time and Convention: Five Broadcasts 
Biting_an Iron Bull 

Taoist Ways 

Swimming Headless 

Zen Tales 

Zen Bones 


Notes 


E-mail Sign-Up 


Introduction 


In 1937, the twenty-one-year old Alan Watts wrote in an 
article entitled “What Is Zen?”: 


The word zen is the Japanese equivalent of the 
Chinese ch’an, which is evolved from the Sanskrit 
dhyana—usually translated as “meditation.” But it 
does not mean “meditation” as the word is usually 
translated in the West. It is less a contemplative 
exercise undertaken in solitude than a constant 
attitude of mind. It places no reliance on scriptural 
authority, on rites and ceremonies, and it had no 
dogmas or orthodox body of doctrines. Strictly 
speaking it has no teachings as we understand them; 
it is a practice rather than a theory. Creeds and 
doctrines are ideas about truth, and not truth itself, 
and the aim of Zen is to sweep away all formulae, 
symbols and doctrinal substitutes which stand 
between the individual and enlightenment. 

Therefore its methods are, to Westerners, 
somewhat alarming and seemingly irreverent. It 
makes fun of logic; it turns metaphysics and theology 
upside down to make them look absurd. Its 
technique is to jolt and shock people out of their 
intellectual ruts into the highway of spiritual 
freedom. Thus a religious question will often be 


answered with the most commonplace observation as 
to the state of the weather, or even with rough 
treatment such as a slap on the face or an 
extraordinary statement which appears to mean 
nothing.... For Zen is a religion of life, not a religion 
about life. 


“What Is Zen?” was written just a year after publication 
of The Spirit of Zen in 1936. The Spirit of Zen was the first 
of two books on Zen Buddhism by Watts. His second, The 
Way of Zen, played a key role in introducing millions of 
Western readers to Eastern thought in general, and to Zen 
in particular. Prior to 1940 Watts had also begun to speak 
publicly, at gatherings of the Buddhist Lodge in London 
and before other religious study groups in Britain. His first 
lectures, some of which appear in the early chapters of this 
work, were prepared well in advance, and in their written 
form exhibit a style distinguishable from his written works 
of the period. By 1950, however, Watts had become more 
comfortable as a speaker, and he rarely used more than a 
few general notes of subject areas to be covered. By 1960 
he had mastered the ability to speak extemporaneously for 
hours on end, often weaving together the ideas of cultures 
separated by thousands of miles and many centuries. By 
the time of his passing in 1973 Watts had authored more 
than twenty significant books on comparative philosophy 
and recorded hundreds of hours of public lectures and 
seminar sessions. Today many of his books remain in print 
and his lectures are heard on public radio across the 
country on “The Love of Wisdom” series. 

The following chapters present a synthesis of Alan 
Watts’ further explorations of Zen that have been adapted 
from spoken word archival recordings. This is not primarily 


an account of how Zen evolved but is instead a story of Zen 
in life, of insights, tales, and experiences as they were told 
by the author to live audiences over a period of nearly forty 
years. In selecting the lectures to be included I chose the 
talks that embodied the spontaneous and uncontrolled 
aspect of Zen most fully, and which left me with a 
compelling feeling that something extraordinary had 
happened. My thanks to my associate editor Dan Johnson 
and to Jeffrey Hunter at Weatherhill for their assistance in 
the challenging endeavor of translating moving 
performances into written pages. 


“Picture Without a Frame” is the earliest known Alan Watts 
lecture text, probably delivered before the Buddhist Lodge 
in London, circa 1933. 


“The Psychology of Acceptance” was delivered in 1939 
before the Analytical Psychology Club in New York. 


“Mythological Motifs in Modern Science” is another lecture 
text, probably from the early 1940s. 


“Time and Convention: Five Broadcasts” were originally 
broadcast over KPFA in Berkeley, California. This collection 
of original lecture texts, from broadcasts made in late 1954 
and early 1955, was privately published in 1955. 


“Biting an Iron Bull” is the first session from a seminar 
entitled “Inevitable Ecstasy,” given aboard the S.S. Vallejo 
moored in Sausalito, California, in 1971. 


“Taoist Ways” was the first session from the “Taoism” 
seminar at Esalen in Big Sur, California, recorded in June 
1965. 


“Swimming Headless” is the text of the second session at 
the same seminar. 


“Zen Tales” is a lecture from the Japan Seminar, given to a 
small group on tour in Japan in the autumn of 1965. 


“Zen Bones” was a “zenefit” lecture given on March 9, 
1967, at the Avalon Ballroom in San Francisco to raise 
funds for the purchase of the Tassajara Zen Center. 


—Mark Watts 


Picture Without a Frame 


he mind of man makes sense out of life by looking at it 

through frames. Within limits, something can be 
achieved: right and wrong can be laid down; success and 
failure can be determined; important and unimportant can 
be distinguished. By constructing a frame whose 
boundaries are birth and death, we can, within those limits, 
live out a life that appears to be meaningful and to 
accomplish something in terms of time. But a strange 
disquiet arises when we look outside the frame, for before 
birth we are not, and after death we leave only brief 
memorials. Frames are the very substance of rational 
knowledge, for we handle our experience of the world by 
putting it into classes. What “is” is defined by the frame 
that distinguishes it from what is not, and vice versa. 
Motion is defined by the frame that separates it from 
stillness, so that if the frame be removed and we find 
ourselves in a world where all is in motion, the idea of 
motion ceases to mean anything. This is why the logicians 
say that there cannot be a class of all classes, a frame 
including all frames—for a frame with nothing at all outside 
its edges would not be a frame. It would be as 
inconceivable as the color of the eyeball’s lens. 

Within human society we bring order into being and 
make communication possible by means of frames. We 
identify ourselves in terms of narrowing frames of 


reference—as that I am human, male, Caucasian, adult, 
American, professor, and so forth. When the frames are 
larger than human—mammal, organic, existent—they begin 
to lose meaning. The same is true when they become 
smaller than the frame designated by my proper name— 
tissue, cells, molecules, atoms, electrons, et cetera. Yet, 
large or small, every one of these identifying terms is the 
name of a frame, and there seems to be no way of saying or 
thinking what I am except in terms of frames. This gives me 
a peculiarly empty feeling, so that I begin to feel like the 
Irishman’s definition of a net—”a lot of holes tied together 
with string.” 

The curious human mind has always wanted to know 
“what” is inside the frames, and for an answer it gets only 
the names of still smaller frames. In modern philosophy it is 
no longer considered proper to ask what anything is, unless 
you are simply speaking about its class or frame, or unless 
you are asking what it does—unless, that is, you are asking 
for an “operational definition.” But even operational 
definitions—running, jumping, hopping, wobbling—are the 
names of frames, of classes of movement and behavior. The 
problem is that thought and language have no terms except 
frame-terms, and there is really no way of even phrasing 
one’s question so as to speak of what is not a frame. To ask, 
“What?” is to ask, “What frame?” for there are no means of 
saying what anything is save by denoting its class, by 
describing its “difference” from other things, which is 
simply to designate its boundaries, its frame. 

In many schools of philosophy, stray thoughts that 
quarrel with this conclusion are simply outlawed as 
meaningless nonsense. The philosophers must at all costs 
convince themselves that life is composed of frames and 
frames alone, overlooking the fact that frames are “airy 


nothings” in their enthusiasm for the fact that, hollow as 
they may be, they are at least definite. The philosophers 
will also contend that such knowledge amounts to far more 
than a vain effort to catch the wind in nets. After all it is the 
very nature of scientific knowledge; and look what science 
has achieved in the realm of concrete experience—at the 
innumerable ways in which it has made it easier and more 
pleasant to survive in this world as human beings. 

One may wonder how close Western philosophy is 
coming to a realization that the “real material world” 
composed entirely of these frames is a vast net of 
abstractions. This will, perhaps, be difficult to see so long 
as we pretend to be really satisfied with the technological 
miracles of science—so long as the prospects of longer and 
more pleasant lives can distract our attention and keep it 
well within the limits of the frame called birth-and-death. 
But people have never been willing to remain closed in 
boxes for very long, and the wiser orthodoxies have used 
them as wise parents provide playpens for their babies. On 
the one hand, the pen is a safe place where baby can stay 
out of trouble. On the other, there is a proper parental 
pride in seeing the baby grow strong enough to climb over 
the fence. The trouble with so many Western orthodoxies is 
that they have been living inside the pen with the baby. 
They have never allowed those who went outside to return 
unless they promise never to go out again. It is for this 
reason that the great Western orthodoxies, religious and 
scientific, have been strictly exoteric and profane. They 
have never had the secret smile of the parent who lays 
down rules in the hope that they will eventually be 
disobeyed. But that is the smile on the face of the sphinx, 
and on the faces of meditating buddhas. 


To know the universe in terms of nothing but frames is 
almost exactly what Indian philosophy means by maya, the 
idea that all such knowledge is in some sense an illusion. 
The very word is related to our terms metre, matrix, and 
material since it comes from the Sanskirt root ma, “to 
measure.” And measurement is framing: describing, as 
circles are described with dividers; defining, as limits are 
set with rulers; and dividing with hairlines, as minutes are 
marked out on a clock. These make up the frail mesh of 
abstractions with which the human mind tries to grasp the 
world, always, ultimately, in vain. For the sense of 
achievement, whether in knowledge or in action, is 
maintained only so long as one keeps one’s gaze within a 
limited frame. But if the angle of vision is widened in both 
Space and time, we begin to feel a frightening sense of 
futility. It begins to dawn upon us that our knowledge of 
the world and of ourselves is entirely hollow, and that all 
our efforts of muscle and brain have gone for nothing. 

A despair of this kind is the starting point of Buddhism. 
But those who close their minds to it never discover that 
despair has two faces—that the sigh of “giving up the 
ghost” transforms itself into the sigh of relief, of liberation. 
This is, I think, the proper meaning of nirvana “to blow out, 
to despirate.” It is here, too, that we discover the meaning 
of Buddhist and Taoist passivity, of the peculiar wisdom of 
a certain almost indescribable kind of inaction. 

If there is any one psychological problem that really 
baffles the student of Buddhism, it is that desire (trishna) 
or grasping cannot put an end to desire—or, in other 
words, that to seek awakening (bodhi) is to thrust it away, 
that to try to become a buddha is to perpetuate ignorance. 
To imagine that the self can deliver itself is to foster the 
very illusion of self that constitutes bondage. For when 


awakening, the actual vision of reality, is conceived as 
something to be grasped, something to be reached in the 
course of future time as if it were an object of success, then 
it is at once degraded to the level of frame-knowledge. 
Hence the strange insistence of such Zen masters as Rinzai 
and Bankei on the life of “not seeking.” 

In the words of Rinzai, “Don’t have a single thought in 
your mind about seeking for buddhahood.” How can this 
be? The ancients say, “If you desire deliberately to seek the 
buddha, your buddha is just samsara (birth and death).” 
There is no place in Buddhism for using effort. Just be 
ordinary, without anything special. Relieve your bowels, 
pass water, put on your clothes, and eat your food. When 
you’re tired, go and lie down. Ignorant people may laugh at 
me, but the wise will understand. If a man seeks the Tao, 
that man loses the Tao.!11) 

Or, as Suzuki translates the words of Bankei, “If you 
have the least desire to be something better than you 
actually are, if you hurry up to the slightest degree in your 
search of something, you are already going against the 
unborn [i.e., the unframed].”!2! 

It is at this point that the jiriki (“self-powered”) and 
tariki (“other-powered”) forms of Buddhism meet, for 
Rinzai and Bankei are here saying what the followers of the 
Jodo Shinshu, or True Pure Land School, express in other 
terms. According to their view, the notion that a person can 
attain buddhahood by their own effort or contriving is 
sheer pride. One must recognize that one’s own resources 
can lead nowhere but to the naraka, the so-called hells, the 
places of perpetual self-frustration. Deliverance from this 
bondage must come through a complete disillusionment 
with one’s own efforts, in which there is no recourse but to 
trust oneself completely to the “other-power.” This requires 


the total abandonment of all forms of “self-powered” 
thinking, including the concern as to whether one’s faith is 
sufficient or sincere.|/3! 

The difficulty of realizing this total abandonment of 
seeking or “self-power” is that the notion “I must do 
something to get it” is so deeply ingrained that even giving 
up or “not doing” is approached in the spirit of something 
to be done. This is why the Pure Land School insists that 
even concern as to whether one has faith or the power of 
self-surrender is to be abandoned, and why Zen says: “This 
cannot be attained through thinking; this cannot be sought 
by not thinking.” 

This is to say the same thing as when Suzuki quotes 
from the Pure Land mystic Kichibei, “When all the ideas of 
self-power based upon moral values and _ disciplinary 
measures are purged, there is nothing left in you that will 
declare itself to be the hearer [i.e., the one who gives up 
and accepts the other-power], and just because of this you 
do not miss anything you hear.” [4! 

Self-surrender is not, then, a voluntary act, but 
something that happens when one finds themself in an 
ultimate quandary, at a crossroads where every road 
offered is the wrong road, and every choice, even making 
no choice, is a mistake. The function of such Buddhist 
disciplines as meditation and the koan is to precipitate this 
quandary, to exhibit the futility of “self-power” by 
exercising it to the limit. Yet such meditations become 
somewhat farcical when done in order to realize what 
cannot be done, when, as it were, you try to make a catch 
hold of itself “in order” to realize that it can’t. Of such 
artificial efforts to get oneself into this quandary, which 
Zen Calls the state of “great doubt,” Bankei said, “It is like 
a Buddhist priest misplacing his only ceremonial robe, 


which he fails to locate in spite of his most anxious hunting. 
He or she cannot even for a moment give up the thought of 
the lost article. This is a doubt genuinely aroused. People of 
these days try to cherish doubt merely because the old 
masters had it. This no more than make-believe: it is like 
searching after a thing that one has never lost.” !5! 

Our difficulty in understanding such men as Rinzai, 
Bankei, and Kichibei is that their Buddhism sounds too 
easy. To judge from their words, the great buddhas and 
sages realized a state of mind so close to our ordinary 
everyday mind that we seem forced to one of two 
conclusions: that there is nothing specially important in 
Buddhism after all, or that we have _ completely 
misunderstood what they were saying. It seems 
inconceivable that these spiritual giants of the past should 
have gone through all their disciplines and labors for 
nothing, so that in the end all that they have to say is, as 
Nansen said to Joshu, “Your ordinary mind is the Tao, and 
by intending to accord with it, you immediately deviate.” 

But the problem here is, again, one of framework. 
Buddhism was originally no more than the Buddha’s 
experience of awakening. After twenty-five hundred years 
of explanation and discussion it has been so conformed to 
the frames of human thought that our view of what a 
buddha is has undergone a radical distortion. Our very 
natural reverence for these spiritual giants, coupled with 
the intensity of our aspiration to the same state, has 
inevitably made awakening a coveted prize. It has, in other 
words, raised it to the very highest degree of a scale of 
values in which it has no part at all: the scale of success. 
Yet it would be nearer to the point, though still short of it, 
to say that awakening is ultimate failure. 


In the symbolism of the Buddhist Wheel of Becoming, 
the state of buddhahood lies nowhere in the six divisions of 
the Wheel. At the highest point are the devas, the angels at 
the very crown of spiritual success. But, on the circular 
path, high leads to low, and in the depths are the naraka 
realms that represent the extreme of sentient misery. 
Ascent does not lead to nirvana, to buddhahood, but only to 
the temporary deva world. In other words, there can be no 
association of awakening with ideas of attainment, of 
Spiritual superiority, of success, of mastery, or of claims to 
any prerogative. It is only quite figuratively—that is, within 
the misleading frames of human thought—that the buddhas 
are termed higher than Ishvara, higher than the highest 
gods. “Higher” must here be translated as meaning 
“altogether outside the scale of values in which high and 
low have any significance.” 

Yet, on the other hand, the state of awakening is just as 
remote from that envious hostility to greatness, that 
insensitive disregard for the relative values of superiority 
that expresses itself in shallow egalitarianism. This is a 
kind of profane mimicry of the classlessness of the 
buddhas, which is by no means freedom from class, but 
mere antagonism to it. And antagonism is another form of 
bondage. 

The status of a buddha is immeasurable, not because of 
its height or depth, but because buddhas do not measure, 
so are not maya, and so, in a way, do not matter. It is all the 
same word. They are, in Zen language, buji (“nothing 
special”) without affecting to be ordinary. Above all, to a 
buddha it is meaningless to think that he or she is a 
buddha. For there is no “he or she,” no frame. 


The Psychology of Acceptance 


The Reconciliation of the Opposites in Eastern 
Thought and in Analytical Psychology 


B efore I begin this lecture, I must warn you that I am 
going to discuss the most irritating and elusive subject 
in the world. The subject itself concerns perhaps the most 
important problem of humankind’s spiritual life, and I said 
that it was irritating and elusive because it is so essentially 
simple that the moment we begin to grapple with it, it 
becomes unutterably complicated. I am afraid I have been 
guilty of a paradox, but it is said that a paradox is only a 
truth standing on its head to attract attention. There are 
certain truths that have to be stood on their heads before 
they can be noticed at all; in the ordinary way they are so 
simple that we fail to perceive them, and they have to be 
complicated in order to be presented for thought and 
discussion. Our own faces are an example of this. Nothing 
could be more obvious and self-evident than a person’s own 
face; but oddly enough, the person cannot see it at all 
unless they introduce the complication of a mirror that 
shows it to them reversed. The image one sees is their face 
and yet not their face, and this is a form of paradox. If this 
is true of a person’s face, how much more must it be true of 
their innermost self, their soul, psyche, mind, or whatever 
you like to call it? If the eyes cannot see themselves, how 


much less can that something which looks through the eyes 
see itself? And yet this something is, generally speaking, 
the most important and the most predominant factor in our 
lives; it hardly ever passes out of direct or indirect 
consciousness, and yet the moment we try to lay hold on it, 
we find ourselves in a maze of confusion. So peculiar is this 
thing that we call the “self” or “soul” that when something 
goes wrong with it, it finds it so hard to put it right that it 
must resort to the astonishing procedure of visiting a 
psychologist—who is a kind of mental mirror—and with 
them submit to a devastatingly complex analysis that may 
last months or years. 

Therefore, complications inevitably arise whenever we 
approach the affairs of the spirit. To use another 
illustration, nothing could be more simple and ordinary 
than water. But try to grasp it in your hands, and you will 
go on grasping to your dying day, for the harder you grasp, 
the faster it slips through your fingers. Two definitions are 
called for at this point. What is this thing that I have called 
the self, soul, or psyche, and what is meant by a person’s 
Spirit or spiritual life? With regard to the self, we will enter 
into no more complications than are absolutely necessary. 
For the time being, call it just the thing that feels that it is 
“I,” that which perceives and knows, which appears to be 
able to exist in both conscious and unconscious states. You 
refer to it subjectively as I, and objectively as myself. But, 
as to “spirit” and “spiritual” I am wondering whether I 
ought to use such words at all in a scientific assembly. 
Perhaps, though, you will pardon their use if I explain that I 
mean by them nothing occult, supernatural, metaphysical, 
or psychic; nothing, in fact, that is outside the scope of our 
ordinary, everyday consciousness. To my mind, the affairs 
of the spirit concern a certain type of relationship between 


the self and the universe, the external universe of people, 
things, institutions, natural forces, and the like, and the 
internal universe of ideas, feelings, and impulses both 
conscious and unconscious. But what type of relationship is 
this? In one sense, it is a psychological adjustment to these 
inner and outer worlds. In this sense spirituality is entirely 
a matter of adjustment, and has nothing to do with 
supernatural or psychic perceptions or entities, nor with 
anything that we may understand as an occult state of 
consciousness. 

Thus, we may say that there is spiritual growth when a 
person becomes so adjusted to the world that he or she is 
at ease and at home with both conscious perceptions and 
unconscious impulses. That is using psychological 
terminology, but if we were to put it into the language of 
religion, we should say that a person in this condition loved 
and was at one with life in all its aspects. Psychology and 
religion alike exist because, as a general rule, people lack 
this adjustment. They are oppressed by _ external 
circumstances and the uncontrolled whims of their own 
mind; they are involved between conflicting pairs of 
opposites—pleasure and pain, life and death, love and fear, 
good and evil—and their maladjustment consists, 
apparently, in holding to one of these opposites and 
rejecting the other. There is the primary opposition 
between oneself and all that is not oneself, between the 
subjective and objective worlds, and one resists and tries to 
escape from all those things in the objective world that 
Cause one pain or threaten their existence, and here the 
complications begin. I am not going to inquire into the 
original cause of this condition of suffering, this resistance 
to life that seems to increase as humankind ascends from 
the primitive state; for the purpose of this discussion we 


must just take it as existing, and leave other questions to 
academic theologians. 

Therefore, we must begin with the premise that in one 
way or another we suffer from this opposition between 
ourselves and the world. Disliking this state of affairs, we 
create an ideal called happiness, which may mean one of 
two things: either the elimination of all those things about 
us that cause pain or else a state of mind of psychological 
adaptation, whereby we can accept pain and so conquer it. 
That is not to say that this acceptance removes pain- 
causing events; it is intended rather to remove our fear of 
them. Religions have come into being to create both these 
kinds of happiness, and religion in its most elementary 
form is an affair of magic designed to remove pain-causing 
events. This is also the purpose of physical science, and, as 
a rule, when one fails to achieve this purpose, they resort 
to some emotional, sensual, or intellectual stimulus that 
enables them to forget these events in the manner of the 
ostrich, who tries to avoid their enemy by burying their 
own head so that they cannot see them. But there are forms 
of religion, and now forms of science, that seek neither to 
remove painful events nor to hide from them. These forms 
of religion are mainly Asian in origin, and in science we 
find a similar purpose. The important forms of Eastern 
religion have a like purpose, but there you will not find any 
formulated concept of the unconscious as we understand it. 
The reason is that ancient practitioners of yoga in all its 
many forms were conscious of these mental contents that 
are unconscious to us. Thus, you will find in many yoga 
texts that one of the first exercises in meditation is to relax 
the mind in such a way that all its contents gradually rise to 
the surface; the texts go on to say that you will find yourself 


thinking of all kinds of terrible things, things that you never 
dreamed could exist in your soul. 

But now let us go back and consider humankind in this 
state of opposition and consequent suffering. In their 
attempts to extricate themselves from it, people become 
involved in a terrible complexity. They fear pain, death, 
deprivation, and all forms of disease. Desiring to escape 
from these things, they fear them all the more; desiring to 
escape from this fear, they become afraid of fear, and then 
afraid of the fear of fear until they find themselves running 
away into an infinite regression, so that they become 
progressively removed from basic facts. This business of 
infinite regression is really the key to my whole argument, 
for this is in fact the fundamental program of psychology 
and religion alike, the thing that involves the simplicity of 
humankind’s spiritual life in such wild complications. 
Infinite regression is primarily the process of a person 
trying to discover themself and change and know themself. 
It is as if they were trying to lift themself up by their own 
belt, as if they were spinning ‘round in circles to try and 
see their own eyes, and the faster they spin, the faster their 
eyes run away. It is rather like the old story of the donkey 
who has a carrot dangled before them from a stick that is 
fastened to their collar; the more they chase it, the more it 
runs away, and this is infinite regression. 

From this point, I want to try and describe a process of 
psychological development, taking analytical psychology 
and certain forms of Eastern religion hand in hand as far as 
they will go. I say “as far as they will go” because I believe 
there is something new that the East can contribute to this 
process, something so essentially simple that it is generally 
overlooked, something that you may think me quite crazy 
for introducing at all. It is a principle that one either 


understands or ridicules, that is seen either as a 
tremendous truth or else as something that is as 
incomprehensible as it is absurd. In the words of the 
Chinese sage Lao-tzu: 


When the superior man hears of the Tao, 

He puts it into practice. 

But when the inferior man hears of it, he laughs at it. 

Indeed, it would not be the true Tao if he did not 
laugh. 

So please do not say that you have not been warned! 


But first we must lead up to this by considering the 
whole matter of acceptance as a principle of psychological 
healing. Since the birth of psychology, we have heard much 
about the ill effects of escaping from life—a phrase that 
may mean almost anything in accordance with what you 
understand by life, and it can be quite plausibly argued that 
almost any form of human activity is such an escape. Thus, 
for purposes of discussion, we must temporarily limit its 
meaning to the general reaction of human beings to any 
form of mental or physical suffering. We shall have to limit 
its meaning just a bit more than this, because there is no 
need to place medicine and other methods of alleviating 
suffering under the category of escapism. Furthermore, 
this is no question of moralizing and saying, “My good 
people, go out and suffer as much as you can. It will do you 
such a lot of good.” Escapism, in this sense, is not avoiding 
suffering; it is, rather, the fear of suffering, the refusal to 
accept the dark side of life whenever it happens to appear. 
This statement will later have to be qualified, though for 
the time being it must stand as a starting point for our 
argument. The technique of acceptance is used in 


psychology to overcome the wish to escape and _ its 
resultant complications or neuroses. It is relaxation of a 
certain mental tension, which, on the one hand, represses 
the various unwelcome contents of the unconscious, and, 
on the other, reacts with fear against adversity from 
outside. But, it may be asked, why do scientists worry 
about removing fear when it might well be possible for 
them to remove the causes of fear through medicine, 
scientific economics, mechanical invention, and compulsory 
surgical operations on the brains of criminals and other 
persons with socially subversive ideas? The answer is 
surely that they would create an exceedingly dull world, for 
if there is to be a light side to life at all, there must also be 
a dark side. An excess of light makes the eyes blind, for too 
much of a good thing invariably ends in boredom, in a 
deadening of the senses, in a loss of the power to 
appreciate, and this is the first and most obvious argument 
in favor of acceptance. Pain is essential to pleasure if 
pleasure is to be known as such, for the two are to each 
other as back to front and short to long. Therefore, it is 
absurd to cling to the one and try to push the other out of 
existence. The same may be said of living and dying, for life 
is such that it depends absolutely on death, being a 
ceaseless process of living and dying, beginning and 
ending, starting and stopping, ascending and descending. 
Without these things, there could be no movement, no 
growth, nothing at all that we could call life. For just as 
music depends on the sounding and silencing of notes, 
existence depends on living and dying, the two opposites 
that are its father and mother. Thus, to deny and attempt to 
reject any one of these opposites amounts to a denial of 
existence itself; if, however, both are accepted, then we 
may say that whoever does so is at ease and at home in the 


world, that they have, so to speak, identified themself with 
the child of the opposites that is life in all its aspects. This 
is the philosophical justification of acceptance. 

But now what about psychology? Here acceptance has a 
twofold function. On the one hand, the tension in the 
psyche that we call “escapism” must be relaxed in order 
that the repressed contents of the unconscious may be 
brought to light; on the other, the relaxation must be 
maintained in order that we may come to terms with those 
contents, having exposed them, and also that we may 
improve the relations between ourselves and external 
circumstances. The first of these functions Jung describes 
very admirably in his commentary to The Secret of the 
Golden Flower: 


We must be able to let things happen in the 
psyche.... Consciousness is forever interfering, 
helping, correcting and negating, and never leaving 
the simple growth of the psychic processes in 
peace.... He goes on to say that acceptance...consists 
solely in watching objectively the development of any 
fragment of fantasy.... These exercises must be 
continued until the cramp in the conscious is 
released, or, in other words, until one can let things 
happen; which was the immediate goal of the 
exercise. In this way, a new attitude is created, an 
attitude which accepts the irrational and _ the 
unbelievable, simply because it is what is happening. 


Note that last sentence. Here is our link with the Asian 
view of acceptance, for Jung implies that whatever IS is to 
be accepted, however irrational, however ugly and 
unpalatable. The Hindu would say the same thing in 


another way, using religious terminology, for his or her 
philosophy of Advaita Vedanta teaches that all things are 
brahman, the breath of life, the one reality that is the 
raison d’etre of existence. Nothing, however vile and 
unpleasant, is anything but brahman, and this is another 
way of saying that every conceivable aspect of life is 
acceptable because it is an essential component of the 
whole. What is the psychological effect of this attitude? To 
answer this, let us turn to the Chinese doctrine of Taoism, 
which is a kind of spiritual jujutsu whose central principle 
is called “non-action,” which is to say “relaxing oneself to 
adversity and thereby defeating it.” Chuang Tzu, one of its 
chief exponents, says: “The perfect man employs his mind 
as a mirror; it grasps nothing; it refuses nothing; it 
receives, but does not keep.” Or to use another favorite 
Taoist analogy, the mind is made like water, yielding to 
everything that may be thrust into it. And because it always 
yields, it can never be harmed; you may slash it forever 
with a knife without leaving any cut, and yet it never resists 
you. 

An even more definite expression of the principle of 
acceptance will be found in the following dialogue of a 
Chinese teacher of Ch’an Buddhism, better known by its 
Japanese name Zen, and his pupil. The pupil asked him, “It 
is terribly hot, and how shall we escape the heat?” Instantly 
the teacher replied, “Go right down to the bottom of the 
furnace!” “But in the furnace,” cried the bewildered pupil, 
“how shall we escape the scorching fire?” To this he gave 
the laconic answer, “No further pains will harass you.” To 
one who is in the midst of mental or physical pain, this may 
sound like a rather bold experiment. But however absurd it 
sounds, in such an extremity anything is worth trying. “Go 
right down to the bottom of the furnace.” In other words, 


experience pain to the full. Do not try to run away from it, 
do not resist it by trying to think of something else or by 
cursing fate. Open your arms to it, embrace it, ask it to do 
its worst to you; it is a kind of “higher masochism.” 
Everyone knows that if you do not want a nettle to sting 
you, you must grasp it firmly in your hand. For to run away 
from pain is to create a state of conflict that only inflames 
the hurt; it seems the obvious thing to do, just as the first 
instinct of a person swept away by the current is to fight 
against it. To go with it requires a moment’s plucking up of 
courage; it seems to invite disaster, yet oddly enough it is 
the only salvation. For the attempt to escape from pain is 
the beginning of infinite regression, the entrance to a 
hideous abyss of suffering into which it is peculiarly easy to 
fall. In escaping, you are putting one tension on top of 
another, adding frost over snow, trying to quench fire with 
flame. 

You will all be familiar with the application of this 
technique in analytical psychology, with Jung’s idea of 
letting the unconscious in the form of anima or animus 
speak to you, of becoming acquainted with the strange 
emotions and impulses that take hold of you and refuse to 
be hurried away, inviting them, as it were, to come and 
have a drink and talk things over. When you no longer 
resist them, they no longer master you, for their power 
over you is derived solely from the force you pit against 
them. Being part of you, they simply use your strength, but 
if you make no show of strength, they make none either. 
Eventually you become master in your own house, but oh, 
be careful! There is a great snag coming. If you turn to 
Jung’s Two Essays on Analytical Psychology, you will find in 
Part II one of the most important chapters he has ever 
written, entitled “The Mana Personality.” Here he explains 


that having mastered the animus or anima, by acceptance 
you have captured for yourself what primitive peoples 
would call its mana or magic power over you. But there is a 
danger that this mana may inflate you and make you 
imagine yourself as a “mana personality,” which is to say, a 
person of might, a magician, or god. He writes: 


If the ego arrogates to itself power over the 
unconscious, the unconscious responds with a subtle 
attack, in this case with the mana _ personality 
dominant, the enormous prestige of which casts a 
spell over the ego. The only protection against this is 
the fullest confession of one’s own weakness over 
against the powers of the unconscious. We set up no 
power in opposition to the unconscious, and 
consequently we do not provoke it to attack. 


But the snag is not ended here; indeed, we are only just 
beginning to get into trouble. 

In this affair of the mana personality, Jung has 
demonstrated an important form of the difficulty that so 
easily turns the psychology of acceptance into an infallible 
method for producing lunatics. For the spell of the mana 
personality can only capture those whose acceptance has 
not been genuine; nothing, however, is more elusive than 
genuine acceptance of life. This is easy to understand when 
we aSk why it should ever occur to anyone in the first place 
that it is necessary to accept life. Let us take, for example, 
a person who contracts some form of neurosis by trying to 
escape from pain and the fear of pain. They go to a 
psychologist and learn the technique of acceptance, but 
why are they willing to learn it? Because they are trying to 
escape from the pain of neurosis, and we may be sure that 


in ninety-eight cases out of a hundred, acceptance is simply 
an indirect method of escape. The trouble is that a change 
of technique does not necessarily involve a change in the 
person who employs technique. They alter their tactics, but 
the fundamental motive remains the same. You may ask, 
“Well how do we change our motive?” But then the answer 
would be, “Why do you want to change your motive?” And 
again we are brought to the admission that our motive for 
wanting to change our motive is the same as our motive for 
wanting to accept, which, in turn, is the same as our motive 
for wanting to escape. I am afraid that is rather a mouthful, 
but we are approaching the treacherous ground of this 
infinite regression, where everything begins to go crazy. 
Thus, we may ask the question in a more general way. Why 
do people go in for religion and psychology? Why do they 
want to improve themselves? Why do they submit to all 
manner of disciplines and techniques to change their 
attitude to life? The usual answer is that they wish to 
achieve some kind of salvation, some safety and protection 
from suffering. Herein is the reason for the popularity of 
such religious concepts as personal immortality. This may 
or may not be a fact; we do not know, but its vogue arises 
from its promise of protection from the alarming prospect 
of the loss of one’s personal self. The same may be said of 
the general idea of God, especially of the doting mother 
kind of God we find in the more insipid varieties of 
Christianity. These are the more obvious forms of spiritual 
escapism. Less obvious and more subtle are the forms that 
masquerade as methods of acceptance, which are attempts 
to escape from the fear of the dark side of life by the purest 
deception. We are told that we may overcome the fear of 
life by relaxing to it, but if we relax to it in order to 
overcome it, we are worse off then we were before; we 


have simply begun the flight into infinite regression without 
changing our underlying desire for escape by a single 
fraction. Beware of the indirect method! 

And here, another difficulty arises. We have seen that 
acceptance is a form of relaxation, which, if it does not 
come to you naturally, has an awkward habit of eluding you 
the moment you try to catch it. The reason is that 
relaxation cannot be achieved by any kind of effort. 
Mothers are apt to say to excited and sleepless children, 
“Now dear, try and go to sleep.” The poor child tries very 
hard, but the more they try, the more their tense effort to 
sleep keeps them awake. Schoolteachers tell children to try 
to concentrate on a book, a mathematical exercise, or 
whatever it may be, with the result that in their strenuous 
attempts to concentrate, their thoughts are completely 
diverted from the task in hand. They think about 
themselves trying to concentrate instead of the thing to 
which they should be attending, and exactly the same 
difficulty arises in trying to relax psychological tension: 
your efforts to achieve it stand in your own way. And then, 
if you try not to try to relax, once more you slip into infinite 
regression. Thus, the psychology of acceptance is fraught 
with these two pitfalls, both of which are bottomless, and 
both of which have a common origin, namely, the desire to 
escape. On the one hand, if you desire to change this 
desire, your second desire is only the first once removed; 
on the other, this desire produces effort, and effort thwarts 
relaxation. This was clearly recognized by both Buddhists 
and Taoists of old China. To them, “non-action” was what 
we Call “acceptance.” By “non-action,” one was supposed to 
be able to achieve harmony with the Tao, which is their 
word for the whole of life comprising the two elements of 
yin and yang, the prototypes of all pairs of opposites. 


Academic Orientalists often make the ludicrous mistake of 
equating “non-action” with doing nothing, but these 
Chinese philosophers and psychologists were much too 
subtle to imagine that union with the Tao could be had by 
the deceptive expedient of doing nothing. For to do nothing 
in order to find the Tao is an indirect way of doing 
something; and “non-action” has to be much more 
thoroughgoing than this. Thus, a Buddhist teacher was 
asked, “What is the Tao?” “Usual life,” he replied, “is the 
Tao.” “Well, how do we bring ourselves into accord with 
it?” “If you try to accord with it,” was his answer, “you will 
get away from it.” 

This brings us to a strange predicament. Acceptance of 
the opposites and consequent harmony with life is not to be 
had by trying. Nor is it to be had by a studied not-trying. 
You cannot get it by doing something about it; you cannot 
get it by doing nothing about it. At this point, we may be 
tempted to throw all the books on psychology and religion 
into the fire, to stop worrying about our mental and 
spiritual condition, to make an end of listening to lectures 
and dash for the nearest nightclub. But why do that? If you 
can’t find the Tao in psychology and religion, you won’t find 
it in a nightclub either. For, wherever you look for it, it 
runs away; and if you try to deceive the devil by pretending 
to yourself that you are not looking for it, you certainly 
won't deceive the Tao. It will elude you just as quickly. So, 
here we are back to the exasperating business of the 
donkey and the carrot. If the donkey pursues it, it retreats 
before it; if the donkey does not pursue it, it remains where 
it is, so near and yet so far. 

It is a peculiar problem, and I do not feel that modern 
psychology has made any really serious attempt to 
understand it. There is one school that might say that those 


who find themselves in this predicament should avail 
themselves of good, healthy wives or husbands wherewith 
to fulfill the thwarted biological functions whose lack of 
expression has brought this psychological condition into 
being. In modern civilization, however, this is not always 
easy, and even where it is possible, it by no means covers 
the whole problem. I have a suspicion that psychologists of 
this school would realize how little their solution 
contributes if they really fulfilled their own biological 
functions, for their obsession with such matters seems to 
indicate a certain rankling lack of experience therein. The 
Zurich School of Analytical Psychology makes the nearest 
approach, though it seems to me that Jung himself goes 
little further than the problem of the mana personality. His 
study of the results of acceptance is both brilliant and 
profound, but, from the Eastern standpoint, I feel there is 
something lacking at the very foundations, something 
without which true acceptance is impossible. At the same 
time, I do not imagine that analytical psychology could 
achieve what it has achieved without being able to obtain 
true acceptance. Even so, I think it must have been 
obtained somewhat haphazardly, for I know of so many 
cases of both doctors and laymen, supposed to be 
completely analyzed, whom I can only describe as psychic 
ruins. But in this, I am prepared to stand corrected, for 
Jung and his associates have discovered much that they 
have never published. 

But still, the problem remains to be solved, and I believe 
that a study of certain forms of Eastern religion is one way 
of opening our eyes to the solution. It is not the only way, 
but it seems to me the most convenient. Now I warned you 
that the solution that they offer may seem quite 
outrageous, so let us approach it gently on the good 


principle of “softly, softly, catchee monkey.” First, it must 
be understood that the problem and its solution belong only 
to one aspect of Eastern religion, an aspect that is most 
completely expressed in certain Chinese texts compiled 
between c.£. 500 and the late Middle Ages. Hints of it 
existed in China as early as 300 B.c.£. in the indigenous 
religion of Taoism, but it did not reach maturity until the 
introduction of Buddhism with its traditions of Hindu 
philosophy, which, together with Taoism, brought the 
matter to fruition. And here it must be repeated that both 
the problem and its solution belong purely to what I have 
described as the spiritual realm, having no necessary 
connection with that other aspect of Eastern religion, 
which is yoga, with its cultivation of occult and psychic 
states. 

Both in the Advaita system of the Hindus and in Taoism, 
there is really only one important doctrine, namely that 
every possible form of existence is produced by and is itself 
brahman or the Tao. Advaita means literally “not-two,” 
which means to say that there is only one ultimate reality 
or source of activity in the universe, and as there is only 
one, nothing can be set in opposition to it. For opposition 
can arise only when there is duality, and though this one 
reality expresses itself in innumerable pairs of opposites, 
there is nothing whatever that can be opposed to the reality 
itself. So, also, we may say of the Tao that though it is 
expressed in two opposed (or, from another point of view, 
complementary) elements—positive and negative, living 
and dying—there is nothing whatsoever outside the Tao 
itself. You may think I am talking in the unverifiable 
abstractions of metaphysics, but that is only because I have 
used the unfamiliar words brahman and Tao. In fact you 
need no metaphysical knowledge to _ verify these 


statements. We often use phrases such as, “Life is like 
that,” or as the French exclaim when things go wrong, 
C’est la vie! If you substitute the word “life” in this wide 
and all-inclusive sense for brahman and Tao, you will begin 
to understand what these Asian systems mean. The Greeks 
had a word for it: To ‘ov, that which is, Being; or, to use 
Jung’s phrase that I have already quoted, it is “what is 
happening.” Life, in this sense, includes all opposites, being 
a vast conglomeration of people, things, forces, ideas, 
planets, stars, trees, and houses to the totality of which 
nothing can be added and from which nothing can be taken 
away. When Jung was lecturing in London some time ago, 
he told a story of someone who had asked a Chinese 
scholar what he meant by Tao. The scholar asked him to 
look out of the window and tell him what he saw. “I see 
houses and streets,” he answered. “What else?” “People are 
walking about and there are clouds overhead.” “What 
else?” “The wind is blowing.” The scholar opened his arms 
as if to include the whole thing and replied, “That is Tao.” 
And to see it, you do not even have to look out of the 
window. “Without going out of my house,” said Lao-tzu, “I 
can know the whole universe.” For you can find it just by 
looking into your own mind and watching the inside 
universe of thoughts and feelings. 

But please do not make the mistake of imagining that it 
needs some special mystical insight to perceive the Tao in 
and around you. I have said that nothing exists beside or 
apart from it, and we should not make any opposition 
between ordinary life (or the world of opposites) and the 
Tao, as if the Tao were some mysterious essence that lived 
in the heart of atoms. Chinese philosophers even go so far 
as to say that when you assert, “Life is Tao,” you have 
made a mistake by trying to join two different concepts that 


were never in need of joining. Thus, when they are asked 
about the Tao, they may point at a tree, lift a stick, or 
smack your face in order to show you, but they do not say 
that the tree, the stick, or the smack is the Tao, for that 
would instantly imply a mental division between the two. 
What does this mean in terms of psychology? How does 
it solve the problem of infinite regression? We have said a 
great deal about this business of escaping from life and 
accepting it, but all this is based on a false antithesis 
between ourselves and life. While this antithesis exists, 
there can be no true acceptance. In fact you cannot escape 
from life. Civilized people with their acute _ self- 
consciousness have always been possessed with the idea 
that they are in some way out of harmony with life, that 
they are leading an artificial existence, that they are a 
lonely orphan divorced from nature, and most of their 
religion and psychology is so much chattering about this, as 
some with nothing better to do will chatter about an 
imaginary illness. Now that we live in cities and everything 
around us is supposedly artificial, this feeling is increased 
more than ever. But the Empire State Building is just as 
much a work of nature as a bird’s nest, for though mankind 
can commit all manner of atrocities, it cannot in any way 
separate itself from life or the Tao or whatever you like to 
call it. Try as we may to surround ourselves with so-called 
artificiality, and try as we may to imagine that we are 
Spiritually distinct and autonomous units, we can worry to 
the end of time about our lack of harmony with life without 
ever realizing that this very worrying, this very sense of 
self-consciousness, is nothing other than the life from 
which we imagined we were trying to escape. You may 
escape from unpleasant duties, from unwelcome thoughts 
and emotions, and from physical and mental pain, up to a 


point; but from life you can never escape. You can hurl all 
manner of curses at your fate; you can be the most 
abominable crybaby; you can fall into infinite regressions 
by the dozen; you can spend your days looking for 
salvation, or you can spend them with wine, women, and 
song. But never in any one of these things do you deny life; 
for you are life, and life does not deny itself. 

This is not just philosophical speculation; it is an 
understanding of great psychological value, for it gives the 
most astonishing sense of inner freedom. It means this: that 
when you are confronted with suffering, you are at liberty 
to protest and run away as much as you like. If you feel in 
any way out of harmony with life, you are at liberty to feel 
out of harmony; you are even at liberty to get worried 
about it and go to a psychologist. If you want to relax, then 
relax; if you want to be tense, be tense. If you don’t know 
what you want, you are free to remain in ignorance. Of if 
you want to do something that the law of the land forbids, 
you are free to sit down and get mad about being 
prevented. This is true acceptance, for it is simply allowing 
yourself to be what it is. Indeed, you could not stop 
practicing true acceptance even if you wanted to, for your 
very wanting not to or your very ignorance of the fact that 
you were doing so is an expression of your true nature. And 
your true nature always expresses itself, whatever you may 
think about it, for your true nature is simply life working 
through your mind and body, and from this there can be no 
separation, seeing that in all the world there is nothing to 
be separated from it. We can go so far as to say that even 
the idea of separation or discord or escape is, as it were, its 
own idea that you are perfectly free to entertain. What is 
the therapeutic value of all this? Well, you know what 
happens when aé potential suicide goes to a _ clever 


psychologist and threatens to take his own life. The 
psychologist says, “Go ahead, sir! Who’s stopping you? You 
are quite at liberty to do so, and here is a gun.” 

I think this may be clarified by expressing it more 
definitely in religious terms, for these have been coined to 
provide an easy way of explaining things that are not easily 
contained within the somewhat elastic significance of 
ordinary words. The ancient texts say that though all things 
are the Tao, people imagine that they are separate from it, 
and so experience a sense of being ill at ease with life. This 
imagining is the meaning of the familiar Sanskrit word 
maya, or illusion. Hence, to become enlightened, 
humankind must overcome this illusion and realize unity 
with the Tao. But, as there is nothing apart from Tao, the 
illusion must also be Tao, and so must the sense of being ill 
at ease. Knowing this, a person perceives that they are free 
to feel separate as much as they like, for they realize that 
they themselves, with all their thoughts and feelings, are 
the Tao and that nothing they can think or do can divide 
them from it. In fact, the whole matter was essentially 
simple, but they complicated it by trying to catch hold of it 
when in fact there was nothing to catch hold of. For what 
they wanted to catch was really themselves, and they spun 
around in circles to try and see their own eyes instead of 
looking straight ahead and using them. The Buddhist 
philosopher Hsuan-chiao expresses it in this way: 


Like unto space the Tao knows no boundaries; 

Yet it is right here with us, ever retaining its serenity 
and fullness. 

It is only when you seek it that you lose it. 

You cannot take hold of it, nor can you get rid of it; 

While you can do neither, it goes on its own way. 


You remain silent and it speaks; you speak and it is 
silent. 


We might add to this that only relatively speaking do you 
lose it when you seek it; in fact you only seek it because 
you think you have lost it. Thus, in many of the texts, it is 
said that the only difference between an ordinary man and 
an enlightened buddha is that one realizes they are a 
buddha while the other does not. I should explain here that 
the word “buddha” is used both as the title of an historical 
person and as the name for the one reality that we may 
equate with Tao or brahman. Thus, in another text we find 
this from Shih-t’ou: 


My teaching which has come down from the ancient 
buddhas is not dependent on meditation or diligent 
application of any kind. When you attain insight you 
know that thoughts are buddha and buddha is 
thoughts, that thoughts, buddha, sentient beings, 
enlightenment, and defilements are of one and the 
same substance while they vary in names. 


A pupil once asked, “How does one get emancipated?” 
The teacher replied, “Who has ever put you in bondage?” In 
fact, there needs to be nothing done about it at all; you do 
not have to achieve harmony with life because you already 
have it; you do not have to reconcile the pairs of opposites, 
because they are already reconciled. Of course, you may 
say, it is all very well to put it in so many words, but it is 
quite another matter to come to the point where you really 
understand it. In any case, it sounds much too simple to be 
true, and there must be a snag somewhere. The snag, if 
any, lies in that odd mental twist that changes the person 


who doesn’t understand into the person who does. But if 
you let it sink into your mind, the understanding will come 
one day of its own accord; moreover, everyone is at liberty 
not to understand, and, if you will forgive the paradox, I 
would say that one will understand just as soon as they let 
themself be free to be ignorant, for ignorance also is the 
Tao. 

Therefore, in the end we return to a truth that is both 
Surprising and simple—namely, that our _ everyday 
experience is a spiritual experience of the highest order, 
that union with the Tao is not necessarily a strange state of 
consciousness nor a particular form of carefully regulated 
behavior. This truth, to be understood, must first be stood 
on its head and complicated; in other words, before we can 
once again feel our unity with the Tao, we must first feel 
the self-conscious separation from life, which is the 
peculiar characteristic of civilized people; before we can 
understand that nothing special has to be done to achieve it 
we have to go through the psychological process that I 
have described, undertaking the elusive and irritating task 
of chasing ourselves and falling into infinite regression 
through trying to combine things that were never separate. 
Unless this has been done, the mere statement that 
ordinary experience is a supreme spiritual experience will 
be meaningless. Hence, the saying that the aim of religion 
is to become what you are, or in the words of a Buddhist 
poem: “This very earth is the Lotus Land of Purity, / And 
this body is the body of buddha.” From the religious point 
of view, this amounts to the sanctification of all experience. 
As Thomas a Kempis said, “If thy heart were right, then 
every creature would be a mirror of life and a book of holy 
doctrine.” From the psychological point of view, it is the 
acceptance of all experience, and even of those desires and 


impulses that seem to be the very denial of acceptance. 
And the joke about genuine acceptance is this: that you do 
not have to achieve it; you have only to understand that 
whatever you do or don’t do, you cannot get away from it, 
and this remains true whether you understand it or not. 

This state of acceptance or union with the Tao is often 
described figuratively in Eastern texts as being above and 
beyond the opposites, as neither good nor evil, living or 
dying, positive or negative, existent or nonexistent. This 
means that no affirmative or negative statement can be 
made concerning it; for the moment you either deny or 
affirm, something is excluded. That is to say, if you declare, 
“It is this,” you automatically imply, “It is not that,” and 
vice versa, whereas the Tao cannot be limited in this way. 
And even if we were to say that the Tao excludes nothing, 
this too would be a limitation. But if this is getting too 
metaphysical, let me round off the argument with a story 
that demonstrates the matter in a more practical way. A 
Chinese sage was asked the same pressing question, “It is 
terribly hot, and how shall we escape the heat?” He replied, 
“Why not go to the place where it is neither hot nor cold?” 
Again he was asked, “But where is the place where it is 
neither hot nor cold?” “When it is hot,” he answered, “we 
go to the stream by the bamboo grove. When it is cold we 
gather round the fire.” You can take that story in a number 
of ways, substituting any pair of opposites and their 
appropriate reactions for heat and cold. 

When this understanding matures in the right time and 
place, its psychological effects are astonishing, for it 
creates an inner freedom and spontaneity, a sense of being 
at ease in the world and at home with the demons of one’s 
own mind that has to be felt to be believed. There are 
problems that it does not solve, for these are problems of a 


different order—moral, social, medical, economic, and 
political. It gives a new zest for approaching these 
problems, but in itself it is purely a matter of psychological 
adjustment, of spiritual ease and dis-ease, giving us the 
power to devote ourselves joyously and unreservedly to the 
technical problems of life without cherishing any private 
hopes or fears as to whether we are saved or damned, or as 
to whether this or that is going to make us happy or 
miserable. You may object that it is a peculiarly dangerous 
and irresponsible doctrine. This is perfectly true, so 
perhaps you had better not tell anyone about it when you 
go away, for it has been systematically hushed-up in almost 
every form of religion for thousands of years. Wherever it 
was actually taught it was handled, as it were, with the 
rubber gloves and forceps of a rigid moral discipline, lest 
anyone should imagine that it gave them freedom to behave 
just as they pleased. For from one point of view, it is a 
neutral force, which, like electricity, may either slay or 
heal, and, as with electricity, there is a price to be paid for 
its misuse. If it were proclaimed from the housetops, there 
would undoubtedly be trouble, but, if we are to judge from 
the history of the religions wherein it has been understood, 
its effect on a reasonably balanced mind is to produce a 
reverence and respect for life that does not encourage 
abuse. For it enables you to understand that your own 
antisocial desires may be at once accepted and denied, 
seeing that neither self-indulgence nor self-denial are 
contrary to true acceptance. But more than this: if evil and 
crime arise from the hatred of life, from a fundamental 
antagonism to the world, hatred becomes very dull when 
you know you are free to hate as much as you like; it 
becomes ashamed of itself like the fractious, squawking 
child whose mother says to it, “That’s right dear, have a 


good cry. Go on, scream, lie on the floor, kick your legs. 
Don’t worry if the neighbors hear. Have a good yell.” This 
antagonism, in one or another of its many forms, is at the 
root of crime and _ religious endeavor alike, for 
fundamentally it is the sense of opposition between oneself 
and the world. Given recognition and free rein, it becomes 
absurd, and you realize also that whatever in fact you do or 
don’t do, you are capable of and free to do almost anything 
that is humanly possible, whether supreme virtue or 
abysmal crime. A story is told of a Tibetan Buddhist teacher 
examining a disciple prior to initiation. On being asked 
whether he could tell a lie, the disciple was profoundly 
shocked, and replied that it was of course impossible for 
him to commit such a violation of the precepts. “Well then,” 
said the teacher, “go away and learn how to tell a lie, and 
until you have learnt, don’t come back to me for initiation.” 
For the knowledge that you are capable of anything in this 
sense at once creates a new and more harmonious relation 
with the world of men, a relation that might be expressed 
in those two old sayings Tout comprendre c’est tout 
pardonner, and Humani nihil a me alienum puto: I think 
myself estranged to nothing human. 

But there is more to it than this. For the understanding 
that ordinary experience is a supreme spiritual experience 
has an effect that is best described as a feeling of wonder 
for life in which there is something childlike, whereof we 
may say, “Of such is the kingdom of Heaven.” A Chinese 
poet expressed it in this way: 


How wondrously supernatural, 
And how miraculous this— 
I draw water and I carry fuel! 


The sense of being at ease with the world leaves one 
free to contemplate and enjoy things that the terribly 
serious and earnestly seeking religious state of mind 
considers too trivial. People whose minds are in this 
condition are so taken up with “the Search” that they have 
neither the time nor the taste for ordinary human pursuits. 
They enjoy no other conversation than that of the “higher 
things,” and find it so hard to unbend, to chatter about 
nothing in particular for the sake of being sociable, to roll 
about on the floor and play with children, to go about and 
gape at wonderful things, at landscapes, waterfalls, 
crowds, circuses, thunderstorms, and curious people, to 
enjoy a good dinner, to lie on one’s back in the sun and 
think about nothing except chewing a piece of grass, to 
sing, dance, tell stories, or to stroll aimlessly around 
Central Park in the evening, watching the lights of the big 
city. Spiritual insight reveals a mystery and magic in these 
things that no one should be ashamed to feel. 

It has been said that the mystery of life is not a problem 
to be solved, but a reality to be experienced, and when 
certain scientists claim that they are on the way to 
banishing all mysteries, to explaining everything in the 
universe, they should also realize that they are on their way 
to explaining the universe away. But if I am to say just how 
the magic gets into these ordinary things of life, you must 
excuse my being slightly poetical, for no other mode of 
expression quite conveys the feeling. The magic of life is in 
the fact that every littlest thing, both in and around you, 
expresses, and in action uses, the same power that hurls 
the stars through space and causes their fire; that bellows 
in thunder and whispers in wind; that produces a giant tree 
from the microscopic germ of a seed and wears away 
mountains to thin clouds of dust. It is in the fact that 


whatever you feel, think, do, or say, you cannot cut yourself 
off from it; in spite of all your mistakes, in spite of all your 
imaginings and fears, never for a moment do you cease to 
use and share in its tremendous freedom. To exist, it must 
include all opposites, and hence can suffer from none of 
them; thus, you express it in living as much as in dying, in 
creating as much as in destroying, in accepting as much as 
in escaping, in being wise as much as in being a fool. 
Therefore, when the mana personality rears its subtle head 
and a person becomes inflated with the conceit of themself 
as a Spiritual giant who has accepted all life and reconciled 
the opposites, let them remember that life was never in 
need of being accepted nor the opposites of being 
reconciled. Worms, skunks, morons, and drunkards are in 
fact accepting it as much as we, and the only difference is 
that we know it while they do not. But that we have at last 
discovered it is less a cause for pride than for laughter at 
ourselves for not having seen it before. 


Mythological Motifs in Modern 
Science 


ore poem says human life is “Like a sword that 
cuts, but cannot cut itself; Like an eye that sees, but 
cannot see itself.” 

In short, our predicament is that we cannot at one and 
the same time be subject and object, observer and 
observed, controller and controlled. This is another way of 
saying that the inner origins of our thought and action must 
always be unconscious. However much we may understand 
ourselves, the very act of understanding alters what we 
understand, and to explore human nature is to change it in 
unpredictable ways so that, to some extent, our knowledge 
of ourselves is always obsolete. If this be true, it will also 
be true that humankind must always be makers of myth. 
For, as I understand it, myth is the imagery whereby we 
project upon the known, external world the ever-changing 
and ungraspable pattern of our own unconscious and inner 
workings. 

The whole psychology of the unconscious, deriving from 
the work of Freud and Jung, has, I believe, established the 
fact that our view of the world, our theology or cosmology, 
is always the external projection of processes within 
ourselves that are otherwise unknown. But I do not believe 
that it has been able to prove that these processes are as 


invariable and common to all as their physical structure. A 
universal and definitive science of the unconscious is really 
a contradiction in terms, for the whole value of the idea of 
the unconscious is not that it opens up a new realm of the 
world to be explored and mastered but rather that it points 
out the elastic though nonetheless inescapable limitations 
of consciousness and of its ability to control both itself and 
the surrounding world. 

To a very important extent, science is a Western attempt 
to liberate oneself from myth, from the so-called “pathetic 
fallacy” of constructing the world in our own unconscious 
image. Without detracting from the glory of science, I want 
to suggest that this attempt is impossible and absurd, and I 
will do so by discussing the parallel between Western 
science and Eastern efforts to achieve the same objective 
along other lines. Here I should say that I am approaching 
this subject not so much as a historian or philosopher of 
science, but as a student of the comparative philosophies of 
Asia and the West. 

There is an old Indian tale of a king who lived in the far- 
off times when people walked barefooted upon this stony 
and rugged earth, and who proposed one day that 
thousands of cattle should be slain so that the ground 
might be covered with their skins. However, a philosopher 
at his court suggested that if only a few cattle were slain, 
small pieces of their hide might be bound to people’s feet 
so that a carpet of leather would, in effect, be available 
wherever they want. This story is a parable of the differing 
ways in which Western and Eastern cultures have, in 
general, approached the problem of controlling what we 
experience so as to reduce suffering. The West, covering 
the whole ground with skins, has invented the technology 
of mastering the external world. The East, putting mere 


strips of leather on the feet, has neglected the external 
world and idealized the control of the mind. It has 
concentrated upon solving the problem by changing oneself 
rather than the environment, and the success and failure of 
both attempts are enormously instructive. 

The cultures of India and China have invented their own 
techniques of liberation from myth. Anyone who is set upon 
overcoming myth will use the word in its pejorative sense 
to mean “falsehood” or “illusion” as opposed to “truth” and 
“fact.” It is in this sense that the Hindu and Buddhist 
philosophies of India frequently use the word maya to 
suggest that the external world, or perhaps the way in 
which we think about the world, is an illusion arising in our 
own minds. So long as this illusion arises, life in the world 
appears to be painful and problematic. But if the mind can 
be controlled so that the illusion ceases, the hard world, or 
perhaps just our objections to it, will vanish. 

Let us first consider the cosmology, the view of the 
world, largely common to both Hinduism and Buddhism—or 
rather to the culture in which they arose as ways of 
liberation from that cosmology. Every life, whether human 
or animal, angelic or demonic, is seen as a link in an 
inconceivably long series of incarnations through which 
every individualized being must pass so long as they feel 
themself to be an individual. The series of incarnations is 
not so much a progressive evolution as a cycle of slow 
alternation between the good and the evil, the zenith of the 
angelic paradises of the devas and the nadir of hideous 
purgatories of the narakas; existence is an everlasting to- 
and-fro of pleasure and pain inseparably linked by the logic 
of their polarity, measured in periods of the kalpa, a unit of 
4,320,000 years. So long as the being is in the grip of 
karma, the process of conditioned action regulated by 


attraction and repulsion, they will rotate indefinitely within 
this cycle for kalpa after kalpa. The whole scheme is in fact 
a cosmic squirrel-cage treadmill of vast proportions, kept in 
motion by the pursuit of pleasure in all its forms, physical 
and spiritual. 

Yet, to Hinduism and Buddhism alike, this cosmology, as 
well as the individual beings in its toils, is maya (a myth, 
projection, or illusion arising within the mind) as a 
consequence of avidya (“ignorance” or “unconsciousness”). 
Avidya is a word of many meanings. It may signify 
forgetfulness of the fact that one’s consciousness is not 
individual and separate, but a ray of the atman, the divine 
Self that is the one and only reality. It may mean failure to 
see that pleasure and pain, good and evil, are correlative 
and that therefore the search for one creates the other as 
surely as height implies depth. It may also be taken in the 
special sense of “ignore-ance.” This is the use of 
consciousness for selective attention, the act of focusing 
the mind upon limited areas of the world one after another 
so as to ignore its unity and create the impression that it is 
a multiplicity of distinct things and events. Avidya is 
therefore the unconsciousness, the “screening-out” of the 
truth that all things and all events and their polarities are 
inseparably related, and that there is therefore no way of 
disentangling the “I” from the “thou” or of wresting the 
desirable from the undesirable. 

It follows, then, that control and mastery of the cosmic 
squirrel-cage treadmill must come about through control 
and mastery of the mind and the overcoming of avidya. By 
the disciplines of yoga, the mind must be stilled and 
concentrated. It is then turned back upon itself through the 
gates of the senses so as to withdraw the projection of an 


external world, and finally of the sense-gates themselves, 
the body, and the individualized consciousness. To us this 
may seem as fantastic as crawling into a hole and pulling 
the hole in after us, or as unrealistic as playing ostrich. 
Nevertheless, there is something in it, for we know that the 
appearance of the external world is relative to the structure 
of our brains and sense organs. If these can be changed, 
the world can be changed, at least for the individual 
undertaking the task. They are the one with sandals in a 
barefooted society. According to your prejudices, you may 
call them a victim of hallucination or the discoverer of a 
new level of reality, the first of a new type of person. The 
fact that the vast majority of people see the world in the 
Same way does not mean that they are right: it means 
simply that they are in communication and that they are 
structures of the same kind. 

But to at least one major school of Asian philosophy, this 
way of overcoming maya, and thus of controlling the world, 
did not seem at all satisfactory. On the contrary, the 
general consensus of Mahayana Buddhism was that the 
attempt to obliterate maya and gain total control of 
unconscious projection was to become the victim of illusion 
in a peculiarly deep and tragic way. For this school, the 
term pratyeka-buddha, meaning originally “one who passes 
into nirvana without staying in communication with other 
people,” became a term of opprobrium. In most of the 
Mahayana texts, the pratyekabuddha, or “private buddha,” 
is not a buddha at all. For, in withdrawing into spiritual 
isolation and in damming up the projection of maya 
entirely, they fail to realize that they have become its most 
pitiful slave, myth-bound in the worst sense. It is here that 
we Shall find a parallel with the dark or maleficent role of 
myth in modern science. 


Now the predicament of the pratyeka-buddha, or of the 
yogi who has gained total control of their mind, is not 
unlike that of the absolute ruler described in that classical 
manual of Indian politics, the Arthashastra. Here, the 
tyrant-king is depicted as governing the mandala, or 
concentric circles, of his subordinates like a spider in the 
midst of a web. On the principle of divide et impera, each 
ring of subordinates is set in mistrust of its neighboring 
ring so that adjacent ranks are always spying upon each 
other. The immediate guards or ministers of the king are 
watched by their next inferiors, jealous of their position and 
ever ready to seek favor and promotion by betraying them 
to the monarch and so on all down the hierarchy from the 
chief ministers to the slaves. And, because the whole 
system is a clever balancing of mutual mistrust, the king 
himself, the final guardian of his own guards, can trust no 
one at all. He must even sleep with one eye open, and 
never, never give himself the luxury of rest from vigilance. 
But this means only that the ruler of the system is himself 
its most total prisoner, the spider caught in its own web. 
So, too, the secret police in Orwell’s 1984 must sit and 
watch the innumerable television screens that bug the 
citizens’ homes, glued by their eyes to the task of mistrust 
instead of being able to go walking with their girls in the 
park. 

The development of Mahayana Buddhism arose, then, 
from the recognition that complete self-consciousness and 
self-control are also complete _ self-frustration, the 
frustration of the sword trying to cut itself, or, as we would 
say, of trying to lift oneself up by one’s own bootstraps. In 
technical terms, the delusion of the pratyeka-buddha is that 
nirvana, the state of liberation, is something apart from 


samsara, the cycle of birth and death generated by maya. If 
nirvana is to be understood as withdrawal from the world, 
as getting away from sense-experience so as to be in a 
position to master it, this is equivalent to the idea that the 
controlling self or subject is in fact separate from what it 
controls. This, however, is to be unaware of the fact that 
the controlling will also is maya, or, as we might say, that 
the human brain is part of its own environment. To seek to 
know the unconscious down to its depths is to forget that it 
is the unconscious itself that sees, that consciousness is not 
apart from the unconscious, but is one of its functions: 
“Like an eye that sees, but cannot see itself.” 

It is thus that the bodhisattva, the ideal person of 
Mahayana Buddhism, is represented as one who, after 
withdrawal, returns into the world out of compassion for 
“all sentient beings,” vowing not to enter nirvana until all 
others are delivered with them. But their compassion for 
sentient beings arises from the discovery that they are 
inseparable from them. What the bodhisattva has really 
found out is that there is no escape from the world, 
because there is no one to escape from it. They see that 
other sentient beings are suffering just because they think 
that they are separate and are trying in innumerable ways 
to get out of a trap in which no one is caught, because 
there is only the trap. No flies at all! The classical 
expression of this is the passage in the Lankavatara Sutra, 
which says: 


Those who, afraid of the sufferings arising from the 
discrimination of birth-and-death (samsara), seek for 
nirvana, do not know that birth-and-death and 
nirvana are not to be separated from one another... 


imagining that nirvana consists in the future 
annihilation of the senses and their fields. (II. 18.) 


Or again, the words of the Chinese Mahayanist Seng- 
ts’an: 


Don’t be antagonistic to the world of the senses, 
For when you are not antagonistic to it, 

It turns out to be the same as complete Awakening. 
The wise person does not strive; 

The ignorant man ties himself up. 

(For) if you work on your mind with your mind, 
How can you avoid an immense confusion? 


At this point, the movement of Indian philosophy seems 
to have completed a cycle that was always implied in what 
is probably the basic myth of Hinduism: that all living 
beings are the dreams of God, innumerable parts played by 
the one divine Actor, who, just because he is omnipotent 
and omniscient, can afford the game of plunging himself 
into illusion. Thus as soon as the slumbering Self, the 
atman, awakens from the dream of maya, it discovers that 
all the figures of the dream are not its antagonists, but its 
own will. And God, like his own saints, is divine in the act of 
giving up his will, in the act of what Eastern Christianity 
calls kenosis, the self-emptying or self-surrender of the 
Godhead whereby he both creates the world and becomes 
incarnate in the Son of Man. I do not know whether this is 
true of God, but certainly it was the discovery of the 
Mahayana philosophers that when the mind’s experience is 
perfectly controlled it is no longer worth controlling. 
Nirvana therefore becomes the freedom to embrace the 


world, to deliver oneself over to love and attachment, and 
to will one’s own involvement in maya. 

Western science is also a way of liberation, but thus far 
it has proceeded in a different direction to the same goal of 
controlling the content of our experience, concentrating 
upon the transformation and understanding of the external 
world. In its own way, science has also been concerned 
with the dissolution of maya and has delivered multitudes 
from the terrors of a cosmology not of endless 
reincarnation but of the last judgment, Heaven, and Hell. 
Yet its method of attack is, at first sight, quite different, for 
it did not take as a point of departure the equation of maya 
with the physical world. For science, maya is not nature but 
ideas about nature based upon preconception rather than 
observed fact. Ignorance, furthermore, is not as in Indian 
thought the perception of the world as a multiplicity of 
facts, but precisely ignorance of facts. Science did not, 
therefore, dissolve the Ptolemaic-Christian cosmology by 
discovering it to be a mental projection upon the void, but 
by discovering it to be an inadequate explanation of 
astronomical facts. The cosmology was a myth and a 
projection indeed; but it was not so much this that made it 
false as that it did not fit the observable form of the screen. 

For the scientist, too, projects. His or her scales and 
hypotheses are all projections of human thought upon the 
world. But they know them to be projections, and it is their 
claim that they are not projecting unconsciously. Ancient 
astronomers found their way among the _ stars’ by 
associating their apparent groupings with such concrete 
images as the signs of the zodiac. Their belief in 
astrological influences suggests that they did not realize 
either that they were projecting these images or that the 
constellations to which they were assigned were groupings 


selected by mere convenience. They may have had no 
inkling that they were treating the heavens as an immense 
Rorschach blot, seeing forms in the stars according to their 
inner psychic disposition, which had been given collective 
coherence by the matrix of social tradition and convention. 
But the modern astronomer finds it more accurate and 
serviceable to chart the position of the stars upon an 
abstract grid of sidereal latitude and longitude, knowing 
perfectly well that the grid is a projection that does not 
actually hang in the sky. 

If, then, scientific projection is always conscious and if 
the scientist is more and more aware that they are 
describing the world in terms of measures that they have 
themself invented, will they not be the last person to 
confuse these measures with the world? Is not science 
precisely an anti-mythology in which, as time goes on, we 
Shall seek in vain for any unconscious image? Today 
scientists are so conscious and critical of their own 
methods and procedures, and have gone so far in the 
controlled analysis of scientific thinking itself, that Western 
man’s concern for the control of nature is slipping over into 
Eastern man’s concern for controlling the mind. We are 
now beginning to attack maya in both directions, and for 
this reason books on the philosophy of science become 
more and more reminiscent of Indian metaphysics; I am not 
thinking simply of Eddington and Schrodinger but also of 
Mach, Wittgenstein, and Schlick, and the whole school of 
thought that Popper calls “instrumentalist.” In the present 
century the vestiges of myth have been disappearing from 
science with ever increasing rapidity. Yet as they do so they 
reappear with greater force than ever in an unsuspected, 
and thus unconscious, direction. 


The worldview of science might still have contained 
something mythical when, say, a scientist of the eighteenth 
century could have been astonished to find that the tossing 
of dice “obeyed” the laws of probability. They could have 
believed that, after all, there was some sort of objective 
design or law out there in the universe, and that God or 
nature was inherently mathematical. But today, we are as 
reluctant to speak of events as “obeying” laws as to say 
that some trees have winged seeds “in order” to scatter 
them on the wind. We tend now to think of natural laws as 
inventions or instruments, like the decimal system of 
numbering. The misnamed “laws” of probability are thus a 
mathematical invention, like the ruler, convenient for 
measuring large numbers of events, which, when taken in 
small numbers, are highly irregular. Events do not follow 
laws, for what we call laws are now seen to be patterns that 
we have constructed for predicting events just as we have 
constructed combs for arranging our hair. God did not 
make hair so as to fit combs any more than God made 
noses to support spectacles. 

As the scientific naturalism of the nineteenth century 
abandoned the theological hypothesis, or myth, of the 
divine lawgiver behind the _ laws, the _ scientific 
instrumentalism of the twentieth century is abandoning the 
laws. Even that myth is going, and the realization that laws 
are maya is being swiftly followed by the realization that 
even facts, yes, those precious “scientific facts” are maya. 
We are seeing that the fact, the thing, or the event is a 
useful unit of thought, but that there are no formally 
separate entities in the physical world. Certainly, the 
external world contains clear divisions and lines, patterns, 
and structures, but the way we gather them into units or 


things or facts is as conventional as our perception of 
constellations among the stars. As de Chardin has put it: 


It is time to point out that this procedure is merely 
an intellectual dodge. Considered in its physical, 
concrete reality, the stuff of the universe cannot 
divide itself, but, as a kind of gigantic “atom” it 
forms in its totality...the only real indivisible.... It is 
impossible to cut into this network, to isolate a 
portion without it becoming frayed and unravelled at 
all its edges. All around us, as far as the eye can see, 
the universe holds together, and only one way of 
considering it is really possible—that is, to take it as 
a whole, in one piece. 


It is convenient to think of the world in terms of things 
just as it is convenient to carve up a chicken for eating. But 
“cut-up broilers” do not emerge from the egg. 

But what is happening here? If the laws and even the 
facts of nature are our own conceptual constructions, 
rooted ever more in conscious rationality alone, must we 
not feel increasingly estranged from the actual world 
outside our brains? Consider for a moment the situation in 
applied science and technology. The great scientific 
revolution of the nineteenth century was pervaded by a 
philosophy of naturalistic or materialistic monism that, in 
theory, was opposed to the traditional Western and 
Christian dualism of spirit and matter, soul and body. 
Freud, Haeckel, and Huxley were sure that all phenomena 
of the psyche could be explained in terms of the body, that 
one need no longer be considered a duality, a conscious 
spiritual will in control, chauffeur-wise, of a_ physical 
vehicle. Now one might have thought that this unitary view 


of nature would have done something to reduce Western 
culture’s strong sense of alienation and separation from the 
physical environment. But, on the contrary, scientific 
naturalism gave rise to a technology that we commonly call 
“the conquest of nature.” 

The theory of our spontaneous evolution out of the 
natural order has issued in the feeling that the “blind” 
processes of this order can no longer be trusted, and that 
the future development of the world must be by the 
indefinite increase of conscious control. This point of view 
is not only paradoxical, but also absurd, when one 
considers that the brain through which such control is 
exercised is itself a product of spontaneous process and is 
organized so complexly that our conscious, scientific 
understanding of it is still rudimentary. It seems, then, that 
science, so far from overcoming the myth of the dualistic 
universe, has exaggerated it to an enormous degree. 
Humanity and nature, reason and instinct, calculation and 
spontaneity are now in practice more widely sundered than 
ever. 

The modern counterpart of the traditional Christian urge 
to subordinate nature rigorously to the law of God is the 
technological ambition of rendering all nature, human and 
subhuman, an object of rational control. Is not technology 
in a direct line of descent from the Christian fascination for 
miracles, for spiritual power that proves itself precisely in 
transforming the hard material world? Though it is not 
stated in overtly supernatural terms, we are still in practice 
devotees of the faith that proves itself by moving mountains 
and resurrecting the dead. The flesh with its finite 
limitations is still our enemy, and its failure to respond to 
our control is still the work of the devil. Surely, too, there is 
more than a touch of ascetic spirituality in the fact that the 


image in which physicists conceive the world has less and 
less resemblance to any form of sensuous imagery. 
Scientific knowledge, says Oppenheimer “has become the 
property of specialized communities who pursue their own 
way with growing intensity further and further from their 
roots in ordinary life.” 

Yet, as always, miracles alone turn out to be empty 
victories. In the first place, it has become obvious to us that 
the miracles that we perform through physics and 
chemistry are disastrous in the hands of insane, stupid, or 
malicious people. Science cannot rest content with the 
control of external nature: through sociology, psychology, 
and psychiatry, technology must be extended into people 
themselves so that we can control the controller. But here, 
in the second place, the victory is empty again, for like the 
pratyeka-buddha, the controller who approaches perfect 
control of themself is locked in a vicious circle in which 
action is increasingly paralyzed. The growth of 
bureaucracy, conformism, and regimentation in our society 
is not the result of some dark conspiracy but of the simple 
logic of regulating the behavior of people who handle such 
dangerous instruments’ as_ electricity, automobiles, 
airplanes, and nuclear power. So long, then, as our 
objective is the miracle, power and control over ourselves 
and the world, our society must come to resemble the 
mandala-trap of the Arthashastra, only in the modern 
version of the totalitarian state, the system of mutual 
mistrust in which every person is their neighbor’s 
policeman. And here the game is not worth the candle. The 
price of omnipotence, of possessing the powers of the 
dictator-God, is to be strangled in the network of one’s own 
controls. 


In this light, let us look again at the patterns that our 
modern wisdom projects upon Heaven and_ Earth, 
ostensibly in full rational consciousness, but practically 
unaware of the inseparability of reason and nature, and 
therefore, as Jung would say, under the spell of the 
mythological archetype of the supernatural, purely 
spiritual, and omnipotent God. Certainly, the formal net of 
celestial latitude and longitude is very convenient, as are 
the grid-iron streets of Chicago as compared with those of 
Boston and London (except when they are laid down in 
such defiance of topography as upon the hills of San 
Francisco). But such convenience is convenient from the 
standpoint of a mentality that would control the world 
rather than love it, and when it is in this spirit that we 
cover the world with reticulations of numbered pattern, the 
convenience that we intended turns out to be the myth that 
we did not intend. Oppenheimer has spoken of science as 
“the things we have discovered about nature defined in 
terms of the ways in which they were found out.” The ways 
include both the specific techniques and the motivation 
behind them, and when this is the network of conceptual 
abstractions projected upon nature for no other reason 
than to master it, nature somehow vanishes and we are left 
with the net. We are left, that is, with a conception of the 
world in which there seems to be no order except what 
humankind imposes upon it, and thus a world that is in 
itself completely foreign to us. And because we come to feel 
nature in the ways that we define it, we are left with 
nothing to control or to experience except the systems of 
control whereby nature has been defined. The social 
parallel is that highly mechanized cultures begin to serve 
the logic of machines rather than the desires of people. 


Naturalistic monism to the contrary, Western science— 
save with certain exceptions yet to be mentioned—has not 
actually realized that humanity is inseparable from their 
environment. If we draw the conclusion that the order of 
nature is no more than its description in terms of our 
calculus, and that therefore the pattern of the world is 
simply the invention of human consciousness, we are 
talking as if human consciousness were not part of the 
world. The solid objection to all purely instrumentalist 
theories of natural order is that consciousness and its 
functions—reason, observation, and calculation—are not 
inventions of consciousness. They are operations of a 
cerebral cortex that is part of its own environment, and 
that grew out of that environment without first intending to 
do so. 

The pretension of consciousness is that it can become its 
own object, that is, stand outside itself and the world of 
which it is a part. But as [Perry Williams] Bridgman has put 
it, “the insight that we can never get away from ourselves 
is an insight that the human race through its long history 
has been deliberately—one is tempted to say wilfully— 
refusing to admit.” The mathematical analogue is the Godel 
theorem that no system can be shown to be without 
contradiction except in terms of a higher system, so that 
one may pile up systems and meta-systems forever without 
attaining the point beyond doubt. To put the same thing in 
terms of Indian philosophy, nothing entraps one so deeply 
in maya as the attempt to get out of it. Nothing is so 
unconscious as the ambition to be completely conscious. As 
Shankara himself said of the Godhead, the Brahman, “It is 
the knower, and the knower can know other things, but 
cannot make itself the object of its own knowledge, in the 


same way that fire can burn other things but cannot burn 
itself.” 

Thus if we think we have a purely rational, conscious, 
and unmythical picture of nature in terms of the scientific 
calculus, what we have in fact is the very image of maya in 
its most primordial form. For maya in its root form ma 
means “to measure,” and its inflection matr- gives us 
“meter,” “matrix,” and perhaps “material.” In standing 
back to see the world quite objectively, therefore, we find 
ourselves caught in the primal image of illusion, the 
entangling web of maya as the spider mother who sucks the 
life from us. 

All this is anything but a diatribe against the pursuit of 
science. If science is in any sense a sin, I would Say, 
“Peccate for-titer!” It is through the full and exhaustive 
following of science that we discover the dimensions and 
rationale of the trap in which our consciousness involves 
itself when it aspires to too great a control of itself and the 
world. The limits of control are already being explored and 
Clarified in the cybernetics of Norbert Wiener. The 
inseparability of humanity and nature becomes evident 
with an altogether new lucidity with every step in ecology. 
In psychiatry and psychology, where technology reaches 
most deeply into a person, there have long been those who 
have insisted upon the healing power of a basic trust in the 
unconscious. But what interests me most is the growing 
success of people engaged in basic research in persuading 
government and industry that nothing of any consequence 
will be discovered unless scientists are allowed to be 
playful, unscheduled, and whimsical. Here the whole 
process is at last in reverse, for the need for more and 
more science produces the need for more and more 
spontaneous, playful, and unpredictable people in white 


coats. Certainly, more playfulness will not produce 
scientific discovery, nor any other kind of valuable creation. 
Yet rigorous discipline and exact thinking must always be 
subordinate to the whimsical unconscious; subordinate, but 
nevertheless its indispensable tools. 

The whole situation of science today is profoundly 
mythological, since it is a reenactment of basic themes in 
the mythologies of God. As yet, perhaps, it is no more than 
science fiction, but the logical goal of technology is a world 
in which the touch of a button will grant every desire, and 
where desires themselves will be made desirable desires by 
the proper drugs or alterations of the brain. But such a 
world would swiftly become intolerable without the 
introduction of a button labeled “Surprise!” At first, 
pleasant surprises; later, some nasty ones to add a certain 
spice and adventure to experience. It is thus that in the 
Kalika Purana, Brahma is sunk in deep meditation at the 
beginning of the worlds, when—whoops!—out of the depths 
of his being there emerges the youth called Love, to the 
total astonishment and disquiet of the Creator. There is 
rather the same feeling in Genesis where it is said, without 
any apparent forethought or reason, “And God created 
great whales...” Just like that, and only afterward did he 
look and see that it was good. If, then, the very 
omnipotence that creates the worlds is God letting go of 
himself, is not science with all the techniques and 
disciplines now at its disposal, able to set aside being so 
largely practical and useful and let fantasy bring far 
greater wonders from the mind than giant rockets and 
huge explosions? 


Time and Convention 


Five Broadcasts 


1. Time and the Moment 


It’s very difficult to enter deeply into the feelings of people 
among whom you were not born and brought up. Thus I am 
not quite sure whether Americans have the same peculiar 
sensations about a Sunday evening that I felt as a child in 
England. I think there is probably some difference, because 
in American cities there is not quite the same Sunday 
atmosphere of utterly rolled-up sidewalks, of Saturday 
night’s dinner warmed over for supper, of a kind of 
respectably religious depression hanging over from times 
when Sunday was the Lord’s Day, with a vengeance. In this 
country we do not have quite the same intolerable sadness 
of streets echoing with church bells ringing for Evensong, 
nor the same association of the ending of the day with the 
ending of life—with hell beyond the grave, or worse, the 
everlasting hymn-singing of a churchly heaven. But here, 
too, I believe that Sunday evenings bring for many of us a 
kind of letdown of the spirits, as we are aware of the 
approaching Monday morning and another week of work 
ahead. In a culture where work is so strictly divided from 
play, one does not want the vacation to end, and at the end 
of a period of rest and play you might want to say with the 
Latin poet, “O lente, lente currite noctis equi!“—”O slowly, 


yy 
! 


slowly run, ye horses of the night!” Let time slow down, 
and the party with beer and coffee round the fire not come 
to an end. 

Since childhood, and since coming to this country, I am 
happy to say that this peculiar Sunday evening feeling has 
almost entirely left me. But there does remain, at about this 
time of night, a sense of the slowing down of time, as if 
somewhere between now and the dawn one approached an 
interval through which one might slip out of time 
altogether; a pause of the minute hand in which the world 
may be seen, even for a long moment, from the standpoint 
of eternity. In a day when time is money and money is 
value, this is not a fashionable standpoint. It is equally 
unfashionable for those to whom time is not money but 
opportunity, and progress toward insufferably busy ideals. 
All of this, as I see it, leads to a frightful impoverishment of 
life, to a routine of witless activity in which there is no 
pause for wonder. 

Iam simply appalled by the number of my acquaintances 
for whom any sort of play of the imagination, any release 
from dogged practicality or from the hectic pursuit of 
pleasure or culture, seems impossible. For those who feel 
this way, a slowing down of time is simply boredom—an 
occasion to yawn or look for a more or less violent 
distraction. But there are others for whom this is not so— 
for whom the slow moments of time are the most valuable, 
since they are, as it were, chinks through which the world 
is seen clearly, through which one is able to contemplate 
the beautiful and terrible fascination of what is, instead of 
chasing the comparatively vapid and stereotyped visions of 
what ought to be. Therefore, as Sunday evening is one of 
these slow times, I thought that some of you might enjoy it 
as an occasion for speculation—in the original sense of the 


speculum or mirror, the instrument of reflection—for 
simply wondering at and about the course of our life. 

For this has always seemed to me the proper activity of 
philosophy and religion. Yet these are almost hateful terms 
to those who think of philosophy as an academic splitting of 
hairs, and of religion as a stuffy moralism or a literalistic 
mythology. To me, philosophy and religion have always 
been ways of expressing the sense that being alive is 
uncanny and strange; and thus it has seemed utterly 
incomprehensible that there are people for whom they are 
of no interest. I really don’t believe that there are such 
people. One can very readily sympathize with those for 
whom textbook philosophy and conventional religion are a 
bore, but surely they must express their feeling of wonder 
in other ways, calling it by other names, such as science or 
art, or by no names at all. 

I think, then, we might begin with what to many of us 
must seem the queerest of all queer things—our sense of 
living in a one-way oddity called Time, of being involved in 
a movement that never stops and that never goes back on 
its course. Scientifically speaking, time is a measurement of 
motion in space—the standard of measurement being the 
rotation of the earth upon its own axis and about the sun. 
By these we set our clocks, with their evenly spaced cogs 
and their regularly divided circular dials—in the simple and 
very trusting faith that the speed of the earth is constant, 
that it does not go faster some days and slower on others. 
Of course the clocks tell us that all days go past at the 
same speed, despite the vivid subjective feeling that some 
days rush and some simply drag. For in addition to clock 
time there is also biological and psychological time— 
measured, no doubt, by less constant processes than the 
rotation of the earth, processes such as metabolism, the 


beat of the heart, and the rhythm of the lungs. Incidentally, 
it has often seemed to me that these biological processes 
are much more fundamental to humanity than the rotation 
of the earth, and I have wondered whether we might not 
construct a more congenially shaped clock, elliptical, ovoid, 
or perhaps Mae Westish in form to be in time with the 
rhythms of a more subtle organism than a planet. 

But I think we may agree without further argument that 
time is a measure of motion, and that the problem of time is 
really the problem of motion. To wonder what time is, is 
really to wonder what motion is. In all probability this is 
one of those problems that seem to be made for wondering 
rather than answering, and I am not going to attempt to 
make any definition of motion. But this much we can Say: 
that all motion is relative—meaning that nothing can be 
said to be moving except in relation to something else that 
is relatively still. We know that the earth is rotating only 
because of the apparent movement of the sun and the stars. 
If the earth were the only object in space, we should not be 
able to determine whether it was moving, since there would 
be no relatively stable objects to give points of comparison. 

The question then arises: under such circumstances, 
would the earth be moving in reality without our being able 
to notice it? Would the earth be moving if all other planets, 
stars, and galaxies were suddenly to vanish? I find it quite 
fascinating to realize that this question has no answer, not 
because we do not know, but because it is perfectly 
meaningless. For if there were no other objects in space 
than the earth itself, there would be nothing whatsoever 
with respect to which the earth could be said to be moving 
—toward it, away from it, or around it. Motion is a property 
that does not come into play unless there are, at the very 
least, two bodies: and though we can’t go into it very 


deeply at the moment, this is true of other things besides 
motion. It is also true of facts, things, or events: it is quite 
impossible to conceive a single, solitary fact without at 
least one other fact. Just try to visualize a simple image 
without any background! 

To say, then, that motion and time are relative is to say 
that there is no absolute motion. But this is also to say that 
there is no absolute stillness—because the relationship of 
motion and stillness is mutual. If we perceive motion be 
comparative stillness, we perceive stillness by comparative 
motion. It would therefore be a mistake to suppose that 
either the earth all by itself or the sum total of bodies in 
space—whichever you please—is absolutely still because it 
has no absolute motion. For we are speaking of a situation 
in which the concepts of motion and stillness are simply 
inapplicable and meaningless. 

To come back to earth, I have already noted other ways 
in which we perceive the relativity of motion and time—the 
psychological sensations of time flying and time dragging. 
Try the experiment of watching the sweep hand on an 
electric clock. By a simple adjustment of your imagination 
you can feel that hand either as rushing around the clock or 
as crawling around it. You can think of time as the earth 
turning upon its axis at almost one thousand miles per 
hour, or as the sun creeping across the sky so slowly that 
you can hardly notice it. Close your eyes, and think of 
yourself as living on through time—moving continuously 
from the past into the future. How fast are you going? Are 
you Sailing with a gentle wind or going by jet propulsion? 
You will find that you can adjust your sensations equally 
well to either image. And now comes a very interesting 
question: how slow a sensation of time can you get? 
Change from jet propulsion to sail. Any image will do, 


provided that it is something that moves continuously, 
without jerks. Now change from sail to snail? Perhaps the 
hour hand of a clock. Obviously we can get slower than that 
—much slower—and yet still be moving continuously. How 
slow can slow be? 

I wonder—what is the effect of slowing down your image 
of the passage of time? Does it make you feel rested—or 
simply impatient? Just for the sake of experiment, you 
might try the reverse process: speeding up the image, 
thinking of yourself hurtling through time at the speed of 
light, or at the speed of thought, which can jump in a single 
instant to the remotest galaxies. With such a very fast 
image in mind, it may seem to you that the ordinary events 
around you are taking place extremely slowly. Whereas, on 
the other hand, a slow snail’s pace image of time may make 
it seem that events are rushing past you and leaving you 
way behind. But the point I want to make is this: that all 
these images are attempts to visualize the speed of the 
absolute time at which you are moving from past to future, 
to find some figure of the rate at which your lifetime is 
“really” passing. But, you see, you can think of it any way 
you please—as fast as you like or as slow as you like. So I 
might paraphrase Shakespeare and say, “There is nothing 
either slow or fast, but thinking makes it so.” 

There is a story that somewhere around 1400, the abbot 
of a Benedictine monastery in Germany, whose name was 
John, went for a walk by himself to the top of a hill near the 
monastery. High in the air above the hill’s crown there was 
a Skylark, bouncing up and down, and singing so 
rapturously that the abbot was caught up into an ecstasy— 
and for an intense moment lived in eternity, listening to the 
hymns of the six-winged cherubim and seraphim as they 
danced in flight at the very center of the light of God. The 


vision passed, and the abbot returned to the monastery. At 
the gatehouse a surprised and unfamiliar monk opened the 
wicket and asked the abbot his name and his business. 
“What do you mean!” exclaimed the abbot. “I am your 
Abbot John, and I have just been out for a walk.” “Abbot 
John!” said the gatekeeper. There is no abbot John here. 
Our abbot’s name is Gregory, and he has been our abbot 
for twenty years.” “Brother,” said that abbot sternly, “do 
not jest with me. Open the gate now, and let me in.” And 
then he noticed that the monk’s face was becoming white 
with fear. “Abbot John!” the monk gasped. “We have had no 
Abbot John here for three hundred years. The last Abbot 
John was sometime around 1400. It is now 1704!” 

The reverse of this story is related, I believe, about the 
Prophet Mohammed, who is said to have been rapt into 
heaven for seven long years in the interval between letting 
a pitcher of water slip from his hand and catching it again 
before it could spill.... In fact there is a universal tradition 
about moments in which people have slipped out of time 
into eternity—and very often come back into time at the 
most unexpected and inconvenient places! These stories 
are not always of a religious character. It is said that when 
even the fastest pitcher sent a ball to Babe Ruth, the 
moment of striking it was slowed down in his mind to such 
a point that he could see the seams on the ball with perfect 
clarity. There was once, too, an experimenter with dreams 
who ran an icicle across the neck of a sleeping man, who 
then woke to relate a long, long dream about his 
adventures in the French Revolution that ended up with his 
being guillotined. 

By and large, however, this universal tradition of the 
eternal moment is especially associated with spiritual 
experience and with the arts—and always it carries the 


implication that there is some very special and splendid 
insight to be discovered in a kind of concentration upon the 
immediate moment. It is as if one were to find out that the 
moment in which we live is a sort of keyhole through which 
one may pass into a world in which—on the one hand—time 
does not rush by and—on the other hand—life is not merely 
dead and static. It is to discover that the whole point of 
being alive does not lie in some future destination, some 
far-off ideal yet to be attained, but that in some very queer 
way, this particular instant in which we are living is the 
fulfillment of everything and leaves nothing more that is of 
any real importance to be desired. 

You might naturally imagine that a person who could 
feel this way would thereupon be good for nothing else. 
They would be deprived of incentive to create or achieve 
anything. They would loaf idly through the rest of their 
days, enraptured with nothing but the contemplation of 
their immediate present. I realize that this is what would 
seem to happen, but I know equally well that it is not the 
case, though I do not know why it is not. This may be 
paradox or nonsense, but the truth is that those who have 
ever discovered the complete sufficiency of this one 
moment become extraordinarily creative people. As a 
matter of fact, some approximation to this point of view is 
the only state of mind in which we can cope with some of 
the most difficult kinds of work—work that appears 
endless, boring, and insuperably frustrating. We have to 
take each step as if it were the only one to be taken—and 
then the job is done before we know it. 

Once upon a time there was a judge who complained to 
a Buddhist priest that his work—trying one silly case after 
another—was an intolerable bore, and he asked the priest 


what could he do about it. The priest wrote him the 
following poem: 


Not twice this day: 
Inch, time, foot, gem. 


After such a vivid expression it is perhaps anticlimactic 
to add that he was saying that every single inch and foot of 
time is a unique gem. Ordinarily this does not seem to be 
so, because we have formed the habit of comparing each 
moment with past and future moments, and of adding the 
moments together in our minds so that they present an 
appalling monotony. The unique gem cannot be found 
unless we live each moment without comparing it with 
others, and without adding it to others, treating it as if it 
were the only one to be lived. 

But this seems to be neither easy nor practical. It might 
seem to require a state of amnesia, the difficult and 
probably dangerous step of wiping all other moments out of 
memory and thus losing the thread of coherence and 
purpose in our lives. This would be true if it were 
impossible for us to live, as it were, on two levels at once; 
but in fact it is not at all impossible, since we are doing it 
constantly. I pointed out a little while ago that while from a 
relative standpoint we are certainly moving through space, 
from an absolute standpoint we are neither moving nor 
still, going through time neither swiftly nor slowly. This is 
living on two levels at once. 

From a relative standpoint, from within the framework 
of certain conventions and social institutions, our lives have 
purpose and meaning. But there is another standpoint from 
which we are not going anywhere but nowhere, from which 
all the complex and marvelous creations of human culture 


are like the intricate but meaningless patterns of bubbles 
on the seashore. For sanity’s sake we need to see both 
viewpoints. We need to be able to live with the future 
clearly in mind; but we need also to be able to see the total 
perfection of every instant. These points are not mutually 
exclusive. I cannot explain why they are not, because all 
language is geared to the realm of relativity and can only 
conceive what is more perfect by comparison with what is 
less perfect. So to understand this, you have to go beyond 
words, to realize that even quite ordinary experiences 
cannot really be described with words, and that there is a 
great deal more to life than what we can think about in 
verbal symbols. 

I said a moment ago that the experience of the eternal 
moment is a kind of concentration upon this particular 
instant, as if it were the only one to be lived. That “kind of” 
is important, because it is not concentration as usually 
understood, as a fixed staring. If you stare fixedly at this 
moment, trying to get something out of it, it will elude you 
on the spot. It will be like trying to chop a ball bearing with 
a hatchet. When you think very hard about this moment, 
you can’t put your finger on it, you can’t find it. It is justa 
fleeting infinitesimal, that is never here at all. It is always 
just about to be and always just gone by. 

Concentration in the sense in which I am using the word 
means, not staring at, but being centered in this one 
moment and not comparing it with any other. It requires 
simply the understanding that there is no other moment 
than this one: there never was, and there never will be. It 
moves faster than lightning, and yet—in a kind of Alice- 
Through-the-Looking-Glass fashion—it is always here. It 
Changes with the instability of smoke, and yet is ever the 
same. You cannot, then, compare this moment with any 


other, for there are no others. Memories of the past and 
anticipation of the future are not other moments, but parts 
of this one. When you try to compare them with it, you are 
trying to compare this moment with itself—and nothing is 
more frustrating than trying to do the impossible. 

The thought that there is just this moment, and no other 
one, is at first sight against all common sense. It seems so 
completely obvious that there most certainly will be other 
moments, that tomorrow will soon be here, with the very 
concrete reality of its work to be done and its pains and 
travails to be suffered. True. But if you look at the matter 
clearly, it becomes suddenly quite obvious that you cannot 
experience any other moment than this one with any 
degree of vivid reality. Think of the very worst that could 
happen tomorrow. Feel free to worry about it just as much 
as you like. But actually, in vivid reality, there is nothing in 
the world except just this worrying. Well then—why not 
worry? Why not give yourself up, with all the energy at 
your command, to a real orgy of anxiety? Since there is 
nothing else at the moment, one may as well make the best 
of it. But...let me ask you, what sort of an experience does 
anxiety become when you are so immersed in it that you 
have nothing else to compare it with? This is the same 
problem as how long is a piece of string. It is the same as 
asking whether a snail is going slowly when not being 
compared with an airplane or the hour hand of a clock. 

One cannot live this moment completely, without 
comparison, so long as it still seems that there might be 
some other real alternative. But one has to find out, first of 
all, that there is actually nothing else to do. And there isn’t. 
Everything else is a straining after shadows and clutching 
at winds; and if one must strain after shadows, well go 
ahead and strain. There is a saying in Zen Buddhism, “Walk 


or sit just as you will, but whatever you do, don’t wobble”— 
to which I would add, but if you must wobble, wobble with 
all your might. “The fool who persists in their folly will 
become wise.” But they must persist with the whole energy 
of their soul. 

Perhaps we can now begin to see it has been said that 
all the riches that the heart could desire, why the ultimate 
mystery of the universe, or whatever you want to call it, is 
not to be found far away in some distant place in a remote 
future. The universal tradition of the timeless moment 
insists that it is all right here, and that if you cannot find it 
in this immediate instant, you cannot find it at all, because 
there is no other place to look. But no one in the world can 
explain why it should be so, or can convince you by 
argument that it is worth looking into. It is so much easier 
to try it for oneself, and see into the thing directly. Let me 
conclude with two more Zen poems, which say it so much 
better than I can. There is one about “idle thoughts,” which 
means comparisons between one moment and another. 


In spring, hundreds of flowers; 

In summer, the breeze; 

In autumn, the falling leaves; 

In winter, snow. 

Free your mind from idle thoughts, 
And every season is a good season. 


And in case this sounds too much like a rural rhapsody, 
there is this other: 


Under the sword lifted high 
Is hell, making you tremble. 
But go straight ahead, 


And there is the Land of Bliss. 


2. The Illusion of Time 


It was probably harder to realize a thousand years ago. 
Today it seems to me that no reflective person can possibly 
fail to see it. Somewhere in the makeup of the human mind 
as we know it there is a mistake—a radical and possibly 
fatal error. I don’t think any reasonable person can expose 
themself to the media of mass communication in our world 
—the press, the radio, the TV—not to mention the 
dangerous networks of automotive transportation, without 
beginning to realize that we are the victims of a collective 
insanity. On the surface it seems to be a highly complex 
disease arising from innumerable causes, all of them so 
deeply involved and ingrained that nothing can be done 
about it. But I can’t escape the insistent intuition that it is 
not quite that way—that the causes are not numerous, that 
they do not lie beyond recall in an inaccessible past, nor 
buried in deep-seated and intractable patterns of blind 
emotion. I feel that there is something difficult, but not at 
all impossible, to understand because it is so close to us 
that it escapes notice—a sort of unconscious, unexamined 
assumption about life that might be corrected relatively 
easily if only it could be brought to light. 

This could be wishful thinking. On the other hand, 
people who are accustomed to philosophical, mathematical, 
or scientific thought soon discover that when their thinking 
begins to contradict itself absurdly and to move in 
inextricably complicated vicious circles, there is probably 
something wrong with the premises. There was usually a 
simple mistake at the very beginning, which throws 
everything out of order. The subsequent calculations may 


have been made accurately and cleverly, but the initial 
mistake undermines them so irretrievably that no amount 
of skill can produce order if one continues to follow the 
same line. There is nothing for it but to go back to the 
beginning. 

In human affairs, however, it seems that this is the one 
thing that we cannot possibly do. For we believe that our 
present state of affairs is the consequence of a long course 
of history. And history takes place in a one-way stream of 
time in which there is no going back to beginnings. If there 
were a mistake in the beginning, we are stuck with it. On 
rare occasions, a single individual may perhaps free 
themself from some of the consequences of their past. But 
as we move from the individual to the collective, actions 
become more and more determined, and we move into a 
realm where the present is almost wholly dictated by the 
past and the past remains fixed beyond recall. We know, for 
example, that it is very difficult to predict events in the 
submicroscopic world, to predict the so-called Brownian 
movements of very minute particles. But when such 
movements are considered in the mass, collectively, 
prediction becomes much easier, and a determinism seems 
more and more firmly established. It is perhaps the same 
with individuals on the one hand and societies on the other. 

Yet somehow I suspect that the radical error of which I 
was speaking is closely connected with this very view of 
history. For I feel that our collective insanity has something 
to do with our sensation, or our idea, of time. Time has 
always fascinated me. I don’t mean time in the sense of 
rhythm or tempo. I mean continuous time, which is always 
getting later and later, the ineluctable life-movement from 
the past into the future. It’s so inescapably real, and yet so 
strangely intangible and indefinable. But I cannot get over 


the enormous hunch that there’s something wrong with it— 
that somewhere in our commonsense view of time there is 
a radical illusion. 

There are, I believe, some good and fairly obvious 
reasons for thinking that the root of the difficulty has 
something to do with time. For it is often said that the basic 
instinct of living organisms is for survival, which means of 
going on in time. The need to survive involves struggle, 
conflict, anxiety. Furthermore, in our technological 
civilization time seems much more real and much more 
important than in simpler cultures. Our satisfactions are 
more than ever projected into the future. Tomorrow 
assumes an ever-growing significance—to the degree that 
happiness eludes us in the present. To say that something 
has no future is to damn it outright. On the other hand, to 
have a future is the measure of value, and this future is 
what we pursue at ever-increasing speeds. 

Here on the West Coast of America we can see this ina 
peculiarly vivid way, for we are all on wheels rather than 
legs. We move incessantly, and often to no other purpose 
than to be somewhere else. Vast networks’ of 
superhighways and airlines are making it easier and easier 
to travel to places that are less and less worth visiting 
because they are more and more alike. Industry creates a 
growing multitude of utterly indistinguishable towns. I 
don’t need to underline the conformist spirit of American, 
Russian, and all industrialized life. The maddening 
monotony grows upon us not only in space and shape, but 
also in time—in a succession of days that tend to be more 
and more alike as we move away from the old culture of 
festivals and fasts that gave the year a definite design. We 
are now too busy to feast and too greedy to fast, and thus 
the time, the future time, into which we are racing 


promises to be increasingly monotonous. And we wonder 
why adventurous children start smashing things and why 
sensitive adults get roaring drunk or retreat into the 
relatively fascinating fantasies of psychosis. 

It is in vain that the moralists and the preachers call for 
restraint, sacrifice, and abstinence from _ desire; 
nevertheless, there is something right in what they are 
saying. The notion that human sanity has a good deal to do 
with self-restraint has persisted for many thousands of 
years and has had some very wise exponents. But it has 
usually had an end in view—a temporal, future end—some 
sort of pie in the sky. No one can really abstain, however, 
no one can effectively overcome the mad greed of anxiety, 
until they have realized that the future is a mirage that 
does not contain the answer to anything. The true ascetic is 
not forcing themself; they are just acting naturally in 
accordance with reality as they see it. I think it was Father 
Huntington, founder of the Anglican Order of the Holy 
Cross, who made the remarkable statement that spiritual 
perfection consists in walking slowly. Yet this is not a 
matter of “hold your horses,” of patience as a fierce tension 
with the forward rush of time and desire. The problem is 
simpler in that it needs less energy, but more difficult in 
that it is not at all obvious. What is required is not brilliant 
brains, but a kind of revolutionary simplicity. 

Perhaps it sounds fantastic to say that the really urgent 
thing is not to put a stop to war and atom bombs and 
totalitarian governments, but to put a stop to time. Words 
confuse us, and time means too many things. Let me say 
again, I do not mean time in the special senses of rhythm 
and growth. I mean the entirely monotonous, rhythmless, 
continuously accelerating time, the time in which things do 
not grow but merely move, the time wherein, indeed, things 


are not given time to grow but must be forced into fruition 
faster and faster. It is not really fantastic to talk about 
stopping this kind of time; it is one of the few processes we 
can stop—for the simple reason that it is not real. 

I don’t think it is enough to see that this kind of time is 
not going anywhere, for this insight seldom gives us much 
more than fits of depression. Vanity of vanities, all flesh is 
as the grass, the caravan starting for the dawn of Nothing 
—all that is not quite the point. It is only part of the 
problem, albeit an important part, to see that, in the not so 
very long run, we have no future. This is the negative 
aspect of the insight that we need. But there is also a 
positive aspect, an aspect that more than makes up for the 
depressing deprivation of the thought that the dimension of 
time leads only to annihilation, or to what may be worse, 
infinite monotony—which used to be called everlasting 
damnation. 

The traditional opposite of everlasting damnation was 
called eternal—that is, timeless—life, and however much 
vagueness may have surrounded it, there has been general 
agreement that it was in some way peculiarly wonderful 
and splendid. It never really had very much to do with 
halos, harps, and hymns for always and always; this was 
only a rather crude symbolism for something so much 
easier to understand that ordinary language was too 
complicated to express it. If I may continue with the use of 
this traditional language for a while, I think we should try 
to grasp what was really meant by the difference between 
time and eternity, between earth and heaven, the natural 
and the supernatural, the relative and the absolute. 

Perhaps I can best show the difference between the two 
by an illustration from music. When we listen to a melody, 
or just a changing succession of notes, we think of these 


notes as high or low, long or short. It is obvious, however, 
that the individual notes are not high or low, long or short, 
in themselves, but in relation to each other. This 
comparison, and the consequent recognition of a melody, is 
made possible because we can retain in memory notes that 
are no longer being sounded—notes that are in some sense 
no longer real. And in this sense of the word, the real note, 
that which is being sounded right now, is not in itself high 
or low, long or short. The same is true of the series or 
succession of thoughts or events that we call life. The 
distinctions of good and bad, pleasant and painful, fast and 
slow, are relative—and depend upon retaining the past in 
memory. For purposes of this illustration, the notes or 
events as compared with one another will stand for the 
relative world. On the other hand, the present note or 
event, considered by itself, will stand for the absolute 
world, since in itself, the note is timeless. You will 
remember, too, that traditional descriptions of the absolute 
world are apt to be composed mostly of denials of its 
relativity. It is called that which is neither good nor bad, 
high nor low, long nor short, existing nor non-existing. And 
yet it is also called the one and only reality, just as the note 
that is sounded now is, in a sense, the only real one. 

At this point, I am sure it does not sound as if the so- 
called absolute world is very exciting. For the whole 
significance of a melody depends on the mutual relations of 
the notes. If we were somehow to forget these relations, 
surely the notes would all seem to be the same. Well, 
certainly not—because the sense of sameness depends 
upon comparison just as much as the sense of difference. 
Be that as it may, it would nevertheless seem that a mind in 
which passing events left no more trace than the passage of 
birds through the sky, a mind in which there was no 


comparison between events, would be in a subhuman state 
of idiocy without any conscious intelligence at all. This 
would doubtless be true if it were also true that the two 
worlds—the relative and the absolute—were mutually 
exclusive, if hearing a note by itself made it impossible to 
hear it in relation to other notes. But this is not how it 
works. 

Disentangling the mind from the illusion of time requires 
primarily an act of concentration that is perhaps best made 
in the form of a question. I want to know what is really 
happening, what I am actually and certainly experiencing, 
and not just imagining or remembering. One does not 
handle this question by trying to think it out, but by feeling 
or sensing, to see what is actually there. Only in asking this 
question one must by very careful not to strain and stare, 
as if concentration required a muscular effort. This will 
only put the mind in a kind of cramp. If you want to see 
something clearly, there are two extremes to be avoided— 
staring at it until you eyes water, fuzzing the image, or 
looking so loosely that your eyes go out of focus. So then— 
with eyes and ears, senses and feelings all resting in focus, 
we look directly at whatever happens to be here. Without 
any very great difficulty we should, I think, be able to see 
that in plain fact the only thing we see is what I have called 
the absolute world—a now without past or future. 

Now all this is very much like playing with an optical 
illusion. At first glance it seems perfectly obvious that in 
this drawing of three men in a passage, the three are of 
different sizes. But look again, and it is clear that they are 
all the same size. Yet the impression, created by the 
perspective lines of the passage, that the man at the back is 
ever so much taller than the man in front keeps returning, 
and only after continued readjustment of the mind does it 


become obvious, even at a glance, that their sizes are 
equal. It is the same with the psychological illusion of time. 
It has the tremendous persuasive force of long habit, and 
although seeing through it is not really difficult, the mind 
so easily slips back into its old rut. Yet it can adjust itself to 
the new standpoint, and then it becomes just as self- 
evident, just as much a matter of common sense, that the 
real world is actually timeless. The illusion of time and of 
relativity can still be seen, but seen as an illusion, bereft of 
its persuasive power. What now appears as_ the 
fundamental and primary reality is not a series of events, 
relatively good and bad, long and short; the fundamental 
reality is just this event—sufficient in itself without 
yesterday or tomorrow. What has happened is not that the 
absolute view has destroyed the relative, but that the 
emphasis of reality has shifted in such a way that the 
reality of the timeless world is far more persuasive than 
that of the world of time. 

The correction of this basic illusion naturally brings 
about a large number of psychological changes, and one of 
the most interesting is the disappearance of the sense of 
rush, of temporal urgency and anxiety. You begin to realize 
how your whole consciousness has been cramped and 
stifled by rush, how the moments have whizzed by without 
yielding any real satisfaction, for paradoxical as it may 
sound, to take time seriously is to have no time! Habituated 
as we are to the panic of time-consciousness, we are even 
persuaded that there is something wise and good about it, 
and fear that without the sense of rush human beings 
would lose all incentive and creative interest. 

Now this is the most fantastic nonsense. Human beings 
are, I think, the only creatures who rush. Plants and 
animals create themselves in the most wonderful variety of 


forms, but they never hurry. All their processes of growth 
depend upon the most admirable timing, for, as I said 
before, rush is the polar opposite of real time, which is 
growth and rhythm. Rush is likewise completely inimical to 
human creativeness: artists, inventors, and writers cannot 
work properly when they are rushed, because speed gives 
their thoughts no time to grow and mature. This is why our 
current culture produces such a terrifying amount of sloppy 
workmanship in everything from clothing and housing to 
so-called works of art. It is all slammed together without 
love or patience, in a huge hurry to make money for things 
that aren’t worth buying. We pretend that we cannot afford 
real craftsmen. They are already an almost obsolete race. 
We argue that they were after all a luxury for a leisured 
aristocracy, as if the only alternative to a_ leisured 
aristocracy were a harried mob of bourgeois-proletarians 
owning immense quantities of rubbish. 

I feel it is a very healthy sign of some remnants of sanity 
that more and more people are ceasing to buy certain kinds 
of trash and are spending their leisure hours making some 
of the essentials of life for themselves—houses, furniture, 
dishes, clothing—and there are signs that this is beginning 
to go far beyond a mere hobby. I am acquainted, too, with 
more and more young people who show not the least 
enthusiasm for the sundry squirrel cages of business and 
industry, and who would much rather live in poverty doing 
work that is sincere and true to their sense of vocation. But 
in some respects these are simply the symptoms of 
unbearable discomfort. They do not yet go to what seems to 
me to be the root of the matter, to that basic slip of the 
mind’s eye into the optical illusion of the kind of time 
whose symbol is the monotonous, rhythm-less, uniform 
motion of the clock...that silly gadget that attempts to count 


our hours and whereby we persuade ourselves that they 
are really and truly numbered, that attempts to divide life 
into equal units and measures—hours, days, months, and 
years—which never actually fit in with the essentially non- 
mechanical rhythms of growth and of the seasons and of 
the earth’s rotation about the sun. 

If anyone wants to join a real revolution, something far 
beyond changing from the right side to the left on the hard 
bed of politics, beyond the ideological isms that are merely 
symptoms battling with symptoms—I suggest that for a real 
revolution we start a new leisured aristocracy, not of 
privilege and material wealth, but of people who won’t rush 
or be rushed, out of the clear realization that clock- 
measured time is an illusion. I cannot feel that there is 
really very much to lose by this, except in mere quantity. 
We shall exchange all that money for what little we have, a 
bird in the hand being worth two in the bush. And far, far 
more important than this, we shall exchange the purely 
imaginary and utterly frustrating fantasy of the numbered 
days hurrying by for the actual reality of this one unique 
event—neither long nor short, neither fast nor slow, but 
eternal. 


3. Christianity and Nature 


The original meaning of the word “pagan” is country- 
dweller, and the word came to be identified with “heathen” 
because the first Christian communities grew up in the 
cities. I do not think that nearly enough weight has been 
given to this fact. The urban origins of Christianity may 
have a great deal to do with something that has puzzled me 
all my life, and I can only express this puzzle in a rather 
personal way. 


To put it briefly: I can only feel like a Christian when I 
am indoors; I am incapable of being one in the open air. I 
have a very deep love and respect for the rites and 
doctrines of the Catholic Church. For me, the whole culture 
of European Catholicism—something very different from 
American Catholicism—is one of the most marvelous and 
beautiful things on earth. I love and respect not only its 
outward and aesthetic aspect, but also its inward center— 
the spirit of sanctity that has animated the lives of the 
Christian saints. But I can maintain this love and respect 
only by keeping it in a water-tight compartment, by 
shutting out the light of the open sky with the symbolic 
jewelry of stained-glass windows. 

I feel that there is a deep and quite extraordinary 
incompatibility between the beauty of Christianity and the 
beauty of nature. Speaking personally still, I have always 
found it quite impossible to relate God the Father, Jesus 
Christ, the angels, and the saints to the universe in which I 
actually live. The moment I see a tree or look into a flower, 
or glance at the sky and the stars, or look at a naked 
human body, or go down to the ocean to watch the waves, I 
find myself in a world where this religion simply does not 
fit. The inconsistency is not so much intellectual as 
aesthetic, for what I feel is an incompatibility of character, 
of style. No one, for example, would dream of attributing a 
landscape by Sesshu to Constable or Cézanne, or a 
symphony by Haydn to Schoenberg or Palestrina. In the 
same way, my feeling for the style of Christianity, whether 
Catholic or Protestant, makes it completely impossible for 
me to identify the author of this religion with the author of 
the physical universe. This is not a judgment as to the 
relative merits of the two styles; it is only to say that they 


are not by the same hand and that they do not mix well 
together. 

Now I could well imagine a theologian who might say to 
me, “This is very understandable. For the beauty of the 
physical world is natural, and the beauty of Christianity is 
supernatural. The nearest thing in the physical world to 
supernatural beauty is the beauty of the human being, and 
more especially of the human mind. This is why you 
connect Christianity with the urban rather than the rural 
atmosphere, because in the urban atmosphere you are 
surrounded by the works of humanity.” 

“It is true,” they might go on to say, “that in a rural 
environment you are surrounded by the works of God. But 
humanity, and even the creations of humanity, are far 
higher works of God than anything you can find elsewhere 
in nature. Thus they reveal more of the character of God 
than the sun, moon, and stars, the clouds and the waters, 
for what we sometimes call the artificial is nearer to the 
supernatural than the natural.” 

And then they might add: “In what you have said so far, 
I think I can detect a slight prejudice in favor of the beauty 
of nature—and that is because you are a sentimentalist. 
You love the aesthetic surfaces of nature, so long as you do 
not have to struggle for life, which underlies it. It is only in 
humanity that there have arisen ethical and moral ideas 
that, as it were, give nature a feeling heart—and this, 
again, goes to show that you will not find God reflected 
anywhere in nature so clearly as in humanity. Now it is 
true,” they would say, “that we often want to seek relief 
from the hideousness of crowds and cities in the solitude of 
nature, but this is only because the worst is the corruption 
of the best. The evil of humanity is far more terrible than 
the evil of the serpent or the shark, but only because the 


goodness of humanity immeasurably exceeds the goodness 
of a spring landscape. You have only to consider how 
utterly lonely and lost you would feel if you were the only 
human being in the world. How glad you would then be to 
exchange the whole sum of natural beauty for a single 
human face.” 

This begins to sound like a convincing argument until 
you realize that it contains a very curious premise, implied 
in the idea that I might be willing to exchange the whole 
sum of natural beauty for a single human face. This is not 
an exchange, for the beauty of humanity is, inseparably, 
part of the total sum of natural beauty. Furthermore, the 
discrepancy of style that I feel between Christianity and 
nature includes, within nature, the human form—especially 
when it is not the pale and potatoish thing grown in cities 
under the influence of ill-conceived clothing and sedentary 
living. I often wonder whether the hatred of Caucasians for 
the other races is not a concealed form of envy. 

To some of you, this line of thought may be beginning to 
sound like something that, in sophisticated circles, is now 
regarded as a rather comic romanticism. I am thinking of 
the back-to-nature fads: nudism, vegetarianism, the cult of 
the soil, homespun clothing, beachcombing in the South 
Seas, and all that. In modern times this kind of thing has 
been a reaction against both Christianity and industrialism, 
and for all that may be fanatical, comic, utopian, and 
faddist in movements of this type, I do not think we can 
seriously deny that they have a point, that there is really 
something to be said for a certain amount of neo-paganism. 

This becomes rather easier to see when we compare our 
own culture, not with those of the South Sea Islands, but 
with the highly sophisticated and even urbanized cultures 
of the Far East, of China and Japan. For here we simply do 


not find this peculiar discrepancy between religion and 
nature—at least, not to anything like the extent as with 
Christianity. It is particularly significant that the really 
great Buddhist art of both China and Japan is landscape 
painting, and that both the Buddhist and the Taoist 
conception of the perfect temple is not the stone church 
that shuts nature out but the wooden roof with sliding walls 
that lets nature in. One of the rather fascinating symptoms 
of the compatibility of Buddhism and the incompatibility of 
Christianity with the natural universe is that it is practically 
impossible to represent the crucifixion in the Chinese style 
of painting! I have seen it tried, and the results are 
extremely weird. The reason is simply that the symmetrical 
form of the cross completely destroys the rhythm of a 
Chinese painting if it is permitted to be the principal image 
in the picture. Chinese Christians have tried to solve the 
problem by painting rustic crosses with bark and moss still 
on the wood, and stumps of branches protruding from the 
main beams. But these two straight seams simply jar with 
the rest of the painting, and the artist cannot follow their 
natural tendency to bend the straight lines irregularly 
without destroying the symbol of the cross. 

This in itself is perhaps a rather trivial example, but it 
serves aS a parable, an illustration that will show us 
something of the essential difference between pagan and 
Christian beauty. The reason the form of the cross is so 
foreign to Chinese painting is that the Chinese artist 
follows nature in loving forms that are flowing, jagged, and 
asymmetrical—forms eminently suited to their media, the 
brush and black ink. When, on the other hand, we consider 
the art forms of Christianity, the Byzantine and Gothic, we 
find a love of the architectural and the courtly. For God is 
conceived in the image of a throned monarch, and the 


rituals of the Church are patterned after the court 
ceremonials of the Greco-Roman emperors. Likewise in the 
ancient Hebrew religion, the Ark of the Covenant was 
essentially a throne hidden in the inner sanctuary of the 
Holy of Holies, which was built in the form of a perfect 
cube, since the cube was considered the symbol of 
completeness and perfection. 

Yet from the standpoint of Chinese philosophy and 
aesthetics, this symmetrical and architectonic perfection is 
rigid and lifeless. Such forms are found but rarely in 
nature. So, too, the Chinese conceived of the power behind 
nature not in the image of a monarch but as the Tao, the 
course or flow, and found images for it in water and wind, 
in the air and the sky, as well as in the processes of growth. 
Furthermore, there was no sense that the Tao had any 
desire to obtrude itself or to shine like a monarch. For the 
Tao is always anonymous and unknown, and the incessant 
changefulness and impermanence of nature are used as a 
symbol of the fact that the Tao can never be grasped or 
conceived in any fixed form. 

Furthermore, the Chinese have realized a distinction 
between the natural and the artificial that seems to have 
escaped the Western mind almost entirely. This is the truth 
that natural forms are not made, but grown—that there is a 
radical difference between the organic and the mechanical. 
Things that are made—such as houses, furniture, and 
machines—are an assemblage of parts put together, or 
shaped, like sculpture, from the outside inward. But things 
that grow shape themselves from within outward; they are 
not an assemblage of originally distinct parts: they partition 
themselves, elaborating their own structure from the whole 
to the parts, from the simple to the complex. 


This is why it is impossible for one who sees this 
difference to think of the natural universe as something 
made. It is just here, I feel, that we have the key to the total 
difference of style between the forms of Christianity and 
the forms of nature. In the Church, we are in a universe 
that has been made. Outside the Church, we are in a 
universe that has grown. Thus the God who made the world 
stands outside it as the carpenter stands outside their 
table, whereas the Tao that grows the world is within it. 
Christian theology admits, in theory, that God is immanent, 
within all things. But only in theory. In practice it is God’s 
transcendence, God’s outsideness, that is emphasized, and 
furthermore, God is only permitted to dwell on the inside 
on the strict condition that he maintains an immense 
qualitative difference between himself and the creature 
that he inhabits. Even on the inside God is outside, as the 
architect is still really outside the house that they build, 
even when they go in to decorate the interior. 

This leads us to a further distinction of the greatest 
importance between the Western and the Chinese 
conceptions of nature and of God. Conceiving humanity and 
the universe as made, the Western and Christian mind 
endeavors to interpret them mechanically. The Christian 
Westerner has an idée fixe that the universe consists of 
distinct things or entities, which are like mechanical parts. 
They feel strange to this natural environment, thinking of 
their soul as something that has come into it from the 
outside, as a part is introduced into a house or a machine. 
Furthermore, they try to understand the workings of the 
natural universe in terms of logical laws—laws that may be 
expressed in streamlined, mathematical forms of a regular 
and symmetrical character. They measure the earth and 
the skies by approximating the wayward and whimsical 


shapes of nature to the circles, triangles, and straight lines 
of Mr. Euclid. If they come actually to believe that nature is 
a mechanism, this is because they can only grasp as much 
of nature as they can fit into some mechanical or 
mathematical analogy. As a result, they never really see 
nature. All they really see is the pattern of geometrical 
forms that they have managed to project upon it. 

It is thus one of the strangest paradoxes that whereas 
Christianity insists so strongly that God is personal and 
living, the nature of God as conceived in practice has all the 
attributes of personality except the most central and 
important—which is why it is so terribly difficult to love 
God except as a discipline. For God is really conceived as a 
set of principles—principles of morality, of justice, of 
reason, of science, and of art. Even his love is principled, 
since it is tempered with justice, with the qualities of Eros. 
Absent from this conception is, as I said, the most essential 
element of any living personality, the element that I will 
call inwardness. 

What is inwardness? As I just pointed out, living things, 
organisms, grow from within outward. They do not fashion 
themselves by standing outside themselves like architects 
or mechanics. (And, incidentally, when human beings try to 
develop themselves in this way, the results are always 
affected, artificial, and insincere.) But the very nature of 
inwardness is to be mysterious, immeasurable, and 
unpredictable. For what is truly inward can never become 
an object. It is because of the inwardness of our life process 
that we do not know, or rather, cannot tell how or why we 
live—even though it is our inmost selves that are doing the 
living. The difficulty with God, as conceived in Christianity, 
is that he knows himself through and through; he knows 
everything—and for this reason lacks an inside. He is 


fashioned in the image of Western man as he would like 
himself to be—a being in total control of himself, analyzed 
to the ultimate depths of his own unconscious, understood 
and explained to the last atom of his brain, and to this 
extent completely mechanized. When every last element of 
inwardness has become an object of knowledge, the being 
is reduced to nothing but a rattling shell. 

Thus when I leave the Church and the city behind, and 
go out under the great sky; when I am with the birds, for all 
their voraciousness, and with the clouds for all their 
thunders, and the oceans for all their tempests and 
submerged monsters, I cannot feel in a Christian way 
because I am in a world that grows from within. I am 
simply incapable of feeling its life as coming from above, 
from beyond the stars, even recognizing that this is a figure 
of speech. To put it more exactly, I cannot feel that its life 
comes from Another, from someone who is other than, who 
is qualitatively and spiritually external to, all that lives and 
grows. On the contrary, I feel this whole world to be moved 
from the inside, and from an inside so deep that its inside is 
my inside too. I feel the most peculiar kinship with it, since 
it is a kinship that relates not only to what is sympathetic 
and obviously beautiful. I feel kin even to what strikes me 
as horrendous and strange, because I know that there are 
also seemingly monstrous shapes and inhuman processes 
within my own body. 

Long before Easter celebrated the resurrection of 
Christ, it was the pagan feast of growth, of the natural 
miracle of birth out of the unconscious and inward, rather 
than the “technological” miracle of the corpse brought back 
to life and the stone rolled away from the tomb. To me, it is 
an incomparably greater miracle—even though it happens 
many times a day—that a child is born, than that once a 


dead man came back to life. For in this latter miracle there 
is something unnatural because unnecessary or irrelevant. 
The raising of the dead—when you mean by this the 
revivification of a corpse—can appear as a real marvel only 
to those who feel that death is apart from life, who feel it is 
a return to the inward, to the unknown from which I came 
when I was born. I do not mean this literally, because there 
is no biological resemblance between death and birth. 
Death is not simply reversed birth. I mean, rather, that the 
truly inward source of my life was never born, that it has 
always remained inside, in somewhat the same way as the 
life remains in the tree, though the fruits may come and go. 
Outwardly, Iam one apple among many. Inwardly, I am the 
tree. 

Perhaps this was what Christ really meant when he said, 
“IT am the Vine; you are the branches.” Christianity is by no 
means necessarily the unnatural thing I have described, for 
there are hints within its rich mythology that that 
mechanical-looking, rigid cross is really a tree. I am 
thinking of the ancient hymn that says: 


Faithful Cross above all other, 
One and only noble Tree; 

None in foliage, none in blossom, 
None in fruit thy peer may be. 
Sweetest wood and sweetest iron, 
Sweetest weight is hung on thee. 


There is also, within the Christian tradition, the old and 
universal myth of the blossoming staff—the famous Rod of 
Jesse. This is, of course, what must happen if the Chinese 
artist is to be able to paint the crucifixion of Christ. The 
rigid cross of dead wood must blossom, and turn into a 


living tree. This would, indeed, be a marvelous fulfillment 
or fruition of the Christian story. For there is a legend that 
the wood of the cross upon which Christ was crucified was 
taken from that Tree of Knowledge in the Garden of Eden, 
the eating of whose fatal fruit brought about the Fall of 
Adam, so that he was expelled from Eden and debarred 
from eating the fruit of the other tree that stood there—the 
Tree of Life. Now the kind of knowledge that involves the 
Fall of Man is precisely that of which I have been speaking: 
the knowledge of nature that turns it into a mechanism, 
that tries to turn all inwardness into outwardness, seeking 
fruit only to find husks. This is the cross upon which the 
Christ suffers, if Christ stands for the inward life that is in 
us all. And the crucifixion still remains in vain if it does not 
bring about the transformation of the Tree of Knowledge 
and Death into the Tree of Life. This is why the ancient 
hymn that I have just quoted continues: 


Bend thy boughs, O Tree of Glory, 
Thy relaxing sinews bend. 

For a while the ancient rigor 
Which thy birth bestowed, suspend; 
And the King of heavenly beauty 
On thy bosom gently tend. 


But this is what has not yet happened. The old rugged 
cross remains, and the prayer of this hymn will not be 
answered until the day when the Christian cross bends its 
boughs, relaxes its sinews, and becomes at last the Tree of 
Life. 


4. A Cure for Education 


When children begin to study arithmetic, they learn that 
two and two are absolutely and necessarily four. This is 
drummed into them with the weight of authority, since 
children are capricious creatures and, if left to themselves, 
will discover all sorts of wayward answers for two plus two. 
But if—as is seldom the case—the child ever gets to the 
point where they can go rather more deeply into the 
mysteries of mathematics, they may discover, with some 
degree of concentration, that this absolute law of two plus 
two “ain’t necessarily so.” It depends on what kinds of 
things you are adding. Indeed, if they go still further, they 
find that nothing is absolutely so at all. They will discover 
whole systems of mathematics based on premises that 
seem to be completely absurd—as, for example, that four 
axes at right angles to one another can intersect at one 
point, giving us the mathematics of four dimensions, or, for 
that matter, as many dimensions as you like. 

But this isn’t going to be a talk about mathematics. I 
have mentioned these things as instances of the whole 
problem of unlearning, or, shall I say, of correcting 
necessary and unavoidable mistakes. To put it briefly, what 
we Call upbringing or education is a way of making children 
conform to the conventions of society. This seems to be 
entirely necessary. But in the process, most children are— 
perhaps unavoidably—warped. They lose their innocence, 
their spontaneity, their unselfconsciousness. In 
psychological jargon, they develop all kinds of inner 
conflicts and complexes, and they do not seem to be able to 
recover from them in adult life without the expensive 
luxury of psychoanalysis or some similar kind of therapy. 
And even then, I am not quite sure how often they really 
recover. 


If you persevere in the science of mathematics, you will 
eventually find out that the absolute rules that you learned 
in the beginning were strictly conventional, and were not in 
any sense fixed laws of nature. But you can complete four 
years of college, become a parent, and reach the top of 
your business or profession, without ever “seeing through” 
the absolutes of conduct and feeling, of thinking and 
reasoning, that were so firmly implanted in you as a child. 
To put it in another way, you can go through the whole of 
life without ever getting out of the splints and crutches, the 
spectacles and hearing aids, that were used to train your 
mind in the beginning. The result is that conventional 
disciplines do not become the mere instruments of free 
minds; they become the very structure of the mind itself, so 
that for all our boasting about living in the “land of the 
free,” we are no more free than Dr. Pavlov’s dogs. 

This may be the inevitable price of civilization and 
culture. What you gain upon the roundabout, you lose upon 
the swings, or, as Ogden Nash put it: 


The trouble with a kitten is THAT 
Eventually it becomes a CAT 


It may be that the refreshing naturalness of the child is 
something that the civilized adult loses as irreplaceably as 
the cat its kittenishness. But I do not think this is a proper 
analogy. I have lived a lot with cats, and I much prefer 
them to kittens. Furthermore, I have from time to time met 
with adults—highly sophisticated and cultured adults—who 
have somehow regained, or perhaps never lost, their 
unaffected spontaneity. It does not seem to me to be a 
necessary law that an advanced culture requires the loss of 
these natural qualities. 


I am not trying in any way to idealize the child. With five 
of them, I know better than that! The point is that children 
begin to develop certain virtues that, as a result of their 
upbringing, they do not continue to develop. Social 
conventions require them to develop their orderliness and 
skill rather than their simplicity and unaffectedness, since 
the two types of virtue seem to be mutually exclusive at a 
young age. If this is the cost of civilization, there is a 
serious question as to whether the cost is not much too 
great, as to whether—indeed—it may not eventually be fatal 
to civilization. 

Perhaps I can try to define, or at least to suggest, the 
qualities that we are losing. These are qualities that the 
child exhibits in a rather primitive and embryonic form, and 
which one finds more fully developed only in the most 
exceptional people. To use psychological jargon again, we 
say that people of this rare type are integrated. That’s to 
say, they are not at cross-purposes with themselves; they 
do not get in their own way and stand in their own light. 
They are what the Gospels call “single-eyed,” for “if thine 
eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light.” We call 
this trait sincerity—the virtue of not being self-deceived, of 
not thinking one thing and feeling another, or of not feeling 
one thing and trying to feel another. It is, furthermore, the 
marvelous quality of unselfconsciousness—the quality of 
the person who can think, act, and live without anxious 
side-glances at themselves that spoil the directness and 
effectiveness of their action. And this lack of self- 
consciousness involves something else besides, of a still 
deeper order. A truly unselfconscious person feels related 
to their environment, or rather, integrated with their 
environment. To put it in another way, they do not 
experience any gulf or gap between their own inner 


workings—their thoughts and feelings—and the natural 
processes going on around them. And thus they have a kind 
of unaggressive but nonetheless unshakable assurance, 
which at a deep level is religious faith, or at its deepest 
level a kind of metaphysical certainty. I do not mean by this 
that one is certain as to the truth of some idea or 
proposition. What I call a metaphysical certainty cannot 
really be put into words at all, for it is more nearly a 
feeling, shall I say a feeling of the inescapable naturalness 
and rightness of everything that one feels and does, even 
when it is perfectly clear that, from a relative standpoint, 
one is in the wrong. 

Most civilized adults, and especially those who belong to 
the Anglo-Saxon cultures of the West, do not have this kind 
of naturalness, nor the unmistakable kind of gaiety that 
goes with it. They seem to carry themselves heavily—to be 
so haunted by self-awareness that even when they feel 
themselves to be 100 percent sincere and in the right, they 
must needs insist upon it—as if there might be some doubt 
about it. For when the process of the cultural conditioning 
has not been unlearned, the human mind gets stuck in a 
perpetual self-criticism, a perpetual division against itself, 
which in the end paralyzes creative action. 

There are some who feel that children can be brought up 
without warping them, that with loving and skillful care 
they may be taught the conventions and artificialities of 
society without losing their naturalness. If this is true, I am 
sure that it can only be done by the very rare kind of adult I 
have been talking about. Therefore this doesn’t seem to be 
a very practical answer to the problem. 

Yet the problem has been solved—to some degree at 
least—in other cultures: cultures that have what might be 
called regular institutions for curing people of their 


upbringing, or of the inevitable distortions that it involves. 
It is like salting meat to preserve it, and then soaking out 
the excess salt before putting it on the table to be eaten. 

There are some rather interesting historical reasons why 
we do not have this kind of cultural institution. The most 
important is that we have identified our social and moral 
conventions with the will of God, with the Absolute itself. 
That is to say, we have weighted them with altogether 
excessive authority. As a result, a person who feels a 
conflict between a moral convention and their natural 
feelings finds themself at odds, not only with their family or 
their community, but with the very root and ground of life. 
This is the peculiarly Western sense of sin, of radical and 
natural uncleanness in one’s very vitals. The results of this 
are excessive and dangerous in two ways. On the one hand, 
it produces moral fanaticism, a fierce anxiety to be right, 
which, because it is an attempt to resolve an inner conflict 
of peculiar intensity, is often utterly blind to the injury that 
it does to other people. This is one of the many senses of 
the proverb that the road to hell is paved with good 
intentions, and it explains why wars fought in the defense 
of absolute moral principles are far more devastating and 
frightful than wars that spring from such ordinary human 
passions as greed. 

On the other hand, inner conflicts in which one feels 
estranged from one’s very nature can be so insupportable 
that the only escape seems to be by way of a violent 
reaction against the entire system of convention and 
theology that provokes them. When the mores are 
impressed upon us with too great a weight of authority, we 
are apt to turn against them with an acrimony that throws 
out the baby with the bathwater. And here we are no better 
off than before. It is really impossible to live in societies 


without moral conventions of some kind, for which reason 
these reactions never—save for the shortest periods— 
dispense with them altogether; the conventions are merely 
modified. In our culture, however, the baby that gets 
thrown out with the bathwater is God, the Absolute itself. 

This has a very curious chain of results. God may 
disappear, but since the throne of the absolute is left 
vacant, its place is taken by the relative, by the conventions 
themselves, by society, or by the state. In fact, almost all 
revolutions swap a bad tyranny for a worse—Louis XVI for 
Robespierre, the czar for the Politburo. The same is true 
here. For when there is nothing absolute except the 
relative, when there is no higher court of appeal, as it were, 
than social conventions and institutions themselves, the 
tyranny of convention is complete. This accounts to a 
considerable extent for the absence and the increasing 
disappearance of freedom in the two great secular states of 
the modern world—Russia and the United States. 

The Catholic Church always left the individual an “out” 
from the fierce inner conflict between their own nature and 
the divinely sanctioned order of society. Just and righteous 
as God might be, God was always merciful. There was 
always the possibility of release from guilt through 
confession and absolution, and, in the last resort, the 
Church would always admit that even in the case of those 
who died unregenerate the extent of God’s mercy and 
grace was unknown. Hell was indeed a possibility, but 
never, in any individual case, a certainty. In this sense, the 
mercy of God, the unknown quantity, one might say, the 
very unconventionality of God’s justice, has been the 
salvation of the Church—by reason of which it is still 
something of a going concern. For this is the one respect in 
which the Christian Church approximately resembles the 


sort of institution for unlearning the conventions to which I 
was referring. But even so, the individual could not lean 
upon the divine mercy too heavily without entering into 
danger of the serious sin of presumption; and there are 
those for whom the tension of uncertainty and doubt as to 
one’s relation to God is more insupportable than knowing 
that you are damned outright. 

Thus the peculiarly and abnormally neurotic nature of 
our Western societies is originally due, I think, to the fact 
that our religious traditions provide no cure for one’s 
upbringing, for the damage done in the necessary process 
of social discipline. To put it in another way, our religious 
traditions provide no adult initiation. For very many 
centuries the Christian initiation ceremony has been 
displaced. Baptism has been primarily a rite for children, 
conferred upon them at the beginning, instead of the end, 
of their period of constraint. Therefore it has altogether 
lost the character of an initiation into a mystery. I am 
inclined to believe that this could have happened only 
because there never really was a mystery to be initiated 
into, and there never was a mystery because God was never 
allowed to be really mysterious. That is to say, God was 
never allowed to be beyond the conventional boundaries of 
good and evil. God was inseparably allied with the good, 
with the conventional moral law. 

This being so, there is obviously no place for a mystery. 
For it will by now be clear to you that in any real adult 
initiation, the mystery so closely guarded from the profane 
and undisciplined is precisely that the absolute is 
unconventional, that it is beyond good and evil, and that, by 
consequence, we cannot go against it or be separated from 
it. To put it in another way: the mystery is that the rules of 
society are not the laws of nature, and, furthermore, that 


the laws of nature—if we may call them that—are such that 
we could not go against them even if we wanted to. I will go 
further still: we cannot even want to go against them since 
we ourselves are the very process of those laws. There is no 
way to go against them as there is no way for the hand to 
strike itself. You may remember the words of Goethe’s 
“Fragment Upon Nature”: “We are encompassed by her, 
enfolded by her—impossible to escape from her and 
impossible to come nearer to her. The most unnatural also 
is nature. Who sees her not on all sides sees her truly 
nowhere. Even in resisting her laws one obeys them; and 
one works with her even in desiring to work against her.” 

You can easily see that this might be a very dangerous 
philosophy in the hands of an immature person. On the 
other hand, it is just as obviously a tremendous release for 
a person tied up in the clutches of a completely self- 
contradictory and insoluble inner conflict. A_ real 
understanding of this mystery is, furthermore, release from 
the whole insincerity and unnaturalness of self- 
consciousness. Of course, it is dangerous, but then 
everything is dangerous—food is dangerous, love is 
dangerous, life itself is dangerous! 

But now comes a fascinating example of the inner 
identity of a revolution with what it revolts against. This 
particular mystery was not admitted by the moral 
absolutism of the Church. It is, if anything, even more 
inadmissible to the secular and absolutely relativistic 
philosophies that have replaced the Church. To the Church 
it was a dangerous and damnable heresy. But in the eyes of 
our modern absolute relativists it is completely 
meaningless—for they will tell you that words such as I 
have just quoted from Goethe cannot possibly correspond 
with any actual experience. They will insist that to see 


nature on all sides is to see her nowhere at all, since if 
nature means everything she means nothing. Experience, 
they will say, is necessarily a matter of contrasts and 
relations, so that what cannot be contrasted with 
something different from itself can never be an experience, 
just as light cannot be recognized apart from the contrast 
of darkness. 

All this is very true if what we are talking about is 
language as distinct from experience, symbols and signs as 
distinct from reality. For the logical relations between 
words and ideas are such that certain expressions—such as 
“all events are natural”—do not convey any _ verbal 
information or meaning. But it does not follow that there is 
no experience to which these words correspond and that 
they express as well as words can. It is a very misleading 
confusion of words with reality to assume that what cannot 
be thought cannot be experienced, or, to put it the other 
way round, whatever can be experienced can be expressed 
in thought. 

I have just discovered a passage in Aldous Huxley’s 
Texts and Pretexts that puts this so perfectly that I want to 
read it to you: 


Our immediate impressions of actuality, on the rare 
occasions when we contrive to see with the eyes of 
children or convalescents, of artists or lovers, seem 
to have a quality of supernaturalness. What we 
ordinarily call “nature” and find duller than a 
witling’s jest is in fact the system of generalizations 
and utilitarian symbols which we construct from our 
sensations. Sometimes, however, we are made 
directly and immediately aware of our sensations; it 
is an apocalypse; they seem supernatural. But it is 


through sensations that we come into contact with 
the external world, the world of Nature with a capital 
N. Hence a seeming paradox: external Nature is 
supernatural; and the supernatural, because mental, 
universe in which we do our daily living is all too 
natural—natural to the point of dullness. 


What he calls the “system of generalizations and 
utilitarian symbols that we construct from our sensations” 
is precisely the conventional system of institutions into 
which our upbringing fits us like the bed of Procrustes. 
Where we are too short, we are stretched; were we are too 
long, we are chopped off. But when this fitting process has 
gone on long enough, we need to be freed from it—and if 
this does not happen, we continue to confuse the world of 
symbols and conventions with the world of reality, of 
Nature. Herein lies the identity of the two opposed 
wisdoms of the West—of the Church and of the secularists, 
of the theologians and the positivists. Both have confused 
the conventional with the real—the one by identifying God 
with goodness, and the other by identifying the order of 
nature with the order of words, and this is one and the 
same mistake. 

Now I am sure that a society can escape the more wildly 
insane consequences of this confusion if there is within it 
even a small minority of people who have been cured of, or 
liberated from, the necessary evil of their _ social 
conditioning. There is doubtless such a minority in our own 
world, but it has no status. Society does not recognize it— 
which is another way of saying that society does not 
recognize any limits, any sphere of life beyond its 
jurisdiction. This is why Thoreau complained that solitude 
is not really allowed, that men will pursue you to the ends 


of the earth to compel you to belong to their desperate 
company of oddfellows. 

In more traditional societies than our own, the official 
philosophy or religion almost invariably had two aspects— 
the profane and the sacred, the outward and the inward. 
Outwardly, it collaborated in imposing the social and moral 
disciplines necessary for communal life. But inwardly, for 
the responsible initiates, it was concerned with the realm 
beyond good and evil, self and others, humanity and nature 
—the realm where relative and conventional rules and 
distinctions no longer apply. This is the realm of freedom 
from the bed of Procrustes, and of which the Buddhist 
poem speaks when it says: 


In the spring scenery nothing is better, nothing is 
WOTrse; 
The leaves grow naturally, some long, some short. 


The lack of some such counter-discipline, some such 
cure for our being conformed and integrated with the 
group, is, from a long-range view, the single most 
conspicuous defect of modern societies. But I do not see 
how we are going to get it while our official religions are so 
afraid of it. Their principal fear is, of course, that it seems 
to undermine the guarantees and sanctions for moral 
conduct. But has it never occurred to them that the only 
really significant and authentic moral acts come out of 
freedom—and that seemingly moral acts that arise from 
constraint or fear or shame are strictly counterfeit? Nor do 
I see how we are going to get it when so many of the 
official schools of psychiatry are working for normalcy or 
adjustment, which, as Lewis Hill once pointed out, is simply 
another word for obedience. No, I am afraid it is the 


measure of our profound inner insecurity that we are so 
damnably tidy, that we cannot tolerate the presence of 
saints or lunatics, that we cannot really live with people 
who disagree with us about anything serious, that we 
conceal and avoid emotions, and make ourselves more and 
more into the semblance of Kipling’s monkeys, the 
Bandalog, crying, “We all say so, so it must be true!” 


5. The Art of Nonsense 


I was talking to you last week about the necessity for being 
cured of our education, or upbringing. To be more exact—I 
should say being cured of the inevitable inner conflicts, the 
warpings, which our education involves. I was also talking 
about the fact that many cultures have recognized this 
necessity and have provided regular means whereby a 
certain number of people may be freed from the bondage of 
their social conditioning. This is not at all the same thing as 
destroying their entire education, as making them quite 
literally forget everything they have learned. This point is 
very important. Freedom from conditioning means to be 
able to use what you have learned without being bound by 
it. Let us put it in this way: the ordinary person is forced to 
learn the conventions of society, and thus learns to identify 
themself with them. They move within them like a train on 
its rails. But a liberated person is more like an automobile; 
they can, if they want, stay on a certain track—but they can 
also move away from it. 

In various ancient or traditional societies, such as the 
Indian and the Chinese, institutions such as Buddhism or 
Vedanta or Taoism or Zen were the regular means for 
liberating people from the ill effects of their conditioning. I 
pointed out that Christianity has not, to any important 


extent, played the same role in the West—and for the 
reason that the Christian God or Absolute has been 
identified with the forms of social convention, with mores, 
and there has been a general fear of recognizing that God 
is beyond them. I pointed out, too, that this has weighted 
our conventions with an altogether excessive amount of 
authority, resulting in violent revolutionary reactions, 
which throw out the baby with the bathwater, or in 
paralyzing states of inner conflict. 

This time, I want to discuss with you the actual process 
whereby a liberation from convention is achieved, a process 
that is entirely different from those merely reactionary 
revolutions that exchange one kind of tyranny for another, 
usually worse. But to understand this process, I think we 
must first understand that the most important part of our 
conventional upbringing is the training of the way in which 
we speak and think. For almost all conventions are 
conventions of communication—and this is why the word 
“code” applies equally to a system of laws or customs as to 
a system of signs, whether words or gestures, whereby we 
represent various events to other people or to ourselves. 

In the total course of our education, from toddler to 
college graduate, we have been learning code. We have 
been learning the conventional signs for events and for the 
relationships between events. All of this has been a very 
difficult and often painful acquisition. Consequently we are 
apt to be extraordinarily touchy about it. We hate to have it 
called into question because it has cost us so much and 
represents so much effort. Hence all the excesses of 
cultural imperialism, of the conflicts arising from the 
insistence that our way of life—that is, our code—is the 
best way of life. 


I was saying that the most important part of the code is 
the way in which we speak and think, that is to say, 
language, whether spoken out loud or uttered silently in 
the mind. The vast importance of language is perhaps best 
seen in the fact that people are most acutely frustrated 
when life does not make sense, when the order of events 
does not correspond with the order of thought. Few of us 
will have much objection to dying when we are eighty. But 
there is a great deal of objection to dying when we are 
eight. The first is natural, but the second is an accident, 
since it does not fit in with our preconceived idea, or 
thought, of order. How often, then, do we hear it said that 
it simply doesn’t make sense that the life of so promising a 
child should have been cut short? It hardly needs to be said 
that events of this kind disturb us more profoundly than 
anything else. 

In the same way, you can listen with relative comfort to 
a talk on the radio that makes sense according to the code 
of language. But supposing I were to address you in some 
such way as this: 

“The withering spoon was fleet, and out of the matchless 
quantity of laminated bees, a cumbersome bench of spotted 
nails was derived with angular turrets. Suddenly a crowd of 
winged peppers was arraigned before a_ naturally 
dovetailed potato, and equal sections of fried popularity 
were sequestered on either roof, so that a marvelous rocket 
of scattering pigeons was amputated on the best behavior 
of a titillated squirrel.” 

Well, you might listen for a while for the sheer sense of 
novelty and incongruity. But if it went on much longer, you 
might begin to feel outraged and insulted and start calling 
up the station to get that lunatic off the air. Why? Because I 
am not making sense, I am not using the code of speech in 


a way that seems to correspond with any sort of reality in 
the natural universe. Yet I would be sorry if you were to 
dismiss this kind of utterance out of hand, because there is 
really quite an art to composing it, and the rationale of this 
art is intimately bound up with the process of liberation 
from conditioning. To understand this art, we must first 
recognize that there are a number of quite different kinds 
of nonsense—ranging all the way from mere balderdash to 
pure non-sense, which, if you analyze the word, has almost 
the same meaning as “supernatural”—what is beyond the 
senses, or better, beyond understanding. 

This is rather an odd kind of inquiry, but may I give you 
examples of some quite different kinds of nonsense. There 
is first of all “lalling,” the utterance of a series of 
meaningless and playful sounds. This is the very easiest 
kind of nonsense to talk: 


Thrumular, thrumular, thrilp 
Cum lipsible, lipsible lilp; 

Dim thricken me thrummy 
Lumgumptulous bummy; 
Stormgurgle umbuMDITar bilp. 


Then, rather close to it, is the nonsense of a series of 
words linked by the association of alliteration as distinct 
from the association of rationality. “Tell me a tale of 
tesselated, tintinabulating, tittle-tattling tonsilectomy.” At a 
slightly higher level comes the nonsense in which words 
are linked, not by rationality, but by common association— 
common in the sense of general usage, or in the sense of 
frequent usage by the individual. “Fowls love feathers to 
develop photographically, and camaraderie is black with a 
blue wave, with hair all flying on a winged harp.” Note the 


obvious associations of develop—photographically— 
camaraderie—black and blue—blue waves—wavy hair—hair 
flying—etc. These associations are harder to discover in a 
kind of nonsense where they are, consciously or 
unconsciously, arrested and concealed. Thus’ the 
association “black and blue” may become “black and 
blooming” and, to continue, “blooming with fluorescent 
illusions of unredeemable privacy.” Flowering became 
fluorescent, illumination became illusion, unreality became 
unredeemable, and so forth. 

Now all these kinds of nonsense are terribly easy to 
speak or write. The really difficult kind of nonsense is to 
create, without deliberation or hesitation, a series of words 
falling out of the mind without any associations between 
them—words following one another haphazardly as if they 
had been drawn from a hat. I suppose there are people who 
will say that this is impossible, and they can invariably 
prove their point because you can find associations 
between any two words whatsoever if you look hard 
enough. Wasn’t it the Duchess in Alice in Wonderland who 
said, “Meaning, dear? Anything has a meaning if you only 
look for it!” So let me give you an example of this highest 
and very difficult kind of nonsense. It is, of course, a Zen 
story. Someone asked Joshu, “I read in the scriptures that 
all things return to the One, but where does this One return 
to?” The master replied instantly, “When I was in the 
province of Tsing, I had a robe made that weighed nine 
pounds.” What connection, what relation is there between 
the answer and the question? None at all. 

This may sound easy, but it isn’t. Our thinking is so 
dominated by habit that it is actually quite difficult to give a 
completely dissociated and yet spontaneous answer to a 
question. All this may sound like an invitation to the wildest 


insanity, yet there is method in this madness, and it will, I 
think, become clear if we consider the following quotation 
from another Zen master, the celebrated Sixth Patriarch 
Huineng: “As thought follows thought, do not think of past 
events. If the succession of our past, present, and future 
thoughts is incessantly linked by mutual connection, this is 
called being tied up in knots. But if, in the course of events, 
you do not dwell upon each succeeding thought, there will 
certainly be no knots.” 

Huineng describes the lack of inner freedom as the 
habitual and compulsive linking of our thoughts together, 
by association—rational or otherwise—into a chain. He is 
suggesting that we learn to break up the chain, to let 
thoughts follow one another haphazardly. Of course, if you 
are afraid for your own sanity, if you feel that rational 
thinking is a very precarious possession, this may not be a 
very sensible thing to try. But, once again, let me stress the 
point that this haphazard thinking is not intended to 
displace connected thinking; it is intended _ to 
counterbalance it, to make connected thinking an 
instrument that we use freely instead of a compulsive habit 
—to make us think connectedly and disconnectedly with 
equal facility. 

To a very considerable extent, life itself helps us in this 
task insofar as the ordinary course of events is itself 
haphazard. In this case, all that is necessary to learn 
haphazard thinking is to follow the course of events. But 
the difficulty here is that we try not to see how haphazard 
this course actually is. Compulsively, we do our damnedest 
to make sense out of it. We do it by projection, reading 
connections into things by taking the advice of the 
Duchess: Anything has a meaning if only you look hard 
enough. We do it also by selection—that is, by paying 


attention only to those fragmentary aspects of events that 
can be made to fit together in a connected way. Indeed, 
what we call events are precisely such fragmentary 
aspects, for they are selected bits of experience. For an 
event is defined by excluding everything else that was 
happening at the same time. Or to put it in another way, 
any event is only a small part of itself! In reality, there are 
no fixed boundaries between the wave now breaking on 
Seal Rock and the rest of the Pacific Ocean. We can even 
say that the ocean is breaking on Seal Rock. It is perhaps 
less easy to see the same continuity between a person 
walking along a street and the street itself—as well as 
everything else going on in the street, not to mention the 
city where the street is located. The person walking is a 
selection from the rest of the experience, grasped as the 
focal point of attention. 

Needless to say, this selection of connectable points is 
highly practical. It is like crossing a river filled with rocks— 
picking out just those rocks that can be used as stepping- 
stones. But as the connection between those particular 
rocks is the legs of the person crossing the river, so the 
connection between selected events is in the mind that 
picks them out—and in doing so finds a way across the 
river of life. In reality, in the state of nature, all those rocks 
are equally connected or disconnected—whichever way you 
want to look at it. 

But there is a point at which picking out these stepping- 
stones ceases to be practical. This is when we come to 
believe that the connection between them lies in the stones 
and not in the mind, for as this belief becomes more and 
more firmly entrenched, we lose our ability to see that 
there may also be many other, and perhaps better, ways of 
crossing the river. So, too, our conventions, our codes of 


social communications are confused with laws of nature, 
and we become unable to change or improve them, and so 
lose our freedom. 

Yet beyond this obviously practical disadvantage there is 
something still more momentous, and though less obvious, 
much more practical. The inner conflicts that arise from 
trying to fit the haphazard course of events into the 
patterns of “making sense” required by the code bring 
about an intense state of strain—all the more intense when 
we believe that these code-patterns are objective and real, 
like laws of nature. It is quite obvious that excessive 
emotional strains have a destructive effect. Less obvious is 
the fact that they conceal, or wipe out, a peculiar sensation 
of harmony—or one might say, naturalness—that would 
otherwise be our normal way of feeling. It is probably hard 
for most of us to imagine how we could feel natural or 
harmonious in the midst of a completely haphazard 
universe—a universe where making sense out of things is a 
kind of game like seeing pictures in an inkblot. But our 
difficulty lies in the fact that we have been taught to 
identify ourselves, our own lives and feelings, exclusively 
with order, with the code, so creating a fundamental 
conflict with spontaneous chance. This conflict would not 
arise if the identification of ourselves with order were less 
exclusive, less compulsive—though by no means something 
to be set aside altogether. 

Hence the necessity of jolting our thinking out of the 
ruts in which it ordinarily runs, not to throw it into a new 
set of ruts but to give it the freedom to roam rutless, as 
well as in ruts. And what is needed, in the first place, is a 
clear intellectual understanding of the problem, a good 
theoretical grasp of the difference between conventions of 
thought and actual reality, between the order of words and 


the haphazardry of nature, between the abstract world of 
so-called facts and events and the concrete world of 
immediate experience. 

Beyond this, our minds must learn to wander—not from 
association to association as in daydreaming, but rather in 
a high state of alertness, like a swordfighter defending 
themself from attack from all sides at once. This is a feat 
that we cannot perform if our alertness is strained to the 
point of paralyzing action. On the other hand, if our thrusts 
and parries come out in a regular order, lacking the 
element of surprise, our opponents will soon overwhelm us. 
But for the slight alliterative association at the beginning of 
the list, I would say that the best possible advice for us is 
that of the Walrus, for 


“The time has come,” the Walrus said, 
“To talk of many things: 

Of shoes and ships and sealing-wax, 
Of cabbages and kings, 

And why the sea is boiling-hot, 

And whether pigs have wings.” 


Biting an Iron Bull 


suppose most of you have heard of Zen, but before going 
on to explain various details about it, I wish to make one 
thing absolutely clear. I am not a Zen Buddhist, I am not 
advocating Zen Buddhism, and I am not trying to convert 
anyone to it. I have nothing to sell. I am an entertainer. 
When you go to a concert and you listen to someone play 
Mozart, he has nothing to sell except the sound of the 
music. He does not want to convert you to anything. He 
does not want you to join an organization in favor of 
Mozart’s music as opposed to Beethoven’s. I approach you 
in the same spirit as a musician with her piano, or violinist 
with his violin: I just want you to enjoy a point of view that I 
enjoy. 

Now, then, that has been said, and I hope it has put your 
minds at rest. Let me give you, first of all, some simple 
historical information. Zen is a form of Buddhism. It 
originated in China in about 500, and in about 1200 it was 
transmitted to Japan, where it exists today. It is a way of 
life that has had an immense influence on the arts, culture, 
poetry, and architecture of the Far East. Lately, it has 
become of enormous interest to many people in other parts 
of the world. Normally when one speaks about Buddhism, 
and Zen is a form of Buddhism, it is supposed that one is 
talking about a religion. People are apt to classify 
themselves as Buddhists much in the same way as they 


might say, “I am a Catholic, or a Methodist, or a Baptist, or 
an Episcopalian, or a Jew.” This is rather misleading, 
however, because Buddhism is not a religion in that sense. 
If we want to find a equivalent to Buddhism in Western 
society today, the nearest thing is probably psychotherapy. 
We go to a psychiatrist or psychoanalyst to work out a 
serious personal problem. When we feel that our whole life 
is somehow disoriented and wrong, we do not go to a 
preacher, because a preacher only moralizes and says, “My 
man, you should have more faith in God.” We go instead to 
a doctor, because in our day a person with the tag of 
science has more prestige than a person who has the tag of 
religion. When a psychiatrist goes to work on you, their 
objective is to change your state of consciousness. If your 
state of consciousness, your state of mind, is one of 
constant depression, the psychiatrist or psychotherapist’s 
objective is to change your state of consciousness to 
happiness. 

In a somewhat similar way, the objective of Buddhism in 
all its forms is to bring about a fundamental change in the 
human being’s everyday state of consciousness. It is to 
bring about a change in one’s sense of personal identity, 
your sensation of who and what you are. Buddhism is a 
method of changing consciousness discovered by a man 
called Gautama, who lived in India shortly after 600 B.c.z. 
and was given the title “Buddha”—”The Awakened One,” 
“The Man Who Woke Up”—suggesting that ordinary people 
are asleep. 

The problem to which the Buddha primarily addressed 
himself is suffering. Prior to exploring that, however, we 
have to be clear about certain basics, and these basics have 
to do not so much with concepts and ideas as they do with 
a state of mind. You could also call it a state of feeling, a 


state of sensation, or a state of consciousness; whatever we 
call it, we need to understand it before we can really 
proceed very far. It is an extraordinarily difficult state of 
mind to talk about, even though in its nature it is extremely 
simple. 

The nature of this crucial state of mind is similar to our 
state of mind as an infant, when we had not been told 
anything and did not know anything other than what we 
felt, and we had no names even for that. As we grow older, 
of course, we learn to differentiate one thing from another 
and one event from another, but above all, ourselves from 
everything else. This is well and good, provided we do not 
lose the foundations. 

The multiple things of this world are differentiated, but 
they have a shared basis, just as mountains are 
differentiated but they are all based on the earth. There is 
no word for that basis, not really, because words are only 
for distinctions, and so they cannot really even be a symbol, 
not even an idea, of the non-distinction. We cannot think it, 
but we can feel it, though we do not feel it like an object. 
You feel you are alive, you feel you are conscious, but you 
do not know what consciousness is because consciousness 
is present in every conceivable kind of experience. It is like 
the space in which we live, which is everywhere. It is like a 
fish in water; the fish does not know it is in the water, 
because it never leaves it. 

As we grow up and become fascinated, spellbound, and 
enchanted by all the things that adults wave at us, we 
forget the background and we come to think that all the 
distinctions that we have been learning are supremely 
important. We become hypnotized much in the same way as 
a chicken does when its beak is put to a chalk line. The 
chicken gets hung up, gets stuck on the line. When we are 


told to pay attention to “what matters,” we get stuck on it, 
and this is what is called attachment in Buddhism. 

Attachment does not mean enjoying food, sleep, or 
beauty. Those are responses of our organism, and they are 
as natural as feeling hot near a fire or cold near ice. 
Likewise, our responses of fear or sorrow are not 
attachment. Attachment is quite precisely translated by the 
slang term “hang-up.” It is a kind of “stickiness,” or what is 
called “blocking” in psychology. We get hung up on all the 
various things we are told as we grow up by our parents, 
our aunts and uncles, our teachers, and above all by our 
peer group. The first things everybody wants to convince us 
of is the difference, the separation between ourselves and 
the rest of the world; and the distinction between those 
actions that are voluntary and those that are involuntary— 
what we do, on the one hand, and what happens to us, on 
the other. This is, of course, immensely confusing to a small 
child, because it is told to do all sorts of things that are 
really supposed to happen, like going to sleep, loving 
people, and not blushing. What occurs is this: the child is 
told in some way that we, your parents, elders, and betters, 
command you to do that which will please us only if you do 
it spontaneously. No wonder everybody is completely 
confused. 

We go through life with that burden inside us, and we 
therefore develop this curious thing that is called an “ego.” 
Now, an ego is not the same thing as a particular living 
organism. The organism is something real, though it is not 
a separate thing but a feature of the universe. On the other 
hand, what we call our ego is something abstract. It has the 
same order and kind of reality as an hour or an inch ora 
pound or a line of longitude. It exists for purposes of 
discussion, for convenience. The possession of an ego is a 


social convention; the fallacy that all of us succumb to is 
treating it as if it were a physical organism, as if the ego 
were real in that sense, when in fact it is no more than our 
image of ourselves. When we say to somebody, “You must 
improve your image,” this image is not ourselves any more 
than the idea of a tree is a tree, any more that you can get 
wet in the word “water.” Our image of ourselves is 
extremely inaccurate and incomplete. My image of me is 
not at all your image of me; in addition, my image of me is 
extremely incomplete. It does not include any information 
to speak of about the functioning of my nervous system, my 
circulation, my metabolism, my subtle relationships with 
the entire surrounding human and nonhuman universe. The 
image I have of myself is a caricature arrived at mainly 
through my interaction with other people who tell me who I 
am in various ways, either directly or indirectly. I play with 
their picture of me and they play something back to me, 
and we establish a shared conception of me. This started 
very early in life when I was told I must be me, and you 
were told you must be you, and that each of us must have a 
consistent image. We are encouraged to seek our identities 
in our images, and this is an awful red herring. 

A lot of the current quests for identity among younger 
people are a search for an acceptable image. What role can 
I play? Who am I, in the sense of what am I going to do in 
life? While that search has a certain importance, it is 
extraordinarily misleading if it is not backed up by a deeper 
understanding of the natures of image and identity. On the 
one hand, we possess an intellectual, emotional, and 
imaginative image of ourselves; yet on the other hand, we 
feel that we are only images, and that there is something 
inside us more real than the images, a sort of sensitive core 
inside the skin and that corresponds to the word “I.” 


Let us take a look at this. The thing that we feel is 
“myself” is certainly not the whole body, because a lot of 
the body can be seen as an object. In other words, you 
stand, stretch yourself out, lie on the floor, turn your head, 
and look at yourself. You can see your feet, your legs, and 
your chest, but finally it all vanishes except for a vaguely 
seen nose in front. You assume you have a head, because 
everybody else does, and you have seen it in a mirror. But 
you can never see it directly, just as you cannot see your 
back. We tend to locate our egos in the unseen part of our 
bodies, the inaccessible part from which everything seems 
to come. 

We believe we feel the presence of our ego, our “I-ness,” 
but what is it we really feel? Let us compare the ego to the 
eyes. If I see clearly, and my eyes are in functioning order, 
they most certainly are not conscious of themselves or their 
working. There are no spots in front of them, no defects, 
and no awareness of “eye-ness.” The parts of the eye—the 
lens, retina, and optic nerve—produce the hallucinations 
we know as vision without intruding their presence upon 
the process. By the same token, if my ego, my 
consciousness, is working, I ought not be aware of it; yet I 
am, as some sort of a nuisance, the thing that sits in the 
middle of everything. What is it, then, that we feel as our 
ego? Well, I think I have discovered that it is a chronic and 
habitual sense of muscular strain, which we were taught to 
do in the process of performing normally spontaneous 
things to order. When you are taking off in a jet plane, and 
the plane has gone rather further down the runway than 
you think it should have without getting up in the air, you 
may start pulling at your seat belt to get off the ground. Of 
course, this is perfectly useless. A similar thing happens 
when someone tells us to look carefully, to listen or pay 


attention. We start straining the muscles around our eyes, 
ears, jaws, and hands. We try to use our muscles to make 
our nerves work, which is of course futile and in fact 
hinders the functioning of the nerves. When we try to 
control our emotions, we hold our breath, pull our 
stomachs in, or tighten our muscles to “pull ourselves 
together.” Of course tightening one’s muscles is useless as 
a means of controlling one’s emotions. 

This chronic tension, which in Sanskrit is called sankoca, 
meaning “contraction,” is the root of what we call the 
“feeling of the ego.” The feeling of tightness is the physical 
referent for our psychological image. This ego is the 
marriage of an illusion to a futility. The idea of labeling a 
being with a name is _ naturally useful for social 
communication, provided we know what we are doing and 
take naming for what it is. We become so hung up on this 
concept, however, that it confuses us, and we do not 
imagine that it might be possible for us to feel otherwise. 
When we hear about a person who has transcended the 
ego, we ask, “How did you do that?” But the proper 
question is, “What do you mean by you?” The ego cannot be 
transcended, because it does not properly exist. You cannot 
do anything about a nonexistent thing, anymore than you 
can cut a cheese with a line of longitude. 

Perhaps that sounds very discouraging, but let us 
suppose we are babies again, and we do not know anything. 
Don’t be frightened, we’ll get our knowledge back later; for 
now, let us pretend we are only awareness. Let us suppose 
that we have no information about ourselves at all and no 
words for the self, and that even my talking to you right 
now is just a nonverbal noise. Do not try to do anything 
about this. Do not make any effort, because by force of 
habit certain tensions remain inside you and certain words 


and ideas drift all the time through your mind, just as the 
wind blows or clouds move across the sky. Do not bother 
with them at all. Do not try to get rid of them: just be aware 
of what is going on in your head as if it were clouds in the 
sky or the crackling of the fire. This is not really difficult, 
and there is no trick to it: all you have to do, really, is look 
and listen without naming, and if you are naming, never 
mind, just listen to the naming. 

You cannot force anything. You cannot willfully stop 
thinking, and trying to stop naming is only telling yourself 
that the separate “you” doesn’t exist—it is not a mark of 
defeat or a sign of your lack of practice in meditation. It 
runs on all by itself, and simply means that the individual, 
separate “you” is a figment of your imagination. 

You are aware at this point of a happening. Remember 
that you do not know anything about the difference 
between you and it. You have not been told that you have 
no words for the difference between inside and outside, 
between here and there. Nobody has taught you that what 
you see out in front of you is either near or far from your 
eyes. A baby puts out a finger to touch the moon and does 
not know its distance. It knows that it is here, and calls it 
“this.” You will feel it, the “going on,” which includes 
absolutely everything you apprehend. That is what the 
Chinese call Tao and Buddhists call suchness; it is a 
happening. It does not happen to you, because where is 
that “you”? What you call “you” is an aspect of the 
happening, which has no separate parts. At first this 
happening process may seem a little scary, because it had 
never occurred to us that a process could be self- 
controlling. 

This spontaneous process going on we call “life,” and it 
is controlling itself, aware of itself through you. You are an 


aperture through which the universe looks at itself, and 
because of the universe looking at itself through you, there 
is always an aspect of itself that it cannot see. It is just like 
a snake pursuing its tail, because the snake cannot see its 
head as the observer can. We always find, as we investigate 
the universe, ever more minute things; and as we make 
bigger and bigger telescopes, the universe expands. Why? 
Because it is running away from itself, in both directions. 
Now, it will not do that unless you chase it, so the universe 
is chasing its own tail. This is the Tao, a game of hide-and- 
seek. When you ask the question, “Who is doing the 
chasing?” you are still working under the assumption that 
every verb has to have a subject, and that when there is an 
action there has to be a doer. This is merely a grammatical 
convention, leading to what Whitehead called the “fallacy 
of misplaced concreteness,” like the famous “it” as in “it is 
raining.” So when one declares that there cannot be 
knowing without a knower, one is saying no more than 
there cannot be a verb without a subject; that, however, is 
a grammatical rule, not a law of nature. 

Anything you can think of as a thing, as a noun, can be 
described by a verb, and there are languages that do so. 
When you look for doers as distinct from deeds, you cannot 
find them, just as when you look for stuff underlying the 
patterns of nature, you cannot find any stuff. Instead, you 
just find more and more patterns, because there never was 
any stuff; in fact it was a ghost all along. What we call 
“stuff” is simply pattern seen out of focus. When it is fuzzy, 
we call it stuff. We have these words—energy, matter, 
being, reality, even Tao—but we can never find them. They 
always elude us entirely, although we do have the very 
strong intuition that all this that we see, our universe, is 
connected or related. 


The word “universe” really means “one turn”’—and a 
short turn at that, for though you can make one turn to look 
at yourself, you cannot make two turns and see what is 
looking. As they say in Zen, you cannot take hold of it, but 
you cannot get rid of it, and in not being able to get it you 
get it. In fact, all these trials that gurus put their students 
through have as their ultimate object convincing the 
student—and convincing very thoroughly—that one cannot 
do anything. Even the gurus, however, can only convince 
you in a theoretical way. 

Incidentally, I am not a guru, and I do not give individual 
Spiritual direction to people. Instead, I give away the guru’s 
tricks. That may not be nice, but, on the other hand, those 
tricks are only necessary in the sense that it is necessary 
for you to go to a psychiatrist if you think you must. You 
may not be satisfied unless you go to Japan and study Zen 
Buddhism with a roshi, but it is not necessary unless it is 
the only thing that will satisfy you. If you feel that need, 
you feel it. On the other hand if you do not, no one should 
think less of you. The point is, what do you want to do? 
What is in you to do? You can struggle and struggle, and 
indeed will do so as long as you have the feeling inside you 
that you are missing something. All sorts of people will do 
their utmost to persuade you that you are missing 
something, because they are missing something, and they 
think that they are getting it in a certain way. To assure 
themselves they have made the right choice, they would 
like you to do what they do. 

Now, a clever guru beguiles their students by letting 
them have the feeling of success and accomplishment in 
certain areas. Therefore, a guru gives people exercises that 
are either difficult but can be accomplished or that are 
impossible. You will always be hung up on the impossible 


ones, but with the possible ones you will get the feeling of 
making progress, so that you will double your efforts to 
solve the impossible exercises. The guru arranges many 
levels through which you can advance to this stage of 
consciousness or that state of consciousness, much like the 
different belts you can earn in judo. This gives people the 
sense of competing with themselves, or even with others, 
all because of the feeling inside that they are missing 
something. 

Of course, if you are learning any sort of skill and you 
have not perfected the skill, there is indeed something you 
are missing. But this is not true in Zen, because, as the 
Buddhists say, we are buddhas from the very beginning. All 
of that searching is like looking for your own head, which 
you cannot see and therefore might imagine you have lost. 
The point is simply that we do not see that which looks, and 
therefore we think we have lost it. We are in search of the 
self, the atman, but that is the one thing we cannot find 
because we have it, we are it. 

Although you will think at first that this is a kind of 
determinism, there are two reasons why it is not. First, 
there is nobody being determined. People think of 
determinism as the direction caused by the past. If you use 
your senses, however, you will see that such strict 
causation is a hallucination. The present does not come 
from the past. If you listen, and only listen, where do the 
sounds come from? According to your ears, you hear them 
coming out of silence. The sounds come, and then they 
fade, and off they go like echoes in the labyrinth of your 
brain, which we call memories. The sounds do not come 
from the past; they come out of now and trail off. When we 
see our hands move, we see the hands, and then as they 
move, we think that the movement is caused by the hands 


and that the hands were there before, and so they can 
move later. We do not see that our memory of the hands is 
an echo of their always being, trailing off, echoing like the 
wake of a ship. Just as the wake does not direct the ship, 
the past does not move the present unless you insist that it 
does. If you say, “Naturally I am always moved by the 
past,” this is an alibi, and it completely fails to explain how 
you ever learned anything new. For this reason, 
psychologists do not really understand learning, because 
according to the theory of learning everything new is really 
only assimilated when translated into terms of what you 
already know. If that were true, learning would be a library 
that increases only by the addition of books about books 
already in it (and indeed a lot of libraries are like that). 

When you become aware that this happening is not 
happening to you because you are the happening, and the 
only you there is, is what is going on, you begin to 
disregard the stupid distinctions you have been taught. You 
experience the odd feeling of a synthesis between doing 
and happening, in which doing is as much happening as 
happening, and happening is as much doing as doing. If you 
are not very careful at that point, you will proclaim yourself 
God Almighty in the Judeo-Christian sense. Freud alleged 
that babies feel they are omnipotent, and in a way they are. 
I am omnipotent in so far as I am the universe, but in the 
role of Alan Watts, I am not omnipotent—perhaps only 
cunning. 

This sensation of the happening is what we want to 
explore. It is simply there: we cannot do anything, and we 
cannot not do anything. It is important not to distract 
yourself, however, because if you do, you will miss what 
follows from the feeling of what is going on when you are 
not doing anything and when you are not able even to not 


do anything. This, you see, is the sticky place. You cannot 
get in, and you cannot get out, and that is why in Zen it is 
called “the mosquito biting the iron bull” or “swallowing 
the ball of red-hot iron,” which we cannot gulp down and 
cannot spit out. It is that difficult. 

What are you to do, or not do? The dilemma that you 
thought was you is simply not there at all. Now, do not 
make it difficult. That is a form of evading it. Do not make it 
easy. That is a form of evading it. It is neither difficult nor 
easy, because if it were difficult, it would have to be 
difficult for someone. If it were easy, it would have to be 
easy for someone, and the someone we are talking about is 
just the one that is not there. If you think it is there, okay, 
you can have that thought—but it is a thought. In other 
words, your ego is a thought among thoughts. It is not the 
controlling thinker, or the feeler, or the sensor. It is this 
thing that is going along, and we get anxious because we 
feel nobody is in control. But nobody ever was. 


Taoist Ways 


n the initial stages of Zen training, the master will 
discourage thinking. Although you may come to them 
with a lot of ideas, your difficulty is not going to be solved 
by ideas. It is not going to solved by talk and 
intellectualization, and so they are not encouraged. 
Intellectualization creates a gap or lack of rapport between 
you and your life. You may think about things so much that 
you get into the state where you are eating the menu 
instead of the dinner, you are valuing the money more than 
the wealth, and you are confusing the map with the 
territory. What the master wants to do is get you into the 
landscape, to get you into relationship with what is as 
distinct from ideas about what is. This is a very important 
preliminary discipline, but later on you may realize that the 
process of thinking is also what is, that thoughts in their 
own domain are as real as rocks and words have their own 
reality as much as sky and water. Thoughts about things 
are in their own turn things, and so they lead you 
eventually to the point where you intellectualize and think 
in an immediate way. 

The philosophy of Tao sees humanity as a part of nature 
rather than dominating it. There are several well-known 
Chinese paintings with the title Poet Drinking by 
Moonlight. When you look at one of them, at first you see a 
vast landscape. Only after searching very thoroughly, 


almost with a magnifying glass, do you finally find the poet 
tucked away in a corner of the painting drinking his wine. 
If, however, the subject Poet Drinking by Moonlight were 
painted by a Western painter, the poet would be the central 
figure, dominating the whole picture, the landscape a mere 
backdrop. Of course some Chinese painters specialize in 
family portraits and paint very formal paintings of 
ancestors on their thrones, but the Taoist- and Zen-inspired 
painters view humainty as an integral part of nature. 
Humanity is something in nature, just as everything else is, 
including mountains and streams, trees, flowers, and birds. 
We are not commissioned by some sort of supernatural 
being to farm or dominate nature. The Taoists see nature 
as a Self-regulating, self-governing, and indeed, democratic 
organism, with a totality. It all goes together, and this 
totality is the Tao. 

When we speak in Taoism of following the course of 
nature, or following the way, what we mean is doing things 
in accord with the grain. This does not mean we do not cut 
wood, but that when we cut wood we cut along the grain, 
where the wood is most easily cut. In interacting with other 
people, we try to interact along the lines that are the most 
genial. This is the great, fundamental principle called wu 
wei, or “not forcing.” Wu wei is often translated as “not 
doing,” “not acting,” or “not interfering,” but “not forcing” 
seems to me to hit the nail on the head. We never force a 
lock because we will bend the key or break the lock. 
Instead we jiggle it until it turns. Wu wei means always 
acting in accord with the pattern of things as they exist. 
When we follow the principle of wu wei, we do not impose 
any kind of extraneous force on a situation, because such 
force, by its very nature, is not in accord with the situation. 
For example, the people living in an urban slum are ina 


bad situation. They need better housing. But if we simply 
go in and knock the slum down and put in its place some 
architect’s imaginative notion of a superefficient high-rise 
apartment building to “store” these people as if they were 
goods, we do not solve the problem; we create utter chaos. 
The slum, for all its shortcomings, has an ecology of its 
own. It consists of a very complex system of relationships, 
which make it a going concern, even though it may not be 
going very well, and anybody who wants to alter that 
situation must first become sensitive to all the conditions 
and relationships involved. 

It is terribly important to be aware of the 
interdependence of every form of life upon every other 
form of life. This is how, for example, we cultivate the 
animals that we eat. We look after them, and feed them, 
and see that they breed in reasonable quantities. We do not 
do it very well, as a matter of fact, and troubles are arising 
about the supplies of fish in the ocean and all sorts of 
things resulting from our poor or shortsighted husbandry. 
But in the greater ecology it is clear that the apparent 
conflict among various species is not actually a 
competition. Instead it is a very strange system of 
interrelationship, a system of things feeding on each other 
and cultivating each other at the same time. This is the idea 
of the friendly enemy, the necessary adversary who is part 
of life. You have conflicts going on in your own body. All 
kinds of microorganisms are eating each other up, and if 
that were not happening, you would not be healthy. All the 
interrelationships of nature, whether they appear to be 
friendly relationships, as between bees and flowers, or 
conflicting relationships, as between birds and worms, are 
actually forms of cooperation. This is called “mutual 
arising.” When you understand this as the basis of all 


existence and are able to act “without forcing,” your life is 
spontaneous, a life that is so of itself, natural, not forced, 
and not unduly self-conscious. 

Now another term that is important, although it has 
greater use in Neo-Confucian philosophy and Buddhism 
than in the writings of Lao-tzu, is li. This is a very useful 
concept in understanding the sort of natural order of 
mutual interdependence and mutual arising. Li originally 
meant the markings in jade, the grain in wood, or the fiber 
in muscle. It is defined nowadays in most dictionaries as 
“reason” or “principle,” but this is not a very good 
translation. Joseph Needham once suggested that “organic 
pattern” was an ideal translation, and this is certainly 
preferable. The markings in jade are regarded as what 
make it beautiful. As you look down at the water here, you 
see patterns in the foam when a wave breaks. As you watch 
those patterns, you know they will never make an aesthetic 
mistake. They are not symmetrical and they are very 
difficult to describe. They are wiggly, as are the markings 
in jade, and the grain in wood, which we also regard as 
beautiful. All these things exhibit li; they all have distinct 
forms that we can distinguish quite clearly from what we 
call a mess. The foam patterns of waves, the mineral 
patterns of jade, and the vegetable patterns of wood are 
extraordinarily orderly, yet they do not have an obvious 
order, and nobody can ever pin this organic order down 
completely. We know that it is order and that it is 
something quite different from a random mess, but there is 
no way of defining that order completely. 

In order to be able to paint that way, or live that way, or 
to deliver justice that way, you have to have that order in 
you, innately. You have to have an essential sense of li, but 
there is no way of prescribing it. This is very difficult for 


teachers, because in all of our modern schools and 
universities, we are attempting to teach creativity. The 
trouble is that if we found a method whereby we could 
teach creativity, and everybody could explain just how it 
was done, it would no longer be of interest. The mysterious 
—the dark black of lacquer, the impenetrable and profound 
depth out of which glorious things come—is always an 
essential element in the creative. There is a poem that says, 
“When the bird calls, the mountain becomes more 
mysterious.” Imagine that you are in a mountain valley and 
everything is silent; suddenly, somewhere off in the 
distance, an unseen crow caws. You do not know where the 
crow is, but its cry emphasizes the silence and creates an 
element of mystery. There is a Chinese poem written by a 
man who went to find a sage who lived in a little hut in the 
mountains, with a boy there to serve him: “I asked the boy 
beneath the pines. He said, “The master has gone alone, 
herb gathering somewhere on the mount, cloud-hidden, 
whereabouts unknown.’ ” 

The best teachers of athletic and artistic skills are those 
who teach without forcing. I once studied the piano, though 
I am absolutely no good at it now because I do not practice. 
But I had an absolutely superb teacher for a while. He was 
a very great musicologist and his standards were the 
highest. When I first went to him, he said, “Let me see what 
you can do.” So I played a Scarlatti sonata, and he said, 
“The trouble with you is that you are trying too hard. You 
are hitting the piano, and you should never hit a piano. 
Actually, all you have to do in order to play a piano is to 
drop your hands on it, and so you need to have relaxed 
arms.” He made me practice for a while and felt my 
muscles to see if I were relaxed or not, and then he said, 
“Now just drop your hands on the piano. I don’t care which 


notes you hit, but just drop your hands, let them fall. There 
is enough energy in the weight in your arm to play as loud 
as you will or as soft as you will—just let them drop.” 

He kept feeling my arms. “No, no, you are getting too 
tense, you must pretend you are Lao-tzu,” he said, for he 
was a very educated man and he knew about these things. 
Then he said, “Now, after dropping your hands all you have 
to do is hit the right notes.” He continued, “You know, the 
same thing is involved in making a very complex trill,” and 
he demonstrated. He just dropped his hand on the piano 
and at the same time his fingers went “flluump,” and 
produced a magnificent ornamentation. We went on and we 
practiced this for some time, and then he said, “Now let’s 
get around to hitting the right notes.” 

Let us return to the problem of thinking about thinking. 
Sometimes people are removed from life because they 
dwell in the world of the intellect. They are living in a world 
of symbols. Intellectuals are in a way removed from life, 
tied up in their categories and catalogs, their musts and 
must nots. Yet this realm is also real, and thinking about 
thinking can be lived with as much directness, freshness, 
and spontaneity as life without thinking. In order to live in 
the realm of thinking about thinking with full spontaneity, 
we must no longer regard the symbol, the thought, the 
idea, or the word as a block to life or a means of escape 
from life. To be able to use the symbol, but not as means of 
escape, you have to know that you cannot escape in the 
first place. Not only can you not escape, but there is no one 
to escape: there is no one to be delivered from the prison of 
life. 

The liberation of the mind from symbols is exactly the 
Same process as breaking up the links between successive 
moments and the illusion of a continuing self that travels 


from moment to moment. Such a continuing self is as much 
an illusion as a wave of moving water, or the appearance of 
a solid circle created by moving a cigarette in the dark. The 
fallacy of the continuous self is pointed out by the saying, 
“No one perceives anything, and no one experiences 
anything—there is simply seeing and experiencing.” In fact 
we introduce these redundancies through language, when 
we talk about seeing sights, hearing sounds, and feeling 
feelings. There are sights, there are sounds, there are 
feelings. We do not feel a feeling; the feeling itself already 
contains the feeling of it. This is very simple. Sight does not 
depend on the existence of the seen and the seer, bound 
together by some mysterious process. The seer and the 
seen, the knower and the known, are what we call “terms.” 
Terms mean ends, and these are in mathematical language 
called limits. Now, when we pick up a stick, the stick has 
two ends, and they are the terms of the stick. The ends of 
the stick do not exist as separate points that encounter 
each other on the occasion of meeting at a stick. Actually, 
they are abstract points, and the ends in and of themselves 
and considered as themselves are purely geometrical 
Euclidian imaginations; the stick is the reality. 

In the same way, in the phenomenon called experience 
the reality is not an encounter of the knower and the 
known. The reality is the experience that can be termed as 
having two aspects, two ends, the knower and the known, 
though this is only a figure of speech. In a neurological 
sense, everything you see is yourself. What you are aware 
of is a state of your nervous system, and there is no other 
knowledge whatsoever. That does not mean that your 
nervous system is the only existing reality, and that there is 
nothing beyond your nervous system, but it does mean that 
all knowledge is knowledge of you, and that therefore, in 


some mysterious way, you are not different from the 
external world you know. If you see, then, that what you 
experience and what you are are the same thing, then take 
it a step further and realize also that you are in the external 
world you are looking at. Just as I am in your external 
world, you are in my external world, but I am in the same 
world you are. My inside is not separable from the outside 
world. It is something that the so-called outside world is 
doing, just as it is doing the tree, the ocean, and everything 
else in the outside world. Now, isn’t that great! We have 
now completely eliminated the person in the trap, the one 
who either dominates the world or suffers under it. It has 
vanished, it never was there, and when that happens, you 
can play any life game you want. You can link the past, the 
present, and the future together and play roles, but you 
know that you have seen through the great social lie that 
one accumulates or owns experiences, whether memories, 
sights, sounds, or other people. We are always building up 
our self as the haver of all this, but if you think that, you 
have been had! 


Swimming Headless 


ik the second word in the title of Lao-tzu’s Tao Te 
Ching, presents us with some serious problems in 
translation. It is ordinarily translated “virtue,” but virtue as 
we understand it today isn’t at all appropriate. Te means 
virtue in the sense that we speak of the healing virtues of a 
plant. In the section of the Lao-tzu where the term is 
introduced the text reads, literally, “Superior virtue, not 
virtue, thus it has virtue. Theory of virtue cannot let go of 
virtue, thus it is not virtue.” A smoother translations is, 
“Superior virtue is not conscious of itself as virtue, 
therefore it is virtue. The idea of virtue it is so hooked on 
being virtuous, that it is not virtue.” Te means the 
excellence of things in the sense that a tree excels at being 
a tree. There is no way to imitate a tree; the only way is to 
be one. In the same way, when a human being shows 
extraordinary skill at something, it seems that it comes 
naturally to them. No artifice is apparent, and if there is 
some discipline involved, it is concealed. Such artless 
excellence seems like magic, and in te there is a connection 
between virtue and magic. 

Everything is fundamentally in harmony with the Tao. It 
is said the Tao is that from which nothing can depart, and 
that from which things can depart is not the Tao. 
Fundamentally, then, we cannot escape it. It is as if we are 
all floating in a tremendous river, which carries us along. 


Some people may swim against the river, yet they are still 
being carried along. Others have learned the art of 
swimming with the river. They are carried along too, but 
they are aware of it. They know they are being carried 
along, whereas the people who are swimming against the 
river think they are going in the opposite direction, though 
they’re not, really. We have to flow with the river; there is 
no other way. We can swim against it and pretend not to be 
flowing with it, but we still are. What’s more, the person 
who gives up that pretense, who realizes one is inevitably 
carried by the river and swims with it, suddenly acquires 
behind everything they do the force of the river. 

The person swimming against the river does not by their 
action express the power of the river. On the other hand 
the person swimming with it rides the river’s force and has 
behind them the whole river, the power of which they can 
subtly direct. They can change direction in the river, going 
to the left or the right as a ship uses a rudder to steer in 
the current; or if they are more skillful still, they can tack. 
When a Sailboat tacks, it sails against the wind, yet it still 
uses the wind to blow it along. That is the most skilled art 
of all; that is perfection in Taoism. 

I remember once looking into the air, and one of those 
glorious little thistledown things came floating along. I 
picked it up, like that, and brought it down, and it looked as 
if it were struggling to get away, as if it were an insect 
caught by one leg. I first thought “Well it’s not doing that, 
it’s just the wind blowing.” But then I thought again. “Is it 
really only the wind blowing?” Surely it is the structure of 
this thistledown, which in cooperation with the wind, 
enables it to move like an animal—but using the wind’s 
effort, not its own. It is a more intelligent being than an 
insect, in a way, because an insect exerts effort. A person 


who rows a boat employs effort, but a person who puts up a 
sail employs magic: with the intelligence to use a sail, they 
let nature work for them. Te is a kind of intelligence that 
creates cooperation, so that the desired end _ is 
accomplished without unnecessary effort. For example, 
instead of forcing others to agree with you, you can give 
them the notion that the idea you want them to have is 
their own. When you want to teach a baby to swim, you can 
put the baby in the water and then move backward in the 
water and create a vacuum. This pulls the baby along, and 
it learns the feel of the water and, eventually, how to swim 
on its own. 

The Tao Te Ching is a book written for several purposes. 
We may take it as a guide to mystical understanding of the 
universe, or we may take it as a dissertation on the 
principles of nature, almost a naturalistic handbook of 
natural law. We may also take it as a political treatise, a 
book of wisdom for governors, and on this subject the basic 
principle that it advocates is the virtue of governing by not 
ruling. Suppose the president of the United States were as 
unknown to you by name as the local sanitary inspector, 
the person who looks after the drains and the sewage 
disposal. The inspector may not be a glamorous figure, but 
for that very reason they probably do their job more 
efficiently than the president. The president wastes an 
enormous amount of time interviewing various groups, 
conferring honors, and so forth, and with all of the 
ceremonial functions, the poor person’s life must be an 
utter torment. They are so well known that they have little 
time to give to the government of the country. Just think of 
their mail, and all the people who have to be employed 
sifting it out and assessing it. If they were someone quite 
anonymous, so that we did not have to think about them, 


they would be a very good ruler in just the same way, for 
example, as are the systems that govern your own body’s 
functions. You do not have to attend to your body unless 
you are sick. The government of your body happens 
automatically, going on day after day after day. The better 
it is, the less you have to think about it. On the deepest 
level, a person can get in the way of their own existence by 
becoming too aware of themself. Such a person lacks the 
quality of te. 

The Taoists propose to help people get back to Tao and 
the state of te, so that they will not get in their own way. 
The key, they say, is the idea of being empty. Emptiness, 
being vacant, is the secret of all things. The highest kind of 
knowledge is not “know how” but “no how”—to be able to 
achieve things with “no how,” that is, without any method. 
This is done through something called “fasting the heart.” 
The Chinese word I translate as “heart” does not mean 
heart in the physiological sense. Pronounced hsin, it is in 
fact a part of the character te, and its meaning is closer to 
“heart-mind” or “psychic center.” Hsin is also frequently 
translated as “mind,” and in all the Zen texts where the 
term “no mind” is used, the actual word is wu _ hsin 
(Japanese, mushin). The most desirable kind of heart, then, 
is absence of heart. In English, “heartless” has very bad 
connotations, as does “mindless.” A heartless person is an 
inconsiderate and unfeeling person, and a mindless person 
is an idiot, but in Chinese Buddhism and Taoism, a person 
who has mushin, no mind or no heart, is a person of a very 
high order. Their psychic center does not get in its own 
way, and it operates as if it were not there. 

Lao-tzu said that “the highest form of man uses his hsin 
like a mirror—it grasps nothing, it refuses nothing, it 


receives but does not keep.” And the poem says, “When the 
geese fly over the water and they are reflected in the 
water, the geese do not intend to cast their reflection and 
the water has no mind to retain their image.” The art of 
living is to operate in the world as if you were absent. As a 
matter of fact, this is built into us physiologically. Let me 
ask you simply: What is the color of your head from the 
standpoint of your eyes? You feel that your head is black, or 
that it has not any color at all. Outside you see your field of 
vision as an oval because your two eyes act as two centers 
of an ellipse. But what is beyond the field of vision? What 
color is it where you can’t see? It is not black, and this is an 
important point; there is no color at all beyond your field of 
vision. This little mental exercise gives us an idea of what is 
meant by the character hsuan. Although its dictionary 
definition is “dark, deep, obscure,” it actually refers to this 
kind of no color that is the color of your head—as far as 
your eyes are concerned. Perhaps we could say that the 
invisibility of one’s head, in a certain sense the lack of a 
head, is the secret of being alive. To be headless (to have 
no head in just the sense I am talking about) is our way of 
talking about the Chinese expression wu Asin, or “no 
mind.” 

As a matter of fact, if you want to see the inside of your 
head all you have to do is keep your eyes open, because all 
that you are experiencing in the external, visual field is a 
state of your brain. All the colors and shapes you see are 
the way in which the brain nerves translate the electrical 
impulses in the external world outside the envelope of the 
skin. They translate all of what is going on outside into 
impulses that are to us shape and color. However, shape 
and color are states of the nerves, so that what you see 
when your eyes are open is how it feels inside your head. 


You do not see your brain as an internal undulating 
structure, you see your brain as everything outside. In this 
way the emptiness of one’s head is the condition of seeing 
and the transparency of the eye lens is the condition of 
seeing colors. The thirteenth-century mystic Meister 
Eckhart said, “because my eye has no color it is able to 
discern color”; this is a restatement of the fundamental 
Taoist idea of being absent as a condition of being present, 
being not there so as to be there. Lao-tzu says, “When your 
belt is comfortable you don’t feel it, when your shoes are 
comfortable it is as if you were not wearing any.” The more 
aware you are of these things, the less well they are made 
or the less well they fit. 

We may raise a very simple objection to this, which is 
that if I do not know I am there I seem to be missing 
everything. We want to know that we know. If we are happy 
and we do not know we are happy, we might just as well 
not be happy. To know that you are happy, is really the 
overflowing of the cup of life. The downside of this 
principle is to be miserable and know that you are 
miserable. Some people are miserable without knowing it, 
but you know my limerick: 


There was a young man who said, though 
It seems that I know that I know 

What I would like to see 

Is the I that knows me 

When I know that I know that I know 


Of course this is the great human predicament, the 
development of self-consciousness, the development of the 
possibility of reflecting upon one’s own knowledge, which is 
simultaneously a blessing and a curse. Taoism does not 


escape this problem and it does not avoid this problem. It 
deals with it, but it does not deal with it obviously; it floats 
lightly over it. 

Lao-tzu said, “It is easy enough to stand still; the 
difficulty is to walk without touching the ground.” He is 
referring to the fact that in the state of being in accord with 
the Tao there is a certain feeling of weightlessness parallel 
to the weightlessness that people feel when they float in 
space or when they go deep down into the ocean. This is of 
course connected with the sensation that you are not 
carrying your body around, which I compare to the 
experience of an expert driver when they really are “with 
it” in a car. When the hill lifts them up and drops them off 
the other side, there is a sense of weightlessness, and they 
and the road are all one process. This state is connected to 
the inner meaning of Lieh-tzu riding in the wind. When D.T. 
Suzuki was asked what is it like to have satori, he said, “It 
is just like everyday, ordinary experience except about two 
inches off the ground.” Then of course there is the song, 
“Walking on air, never a care, something is making me 
sing, tra-la-la-la, tra-la-la-la, like a little bird in spring.” 

What is this weightlessness? It means that you are not 
moving around in constant opposition to yourself. Most 
people move in constant opposition to themselves because 
they are afraid that if they do not oppose themselves all the 
time they will lose control and something awful will 
happen. When the human being developed the power to be 
aware of themself, to know that they know—in other words 
when the cortex was formed over the original brain—they 
fell from grace. That was the fall of humanity, because 
when we felt the sensation of being in charge, of being in 
control of ourselves, we became anxious. Am I aware 
enough of myself? Have I taken enough factors into 


consideration? Have I done all that should be done? When 
we asked these questions of ourselves for the first time, we 
started to tremble, and this was the fall of humanity. This is 
also what Lao-tzu means when he says, “When the great 
Tao was lost there came duty to man and right conduct.” In 
other words, nobody talks about how you ought to behave 
unless things have gone radically wrong. There would not 
be any conception of faithful ministers of the state unless 
there were a lot of lousy politicians around. No one would 
talk about filial piety unless there were wayward sons and 
daughters. According to the Taoists, moral preaching is the 
source of confusion. There is a marvelous story about a 
conversation between Confucius and Lao-tzu in which Lao- 
tzu asked Confucius to explain to him about charity and 
duty to one’s neighbor. In reply Confucius gave him a little 
sermon on giving up self-interest and working for others, to 
which Lao-tzu replied, “What stuff sir! Regard the universe. 
The stars come out invariably every night, the sun rises and 
sets, the birds flock and migrate without exception, all 
flowers and trees grow upwards without exception. With 
your ‘charity’ and ‘duty to one’s neighbor,’ you are just 
introducing confusion into the realm. Your attempt to 
eliminate self is a manifestation of selfishness. You are like 
a person beating a drum in search of a fugitive.” All talk 
about selfishness and all talk about becoming virtuous or 
enlightened or integrated or non-neurotic or self-actualized 
attests to the fact that it has not happened, and such talk 
will in fact get in the way of its happening. 

The Taoist sage Lieh-tzu, who lived somewhat later than 
Lao-tzu, was known for his ability to ride on the wind. 
Before acquiring this skill, Lieh-tzu found a very great 
master and went to study with him. The master lived in a 
small hut, and Lieh-tzu sat outside the hut but the master 


paid absolutely no attention to him. Of course this is the 
way with Taoist masters. Why would they want students, 
since they have nothing to teach? After a year of sitting 
outside, Lieh-tzu went away because he was fed up with 
waiting so long. Then he became regretful about leaving 
and thought he really should make an attempt, so he went 
back to the master. When the master saw him approach, he 
asked, “Why this ceaseless coming and going?” So Lieh-tzu 
sat there and tried to control his mind so that he would not 
think of the difference between gain and loss, so that he 
could live in such a way that nothing is either an advantage 
or a disadvantage. 

There is a marvelous story about this perspective. Once 
upon a time there was a Chinese farmer whose horse ran 
away, and all the neighbors came around to commiserate 
that evening. “So sorry to hear your horse has run away. 
This is most unfortunate.” The farmer said, “Maybe.” The 
next day the horse came back bringing seven wild horses 
with it, and everybody came back in the evening and said, 
“Oh, isn’t that lucky. What a great turn of events. You now 
have eight horses!” And he said, “Maybe.” The next day his 
son tried to break one of these horses and ride it but he 
was thrown, and broke his leg, and they all said, “Oh dear, 
that’s too bad,” and he said, “Maybe.” The following day 
the conscription officers came around to conscript people 
into the army and they rejected his son because he had a 
broken leg. Again all the people came around and said, 
“Isn’t that great!” And he said, “Maybe.” The farmer 
steadfastly refrained from thinking of things in terms of 
gain or loss, advantage or disadvantage, because one never 
knows. Receiving a letter from a law office tomorrow 
saying that some distant relative of yours has left you a 
million dollars might make you feel very happy, but the 


windfall may well lead to unbelievable disaster—including a 
visit from the Internal Revenue Service, just to mention one 
possibility. In fact we never really know whether an event 
is fortune or misfortune, we only know our ever-changing 
reactions to ever-changing events. The Taoist is wise 
enough to understand eventually that there is not any fixed 
good or bad; this point of view is called non-choosing. 

To return to Lieh-tzu. He attempted to keep his mind in 
a state of non-choosing, but it is very difficult to overcome 
one’s habits of feeling and thinking. After he had practiced 
this for a year, the master looked at him and recognized he 
was there. After another year’s practice, the master invited 
him to come and sit inside his hut. Then something 
changed, and Lieh-tzu did not try to control his mind 
anymore. He described what he did: “I let my ears hear 
whatever they wanted to hear, I let my eyes see whatever 
they wanted to see, I let my feet move anywhere they 
wanted to go, I let my mind think of whatever it wanted to 
think, and it was a very strange sensation because all my 
bodily existence seemed to melt, and become transparent, 
and to have no weight. I didn’t know whether I was walking 
on the wind or the wind was walking on me.” 

We insist, however, that there are events; we observe 
events, we remember events, and they make an impression 
on us. Yet in the psychology of Taoism there is no 
difference between the observer and what is observed. We 
are only the observation of life from a certain point of view. 
We create an opposition between the thinker and the 
thought, the experiencer and the experience, and the 
knower and the known because we think about knowledge 
in terms of certain metaphors—the metaphor of the stylus 
on the writing sheet, the reflection on the mirror. All those 
sorts of images are part of our idea of knowledge, but the 


Taoist theory of knowledge is quite different. There is no 
knower facing the known, and if there is any knower at all, 
it contains the known. Your mind, if you have one, is not in 
your head; instead, your head is in your mind, because your 
mind, understood from the standpoint of vision, is space. 
The Chinese use the word kung, which means sky, space, 
or emptiness. S€é means both shape and color. The famous 
lines of the Heart Sutra declare that “Space/emptiness is 
precisely shape/color and_ shape/color is_ precisely 
space/emptiness.” What we call space contains the myriads 
of shapes and colors and bodies and weights and so on. It 
does not reflect them as a mirror; but it is the absence that 
guarantees their presence and it is their presence that 
guarantees absence. There is a mutual arising between 
voidness and form, between existence and nonexistence, 
being and non-being, and these are never felt as 
alternatives or elements that are in some kind of contest. 
When we Say, then, that there is not any thinker behind 
thoughts, nor any experiencer that has experiences, this is 
a way of saying that experiencing or knowing is not an 
encounter between strangers. 

Western thought concentrates very much on knowledge 
as an encounter and talks about facing facts, facing reality, 
as if somehow or other the knower and the known came 
from two completely different worlds and met each other. 
The phenomenon of knowledge is almost the precise 
opposite of that. Instead of being a collision between two 
wandering bodies in space, knowledge is much more like 
the expansion of a flower from its stem, where stem and 
flower are knower and the known, the terms of something 
that lies between them. We tend in all our metaphors and 
common speech to think of life as a process that has 
polarized itself, coming out from a center and expressing 


itself in terms of opposites. Of course this is the basis of the 
whole yang/yin principle illustrated as two interlocked 
fishes. It is a fascinating emblem because it is a helix, and 
it is the formation of a spiral nebula, and it is the position of 
sexual intercourse. I am trying to get to the middle of you, 
you are trying to get to the middle of me, neither one of us 
exist without the other. The yang is the light and yin is the 
dark. Yang originally meant the sunny south side of a 
mountain, and yin the dark north side. Yang is the north 
bank of a river that gets the sun, yin is the south bank that 
is in the shade. 

Now, there are no mountains with only one side. The 
mountain, if it is a mountain at all, goes up and down, like a 
wave. There are no waves with a crest but no trough or a 
trough with no crest, because you cannot have half a wave. 
Yang and yin are quite different from each other, but just 
because they are different they are identical, and this is the 
important idea of the “identical difference.” The saying in 
both Taoism and Buddhism is that “difference is identity, 
identity is difference.” The Chinese word for “is” is not 
quite the same as our word. It somewhat resembles “that,” 
so we might render the statement “difference that identity, 
identity that difference.” This does not mean quite A is B, 
but that A is in relation to B or A goes with B, or A 
necessarily involves B. Difference necessarily involves 
identity, identity necessarily involves difference, so there is 
no yang without yin, and there is no yin without yang. 
When I was first studying these things, I was terribly 
bothered by how on earth I was going to see this multi- 
differentiated world as a unity. What was going to happen, 
what was it going to be like to see that all things are one? 
The sages keep saying all things are one, but they all look 
so different to me. All these people act in different ways, 


and they have all their houses and their cars and all their 
this and that. The whole world looked full of the most bony, 
prickly differences. I thought, “Well, what is supposed to 
happen? Is this supposed to be as if your eyesight blurred 
and all these things floated together? What is this 
experience of nirvana or of liberation supposed to be? Why 
do the Hindu sages write about it just as if it were a kind of 
dissolution of everything?” It took me a long time, and 
suddenly one day I realized that the difference I saw 
between things was the same thing as their unity, because 
differences, borders, lines, surfaces, boundaries do not 
really divide things from each other at all, they join them 
together, and all boundaries are held in common. It is like a 
territory that has all been divided up into property, and this 
is your property, and this is my property. But if I live next 
to you, your fence is my fence, and we hold the boundary in 
common. We may make up silly arrangements as to who is 
responsible for the maintenance of this fence, but 
nevertheless we hold our boundaries in common, and we 
would not know where my plot of land was unless we knew 
the definition of your plot of land, and the plot of land that 
is adjoining. I saw then that my sense of me being me was 
exactly the same thing as my sensation of being one with 
the whole cosmos. I did not need to have some other sort of 
different, odd kind of experience to feel in total connection 
with everything. Once you get the clue, you see that the 
sense of unity is inseparable from the sense of difference. 
You would not know your self, or what you meant by self, 
unless at the same time you had the feeling of other. 

Now the secret is that the other eventually turns out to 
be you. The element of surprise in life is when suddenly you 
find the thing most alien turns out to be yourself. Go out at 
night and look at the stars and realize that they are millions 


and billions of miles away, vast conflagrations out in space. 
You can lie back and look at that and say, “Well, surely I 
hardly matter. I am just a tiny little speck aboard this weird 
spotted bit of dust called Earth, and all that was going on 
out there billions of years before I was born and will still be 
going on billions of years after I die.” Nothing seems 
stranger to you than that, or more different from you, yet 
there comes a point, if you watch long enough, when you 
will say “Why that’s me!” It is the other that is the 
condition of your being your self, as the back is the 
condition of being the front, and when you know that, you 
know you never die. 


Zen Tales 


ll of us need to be liberated from our culture to a 

certain extent, largely because education is a kind of a 
necessary evil. When the process of education or 
acculturation has been completed, we need a cure for it. 
Education is like salting meat in order to preserve it; when 
we are actually ready to cook the meat and eat it, we need 
to soak some of the salt out. In the process of being 
brought up by parents and teachers, we are made tolerable 
to live with on the one hand, but on the other hand we are 
unavoidably damaged. As a result, in our culture, it is 
increasingly popular to undergo psychoanalysis after we 
complete our education, to work out all the damage and 
traumatic shocks we experienced in the process. In 
sophisticated circles psychoanalysis has become something 
one goes through not because one suffers from a specific 
mental sickness but because it is considered generally 
beneficial to mental health. Here we can see our fumbling 
attempt to find a cure for our own culture. 

We need a cure because we lose our spontaneity in the 
course of being brought up. What is so delightful about 
children, as well as so objectionable, is that they are 
completely spontaneous. When we watch a child who is 
really just dancing for fun, we say, “That’s delightful.” The 
child eventually notices that this is a way of getting 
attention and becomes self-conscious about dancing. For 


our part, we send them to dancing school where they 
becomes stiff and wretched, and only after many, many 
years of practice does the child, now a young man or 
woman, recapture the spontaneity of childhood as a dancer. 
The child has gone the long way around to get back to the 
thing they once had, and of course it is terribly difficult to 
accomplish this at all. 

The same is true of the “civilizing” process, of learning 
to live, as our culture teaches it. Each child is taught that 
he or she has to observe rules, and as we come to grips 
with that fact, something arises that bugs us human beings 
beyond belief: self-consciousness. Self-consciousness is, in 
one sense, our distinction as human beings, and it also 
contributes to our great ability to appreciate things. We not 
only have the ability to experience happiness, but we can 
know we are experiencing happiness. We not only think, 
but we can think about thinking and analyze the very 
Capacity of reason. To think about thinking, to know about 
knowing, to be aware of what one does and hears, is the 
birth of rational control of behavior, which, we might say, is 
the glory of civilization. The glory of humanity is, however, 
its bane at the same time. How do we know when to stop 
thinking about thinking, for instance? You think about a 
problem, and you have to make a decision, but how long 
should you think about it? How much evidence should you 
collect before you act? You never know. What most of us do 
is to think about a decision until further thought is a 
nuisance. Then, when it is too late to think about it 
anymore, we act. 

We never are sure that we decided the right thing, and 
one of the troubles about thinking about decisions is that 
there are ever so many unpredictable variables. You may 
work out the most perfect business contract, satisfied that 


you have covered every contingency you could anticipate— 
but you did not bargain for slipping on a banana skin on the 
way to your partner’s office! Such a thing could not be 
predicted by any amount of analysis, and the more we try 
to elaborate perfectly foolproof methods of arranging our 
lives, the more we find ourselves encumbered with 
impossible details. This is also the fallacy of too much 
regulation by law. When we try to make the law provide for 
everything, suddenly we cannot move without filling out 
dozens of forms, or without consulting all sorts of 
bureaucrats and hiring a staff of lawyers and accountants. 
We take all kinds of measures to be sure we do not make 
the wrong move, but after a while the game ceases to be 
worth the candle, and life becomes so safe that it is not 
worth living at all. 

This is one of the problems of becoming self-conscious, 
and all education is an instruction in self-consciousness. 
What do you learn in education? You learn words—symbols 
about reality—and with those words you become able to 
talk about living, to think about living, and to have 
knowledge about living. Knowledge is not academically 
respectable knowledge unless it is knowledge in terms of 
words or in terms of numbers, that is to say, in terms of a 
symbolic language about life. Once we know that we know, 
and we know we are alive and we know we are going to die 
because we can anticipate our futures, we feel that we have 
lost our innocence and something has gone wrong. 

The whole problem of self-consciousness is that it puts 
us in a perennial dither and doubt, which we call anxiety. In 
response, we develop a nostalgia for an age of innocence, a 
time before self-consciousness. Wouldn’t it be nice not to 
have to make any decisions, to act entirely on whim? If one 
got into trouble, that would be all right, because at least 


one would not have been anticipating it and worrying about 
it. When a moth mistakes a candle for its sexual object, the 
moth makes a mistake, and that is that. It does not worry 
on the way to the candle whether it is going to get burned, 
and of course moths are sufficiently prolific so that one 
moth more or less lost in a candle does not matter; 
hundreds of moths lost in candles do not matter: Moths just 
go on. We might imagine a human civilization where people 
make mistakes, and when they do, they go off with a 
glorious bang instead of a continual whimper, and that is 
that. They would not worry and they would live 
magnificently. 

But we cannot possibly go back to such a state of 
innocence. One cannot give up self-consciousness on 
purpose, one cannot give up worrying, and one cannot give 
up thinking about oneself. So we remain terrified to live 
spontaneously, because we might do something wrong. The 
core of Zen training, however, is to live spontaneously, and 
this is why it is so fascinating to many Western people, and 
especially Western intellectuals, who are overburdened 
with self-consciousness. What fascinated people most about 
Zen when they first heard of it through Dr. Suzuki’s 
writings were the Zen stories he introduced to them. 

Years and years ago, I lent a book of Zen stories to a 
friend of mine. He was in the hospital, and when he gave it 
back to me, he said, “I didn’t understand a word of it, but it 
cheered me up enormously.” Tang dynasty China, from 
about 600 to 900, marks the golden age of Zen, and the Zen 
literature from that period is especially fascinating. It 
consists mostly of anecdotes about the encounters of Zen 
masters with their students. In Japanese, these are called 
mondo, which means “question and answer,” and from the 
mondo that have come down to us, it appears that the way 


of studying Zen in those days was rather unlike it is now. 
Today Zen is an established religion and is studied in 
various settled communities, but in those days Zen was a 
wandering practice. When you became a Zen monk, you did 
a great deal of traveling; instead of sitting on your fanny 
most of the day, you trudged. You were walking along 
across prairies, up mountain paths, through rugged 
country, and you were visiting master after master after 
master to find one who would answer your question. 

We must imagine a seeker, not a phony seeker, but a 
true seeker. They have within them a burning desire to find 
out what it is all about, who they are, what life is, what 
reality is. What is the way out of this mess? Instead of 
remaining a mixed-up human being, they want to become 
something as simple as a tiger, or a cat, or a bird, or a 
buddha. Such seeker-monks used to wander and wander in 
search of someone who would answer their questions. 

One of the oldest Zen stories is of a man who came to 
where Bodhidharma was meditating. Bodhidharma refused 
to see anybody, and the man who came to see him was 
refused like all the others. Finally, the seeker cut off his left 
arm and presented it to the master to prove _ his 
seriousness. Bodhidharma said, “All right, what do you 
want?” The man said, “I have no peace of mind. Please 
pacify my mind.” The Chinese word is hsin, which is often 
translated as “mind,” but is not actually the same. Hsin is a 
more inclusive word meaning the heart-mind, the center of 
psychic activity. When you say “I have no peace of mind,” it 
doesn’t mean you just have a headache; you have a 
heartache, too. Bodhidharma said to this man, whose name 
was Akar, “Bring out your mind before me and I will pacify 
it,” and Akar said, “When I look for my mind, I cannot find 


it.” Bodhidharma replied, “There, it’s pacified now.” And 
this answered Akar’s question. 

All Zen stories are like this. They are similar in nature to 
jokes. A joke is told to make you laugh. Laughter is not an 
intellectual thing, it is an emotional reaction, and the point 
of the joke is to stir that emotion. If the joke has to be 
explained to you, you may chuckle out of politeness, but 
you will not laugh spontaneously, you will not laugh from 
your belly. 

Of course, the object of Zen is not to produce laughter, 
but to produce awakening, clarification, enlightenment, or 
what is called in Japanese satori. Like laughter, satori is 
something that happens suddenly. As a rule, one does not 
begin to laugh gradually, first softly and then louder and 
louder. You see a joke instantly. A joke is a matter of an 
“aha!” The Zen stories are also intended to produce an 
“aha!” reaction in you, a “But, I see, now it’s clear.” They 
do not in fact contain any information. They are not 
designed to tell you something, to impart information or 
knowledge. They are designed to get rid of something, to 
make a false problem with which you are wrestling 
disappear. In the story of Akar and _ Bodhidharma, 
understanding equaled the disappearance of the problem; 
when Akar looked for the mind that was giving him so 
much trouble, he could not find it. 

The stories are often quite astonishing, and I would like 
to tell a few. Some are quite well known, but I will try and 
choose ones that are less familiar. 

One day a Zen master was walking in the forest with a 
group of his disciples. Suddenly he picked up a tree branch 
and said to one of the monks, “What is it?” The monk 
hesitated, so the master whacked him with the branch. 
Then he turned to another monk, and said, “What is it?” 


The second monk replied, “Give it to me so I can see.” The 
master tossed him the branch, and the second monk caught 
it and hit the master with it. “You got out of that dilemma!” 
cried the master. 

On another occasion, an officer of the army came to a 
Zen master and said, “Sir, I have heard a very strange 
riddle and I want to hear your answer to it. Once upon a 
time there was a man who kept a goose in a bottle, and it 
grew so large that he couldn’t get it out. Now, he didn’t 
want to break the bottle, and he didn’t want to hurt the 
goose, so how did he get it out?” The master changed the 
subject, and said something like, “It’s a nice day today. 
Isn’t the waterfall making a lovely sound outside?” So they 
went on in pleasant conversation, and when the officer got 
up to leave and walked to the door, the master said, “Oh, 
officer,” and he turned around and said, “Yes?” The master 
said, “There, it’s out!” 

The famous Zen master Suibi Mugaku was in a lecture 
hall, surrounded by monks studying, when one of them 
approached him and asked, “What is the secret teaching of 
Buddhism?” Mugaku replied, “Wait until there is no one 
around, and I'll tell you.” Later in the day, the questioner 
accosted him and said, “There is nobody around now. What 
is the secret teaching of Buddhism?” Mugaku led the monk 
into the garden and pointed at the bamboo. The monk said, 
“IT don’t understand.” Mugaku remarked, “What a tall one 
that is, what a short one that is,” and the monk was 
awakened. 

There was a monk named Gotai, and whenever people 
came to ask him a question about Buddhism he would hold 
up a finger. That was the only answer he would give. Now 
Gotai had an attendant, and one day somebody came to the 
temple to inquire about the teaching being given there. The 


master was apparently out, and the attendant held up a 
finger. But actually the master was there, observing this 
exchange from behind a screen. When the visitor left, he 
came out of hiding and asked his attendant, “What is the 
fundamental teaching of Buddhism?” The boy held up a 
finger. Instantly the master drew a knife and cut the finger 
off. The boy was very dismayed and rushed away yelling. 
The master shouted after him, “Hey! Come back!” The boy 
returned, and the master asked, “What is the fundamental 
principle of Buddhism?” The boy went to hold up the finger, 
but it was not there, and he was enlightened. 

A monk left his old master to study with a new one, and 
when he approached the new master, the master asked, 
“Who did you study with before you came to me?” The 
monk replied, “Oh, I studied with so and so.” “What did he 
teach you?” “When I asked about the fundamental meaning 
of Buddhism, he answered me, “Ting-Ting (the Chinese god 
of fire) comes for fire.’” “Well,” the master said, “that was 
an excellent answer, but I bet you didn’t understand it.” 
“Oh yes, I understood it, because Ping-Ting is the god of 
fire, and if Ping-Ting should ask for fire, that would be like 
me asking about Buddhism, because I am really a Buddha 
already.” The master shook his head and said, “I knew it. 
You missed the point completely.” “Well, how would you 
deal with it?” asked the monk. The master said, “You ask 
me.” So the monk repeated the question, “What is the 
fundamental principle of Buddhism?” “Ping-Ting comes for 
fire,” replied the master, and the monk got the point. 

I could go on with these stories indefinitely, but you will 
notice within them a certain shared dynamic. As a rule, 
they require a solution to a dilemma, or they do something 
that creates what we would call a “state of blockage.” This 
is achieved by setting up a situation in which the 


participant anticipates one response, but then the master 
suddenly changes the rules, requiring a reaction different 
from the “normal,” automatic response. If somebody passes 
you in the street and says, “Good morning,” you say, “Good 
morning.” You are not being spontaneous; in fact you are 
being nearly automatic. However, when somebody comes 
up to you and says, “Are you saved?” or “Do you accept 
Jesus Christ as your personal savior?” the unexpectedness 
of the question stalls or “blocks” most people. It’s as if 
someone suddenly asked you, “Why have you got such long 
toenails?” when you are wearing your shoes and nobody 
Can see your toes. 

Anything that disrupts the normal flow of interchange 
may put you off-balance, and the object of Zen is never to 
be off-balance. To be off-balance is the real meaning of 
what is called bonno in Japanese, which means 
“entanglements” or “attachments,” and is often translated 
as “worldly attachments.” In Buddhist philosophy, enjoying 
your dinner is not regarded as a worldly attachment. That 
is natural. It is not a worldly attachment to need to sleep. 
That is perfectly natural, too. To be afflicted by worldly 
attachment is to be sticky, that is, to be like a wheel that 
sticks on the axle and squeaks. We are sticky when we are 
self-conscious, when we are, aS we would say, “all balled- 
up” or “all clutched-up.” We have lost our original 
spontaneity, and we are not flowing with the stream of the 
Tao, the course of nature, or whatever you want to call it. 

The questions of the Zen mondo put you in a dilemma, 
and the point is to see if you can get out of the dilemma 
without a moment’s hesitation. Without a moment’s 
hesitation does not necessarily mean quickly, because 
being in a hurry to give an answer is itself a form of 
attachment. In this connection, you should all read in [D. 


T.] Suzuki’s book Zen and Japanese Culture a letter written 
by the Japanese monk Takuan. He wrote a letter on the art 
of swordsmanship in which he explained the necessity of 
spontaneity. In swordsmanship, you have no time to stop to 
think how you are going to respond to an attack; at that 
moment, it is already too late and you are dead. You must 
respond as spontaneously as sound arises when you clap 
your hands, without a moment’s hesitation; or as 
instantaneously as the spark flies when one strikes steel on 
flint. Takuan cautions that trying to be quick, however, will 
be a block to achieving quickness. The apprentice 
swordsman is first set to work as a sort of janitor for their 
master, working around the house and doing chores. The 
master takes every opportunity to surprise the apprentice, 
leaping out and hitting them with a bamboo sword when 
they least expect it. The apprentice is expected to defend 
themself immediately with whatever is  available—a 
cushion, a broom, a saucepan, or anything they happen to 
be holding. 

It soon becomes rather nerve-wracking going about 
one’s daily work expecting to be jumped any minute, 
especially if one is always wondering where the next blow 
will come from. One soon discovers that the more one plans 
and anticipates the next attack, the more one will always be 
outwitted. The teacher is infinitely clever and will always 
come from an unexpected direction. Finally, one arrives at 
the point where one just gives up. One stops anticipating 
and relaxes; if one is hit, one is hit. Now at last the 
apprentice is ready to begin fencing. They have given up 
protecting themself, and therefore they have learned true 
defense; one cannot defend oneself by calculation, by linear 
thinking, by thinking one thought at a time when your 
enemy may attack from an infinite number of directions. 


Another example of this kind of story is that of a 
woodcutter and a creature named the Satori. The 
woodcutter was working in a clearing in a forest, when he 
looked up and saw a strange animal peeking at him from 
behind a bush. Thinking to have the animal for dinner, he 
rushed at it with his ax, but before he could strike, the 
Satori laughed from the opposite side of the clearing. The 
creature had the power to read thoughts, and so he knew in 
advance from where the woodcutter intended to strike. 
After several attempts, the woodcutter began to grasp the 
Satori’s powers, and naturally thought, “When I see him 
next, instead of going to where he is, I will go to the 
opposite side of the clearing.” As soon as the woodcutter 
thought this, though, the Satori appeared at his side and 
mocked him: “So this is where you think I’m going to be 
next!” The Satori’s taunting continued until the woodsman 
became absolutely furious and returned to chopping wood. 
The Satori laughed and said, “Ah, so you have given up.” 
Just at that moment, as the woodcutter whacked the ax 
against the tree, its blade flew off and struck the Satori 
dead. And that is the way you have to attain Zen. 

Likewise, the apprentice who studies swordsmanship is 
put into an impossible situation, in which they can do 
nothing right. After finding out that nothing will prevent 
them from being hit, they give up—and at last they can be 
spontaneous. Zen training is a_ discipline that is 
spontaneous within limits. In society, this is not possible, 
because people will be bugged if you say exactly what you 
feel and always act according to the truth. You will not be 
liked, and you may indeed do things that threaten your own 
safety and liberty. Zen training, however, is set up so that 
there is a walled-in situation in which one is allowed to be 
spontaneous within certain limits. The crucial moment of 


this training is what is called sanzen, a formal interview 
between student and master. In the climax of that 
interview, no holds are barred. It is a personal interchange 
where fundamental honesty is the crux of the exchange, 
and it is a very sticky situation, because the more you 
wonder how you are going to be fundamentally honest, the 
more you will get cold feet. 

Supposing you were allowed an interview with God, and 
you were allowed to ask one question: What would you ask? 
If you think it over, you know it has got to be really 
important: it has to be the fundamental question. What is it 
that I really want to know? So you start thinking and 
thinking about that, but the more you think about it, the 
more you do not know what you would ask. You think, 
“That’s a silly question, I know what she would say to that.” 
You may think, “That is curious, an interesting question, 
and I don’t suppose anyone knows the answer to it, but 
after all, it’s only idle curiosity, so I don’t think I’ll ask that 
one.” Then you might think of another question, and think 
about it for a while, and before long you realize that it is a 
question that does not mean anything, that it would be a 
waste of breath and a great opportunity, and so you 
continue this process of self-questioning and dismissal until 
you have considered all the questions you might ask. 
Visiting a great Zen master is very much the same. What 
are you going to ask them? You have just this one chance, 
so what do you want to know? 

I remember a friend of mine who went to see a roshi, 
and when he got there, he said, “You know, I feel so silly, I 
haven’t got any questions to ask you, I just feel like 
laughing.” The roshi said, “Good, let’s laugh,” and he broke 
into a great roar. There are many facets of Zen that are so 
easily misunderstood just through reading about them. 


There is one school of people who tend to emphasize the 
spontaneity of Zen, and think, “This is great stuff. It means 
you may just do anything you like.” It is true that certain of 
the great Zen masters have said that Zen is an art, and 
Rinzai made this point very strongly. He said that in Zen 
there is no place for discipline, or for Buddhism, or for 
making efforts of any kind. You just eat when you are 
hungry, sleep when you are tired, move your bowels when 
nature calls. Fools will laugh at me, he said, but the wise 
will understand. However, when somebody goes to Japan to 
study Zen, they write back home letters about hours and 
hours of sitting in one position, of being banged about with 
warning sticks and having to get up at the ghastly hour of 
four o’clock in the morning, wash in cold water, eat a very 
spare diet, and do everything according to a strict code. In 
Japanese Zen monasteries, austerity is the rule, and the 
visitor thinks, “What’s going on?” “Is Zen this, or is it utter 
spontaneity?” The answer is that it is both. 

Zen is a discipline, especially because in Japan today 
most Zen monks are not in the monastery because of any 
personal religious search, and have not been for hundreds 
of years. They have been there because it was a family 
tradition. In all traditional cultures in Asia, there is a 
tendency for the son to carry on his father’s business. If 
you are a son of a priest, it is expected that you will be one 
as well, and so off to the monastery with you. It was the 
same in England in the eighteenth century, where one son 
went into the army, one son went into law, and one son 
went into the ministry. As a result a great many people 
without the slightest interest in religion ended up in 
theological school, and lacking real interest they had to be 
taught how to think. Saint Ignatius, for example, devised 


methods of meditation designed to teach people how to 
think even if they were not interested in thinking. 

A great deal of monastery life, both in Europe and the 
Far East, is therefore designed to discipline people who 
have no genuine personal motivation for their religious 
training. One of the crucial points of Zen training is to 
develop within yourself what is called a “great doubt,” and 
the koan is used to develop a great doubt. For example, the 
novice is asked to hear the sound of one hand clapping. 
Now in the case of the American student of Zen, he or she 
has probably come from far away and taken a good deal of 
trouble and expense to study Zen. Something personal, in 
fact, drove them to study Zen, and that something is the 
seed of the great doubt. To such a student, it seems terribly 
important to find the answer to the koan, and the more 
puzzled they are, the more a matter of life and death it 
seems. This student has roused a great doubt—they have 
an urgent spirit of inquiry—but cannot resolve it. The 
master keeps saying, “Come on, let’s go! Be ready to give 
your life for this.” And the student keeps at it. 

But one who enters a Zen monastery because their 
family expects them to does not have that spirit of inquiry; 
they are just one of the children in the neighborhood 
brought up to enter the monastery. To them the teacher 
may say, “The trouble with you is that you don’t have a 
great doubt.” And of course this student does not have a 
great doubt—they are not even interested in what it may 
be! Eventually, however, they learn to cultivate a great 
doubt, but unfortunately great doubt cannot be made to 
order. In fact, it is difficult to do anything to order. This is 
the paradox of the discipline of Zen training. 

There is a Zen poem that says, “You may want to ask 
where the flowers come from, / But even the god of spring 


does not know.” Another poem says, “Planting flowers to 
which the butterflies come, / Bodhidharma says ‘I do not 
know.’” All of what I would call “vital knowledge,” or 
“living knowledge,” is a mystery to itself. Life is a mystery 
to itself for the same reason. A Zen poem is “like a sword 
that cuts but does not cut itself, like an eye that sees, but 
does not see itself.” The poem is saying that what truly 
exists, the most fundamental reality, knows itself and at the 
same time does not know itself. If it did know itself, it 
would cease existing, for, as in any game, if you know the 
outcome there is no point in playing it out. When master 
chess players sit down and it becomes apparent, although 
there are still many pieces on the board, that one of them is 
going to mate in three moves, they quit. They are not 
bound to finish the game, because they know the outcome. 
If we knew the future perfectly and knew everything that 
we were going to do right up to the day of our death, we 
would say, “Why bother? Let’s commit suicide and start 
another life.” There is no point living through what is 
known completely. Of course, on the other hand, you 
cannot very well live through what is completely unknown 
either. There must be some light, but total light annihilates 
itself. 

There can be no prescription and no infallible technique 
for teaching Zen, although indeed there are Zen schools. 
Sometimes the teacher who has many years of experience 
begins to get disillusioned. What is the point of all these 
schools? You cannot teach Zen; you can only pass it on 
from one person to another by osmosis. 

In learning to play music, we must of course acquire 
techniques, but real mastery depends upon what we do 
with that technique. A person who is sufficiently motivated, 
who is fond of music, will study techniques because they’re 


interested and they wish to master their instrument. 
Likewise, a person who is really interested in self- 
knowledge—and after all, Zen is only a way of acquiring 
self-knowledge—will master certain Zen techniques 
because they are interesting. Soon, however, the schools 
and systems begin to rely entirely upon techniques, 
because technique is the only thing you can teach. You 
cannot teach the thing itself! 

When the student realizes that mastering techniques is 
not itself sufficient, that there is something that can’t be 
taught and can’t be learned but can only be experienced, 
they may panic. What if, after studying and mastering all 
these techniques, they don’t get it? Different teachers have 
different things to say about this predicament. One may 
say, “Well now, look. Just forget about it. It does not matter 
if you don’t get it. Not getting it is getting it.” This paradox 
is used all the time. Not to have it, and to really accept that 
you do not have it—now that is getting it. In fact, that’s the 
real point. “I am going to try as hard as I can not to try to 
get it.” Here we are really playing a game. We think that in 
paradox we have found an infallible method, and we are 
convinced there must be an infallible method, for without a 
method, we are lost, we are up the creek. 

But paradox is not the solution, either, and when we find 
out that there is no method, that there is no positive 
method and there is no negative method, what can we do? 
We cannot do something and we cannot do nothing. Nor 
can we just forget our dilemma, because by now we are 
preoccupied with it. This is what is called having 
“swallowed a ball of hot iron.” You cannot gulp it down and 
you cannot spit it out. Zen is a trap to make you swallow a 
ball of hot iron. 


We must be very careful how we proceed here, because 
we do not wish to end up in a padded cell blathering 
insanely. Yet this is the maddening quandary Zen confronts 
us with, which is why ever so many conflicting things can 
be said about Zen. On the one hand, it can be said rightly 
that Zen is a strict discipline, and on the other hand, it can 
be said rightly that it is not a discipline at all. Nor is it just 
a mixture of things, for Zen is not partly discipline and 
partly spontaneity. Whatever is said about part of it can be 
said of all of it, and therefore it seems to be paradoxical. 
There is no way of putting your finger on this thing, there is 
no way of nailing it down, and that’s the whole point. 

Zen makes you do what you were doing all the time, only 
it makes you do it consistently. Here is me and here is 
knowing about me. I want to try and control myself. I want 
to get a hold of that thing that is me, because when I get 
hold of it then I can control, and if I can control it 
everything will be all right. We are constantly doing this, 
and as a result, we have astounding illusions, including the 
illusion of separateness. We have that particular illusion 
because it is drilled into us through acculturation that each 
one of us is a separate ego and separate center of 
awareness. We see ourselves as a little living pulp of some 
kind that lives in a strange world that scares the heck out 
of us. 

How did we ever come to imagine that we are somehow 
disconnected from what is out there, surrounded by a world 
in which we are strangers? It is quite obvious that this is 
not really so, although it is not obvious to most people. It is 
apparent that you, the real deep you, is this thing. That is 
reality, but you are having a profoundly interesting game 
pretending you are not it. You are going through all kinds 
of amazing mazes to play this game, hiding in terror from 


your own shadow, jumping at the sound of your own heart 
beating, and having goose pimples rise on your own back at 
the sound of your own footsteps. You are always exploring 
this world, and as you do, you find that it gets stranger and 
stranger. As you look out into the infinitudes of space 
where you thought everything was pretty rational, you see 
other galaxies that are millions of light-years away. You 
may think, “Well there are just a lot of galaxies out there.” 
Suddenly, a quasar turns up, and nobody understands what 
a quasar is because the phenomenon defies all the things 
we thought we knew. So the universe grows stranger and 
stranger, and the more you probe it with your mind, the 
less you know. But when we recognize that all of this is 
nothing but our self, in myriad aspects, familiar and 
unfamiliar, we say, “Why, that’s me!” 
What a relief, and what fun to begin all over again. 


Zen Bones 


O nce upon a time, there was a Zen student who quoted 
an old Buddhist poem to his teacher: 


The voices of torrents are from one great tongue. 
The lions of the hills are the pure body of Buddha. 


“Isn’t that right?” he asked. “It is,” said the teacher, 
“but it’s a pity to say so.” It would be much better if this 
occasion were celebrated with no talk at all. If I addressed 
you in the manner of the ancient teachers of Zen, I should 
hit the microphone with my fan and leave. But I have the 
feeling that since you have contributed to the support of 
the Mountain Zen Center in expectation of learning 
something, a few words should be said, even though I warn 
you that by explaining these things to you I shall subject 
you to a very serious hoax. Now, if I allow you to leave here 
this evening under the impression that you understand 
something about Zen, you will have missed the point 
entirely. Zen is a way of life, a state of being, that is not 
possible to embrace in any concept whatsoever. Any 
concepts, any ideas, any words that I shall put across to 
you this evening will have as their object showing the 
limitations of words and of thinking. If one must try to say 
something about what Zen is, and I want to do this by way 
of introduction, I must emphasize that Zen in its essence is 


not a doctrine. There is nothing you are supposed to 
believe in, and it is not a philosophy in our sense; that is to 
say, it is not a set of ideas, an intellectual net in which one 
tries to catch the fish of reality. Actually, the fish of reality 
is more like water: it always slips through the net, and in 
water, when you get into it, there is nothing to hang on to. 
Of course all this universe is like water; it is fluid, it is 
transient, it is changing. When you are thrown into the 
water after being accustomed to living on the dry land and 
you are not used to the idea of swimming, you try to stand 
on the water. You try to catch hold of it, and as a result you 
drown. This refers particularly to the waters of modern 
philosophical confusion, where God is dead, metaphysical 
propositions are meaningless, and there is really nothing to 
hang onto because we are all just falling apart. The only 
way to survive under those circumstances is to learn how to 
swim; you relax, you let go, and you give yourself to the 
water. You have to know how to breathe in the right way, 
but then you find that the water holds you up, and indeed 
in a certain way, you become the water. 

If one attempts (again, I say, misleadingly) to put Zen 
into any sort of concept, it simply comes down to this: that 
in this universe there is one great energy and we have no 
name for it. People have tried various names for it, such as 
God, Brahman, and Tao, but in the West the word God has 
so many funny associations attached to it that most of us 
are bored with it. When people say, “God the Father 
Almighty,” most people feel funny inside, and so we like to 
hear new words. We like to hear about Tao, about 
Brahman, and about tathata, and other strange names from 
the Far East because they do not carry the same 
associations of mawkish sanctimony and funny meanings 
from the past. Actually some of the words that the 


Buddhists use for the basic energy of the world really do 
not mean anything at all. The word, tathata, which is 
Sanskrit for “suchness” or “vastness,” really means 
something more like “da-da-da,” based on the word tat, 
which in Sanskrit means “that.” In Sanskrit existence is 
described as “tat tvam asi,” “That thou art,” or in modern 
American, “You’re it.” But da-da is the first sound a baby 
makes when it comes into the world because the baby looks 
around and says, “da, da, da, da, da.” “That, that, that, that, 
that!” Fathers flatter themselves and think their baby is 
saying “da-da” for “daddy,” but according to Buddhist 
philosophy all this universe is one da-da-da, which means 
ten thousand functions, ten thousand things, or one 
suchness, and we are all one suchness. 

Suchness comes and goes like everything else because 
this whole world is an on and off system. The Chinese say it 
is the yang and the yin and therefore it consists of now you 
see it, now you don’t; here you are, here you aren’t. It is the 
very nature of energy to be like waves, and of course waves 
have crests and troughs. However, we, being under a 
certain kind of sleepiness or illusion, imagine that the 
trough is going to overcome the wave or the crest; the yin, 
the dark principle is going to overcome the yang, or the 
light principle, and that off is finally going to triumph over 
on. We “bug ourselves” by indulging in that illusion. 
“Supposing that darkness did win out, wouldn’t that be 
terrible?” We are constantly worrying and thinking that it 
may, because after all, is it not odd that anything exists? It 
is most peculiar, it requires effort, it requires energy, and it 
would be so much easier for there to have been nothing at 
all. Therefore we think that since being, since the is side of 
things is so much effort, we will give up after a while and 
sink back into death. But death is just the other face of 


energy. It is the rest, the absence of anything around that 
produces something around, just as you cannot have solid 
without space, or space without solid. 

When you wake up to this, you realize that, as the 
French say, the more it changes, the more it is the same 
thing. You are really a playing of this one energy and there 
is nothing else but that. It is you, but for you to always be 
you would be an insufferable bore, and therefore it is 
arranged that you stop being you after awhile and then 
come back as someone else altogether. When you find that 
out, you become full of energy and delight, and as Blake 
said, “Energy is eternal delight.” Suddenly, you see through 
the whole sham of things and you realize you are that and 
you cannot be anything else, so you are relieved of 
fundamental terror. Of course, this does not mean that you 
are always going to be a great hero, that you will not jump 
when you hear a bang, that you will not worry occasionally, 
or that you will not lose your temper. It means, though, that 
fundamentally, deep, deep down within you, you will be 
able to be human and not a stone buddha. In Zen, there is a 
distinction made between a living buddha and a stone 
buddha. If you approach a stone buddha and you hit it hard 
on the head, nothing happens except you break your fist or 
your stick. If you hit a living buddha, they will say “Ouch,” 
and they will feel pain, because if they did not feel 
something, they would not be a human being. 

Buddhas are human. They are not devas, they are not 
gods. They are enlightened men and women, but the point 
is that they are not afraid to be human. They are not afraid 
to let themselves participate in the pains, difficulties, and 
struggles that naturally go with human existence. The only 
difference is, and it is almost an undetectible difference, it 
takes one to know one. As the Zen poem says, “When two 


Zen masters meet each other on the street they need no 
introduction. When thieves meet they recognize one 
another instantly.” So, a person who is a real cool Zen 
understander does not go around saying, “Oh, I understand 
Zen,” “I have satori,” or “I have this attainment or that 
attainment,” because if one said that, they would not 
understand the first thing about it. Chuang-tzu said, “The 
perfect man employs his mind as a mirror; it grasps 
nothing, it refuses nothing, it receives but does not keep.” 
Yet another poem says of wild geese flying over a lake, 
“The wild geese do not intend to cast their reflection and 
the water has no mind to retain their image.” In other 
words, to put it in the contemporary idiom, this is to live 
without hang-ups. The word “hang-up” is almost an exact 
translation of the Sanskrit klesha, ordinarily translated as 
“worldly attachment.” 

All that sounds a little bit pious, and in Zen things that 
sound pious are said to stink of Zen. To have no hang-up, 
however, is to be able to drift like a cloud and flow like 
water, seeing that all life is a magnificent illusion, a playing 
of energy, and there is absolutely nothing fundamentally to 
be afraid of. You will be afraid on the surface, you will be 
afraid of putting your hand in the fire, and you will be 
afraid of getting sick, but you will not be afraid of fear. 
Fear will pass over your mind like a black cloud that flows 
through space without leaving any track. The stars also do 
not leave trails behind them. That fundamental clarity is 
called the “void” in Buddhism, which does not mean void in 
the ordinary sense of emptiness. It means the void that is 
the most real thing there is, though nobody can conceive it. 
The relation between the void and the world is like that you 
have between the speaker in a radio and all the various 
sounds that it produces. On the speaker you hear human 


voices, you hear every kind of musical instrument, honking 
of horns, the sound of traffic, the explosion of guns, and 
this tremendous variety of sounds is the vibrations of one 
diaphragm, but it never says so. The announcer does not 
come on first thing in the morning and say, “Ladies and 
gentlemen, all the sounds that you will hear subsequently 
during the day will be the vibrations of this diaphragm, so 
do not mistake them for reality.” The radio never mentions 
its own construction, and in exactly the same way you are 
never able really to make your mind an object of your own 
examination, just as you cannot look directly into your own 
eyes and you cannot bite your own teeth. You are your 
mind, and if you try to find it and make it something to 
possess, it shows that you do not really know you are it. If 
you are it, you do not need to make anything of it because 
there is nothing to look for, but the test is, are you still 
looking? Do you know that? 

This knowing is not a kind of knowledge that you 
possess, not something you have learned in school, not 
something a degree testifies to. In this knowledge there is 
nothing to be remembered and nothing to be formulated. 
You know it best when you say, “Well, I don’t know it,” 
because that means you are not holding on to it and trying 
to cling to it in the form of a concept. There is absolutely no 
necessity to do so, and should you try, you would be, in Zen 
language “putting legs on a snake” or a “beard on a 
eunuch,” or as we would say, “gilding the lily.” This sounds 
pretty easy, doesn’t it? You mean to say all we have to do is 
just relax? We do not have to go around chasing anything 
anymore, we abandon religion, we abandon meditation, we 
abandon this, that, and the other, and just go on and live it 
up any way we like. This is what a father says to a child 
who keeps asking, “Why, why, why?” “Why did God make 


the universe?” “Who made God?” “Why are the trees 
green?” The father says finally, “Oh shut up and eat your 
bun.” But it is not quite like that. All those people who try 
to realize Zen by doing nothing about it are still trying 
desperately to find it and are on the wrong track. There is 
another poem that says, “You cannot attain it by thinking, 
you cannot grasp it by not thinking,” or you could say, “You 
cannot catch hold of the meaning of Zen by doing 
something about it, but equally you cannot see into its 
meaning by doing nothing about it.” Both are in their 
different ways attempts to move from where you are now, 
here, to somewhere else. The point is that we come to an 
understanding of what I call “suchness” only through being 
completely here, and no means are necessary to be 
completely here, either active means on the one hand or 
passive means on the other, because in both ways you are 
trying to move away from the immediate now. 

It is difficult to understand language like that, however, 
and to understand what it is about, there is really one 
absolutely necessary prerequisite, and that is to stop 
thinking. Now, I am not saying this in the spirit of being an 
anti-intellectual, because I think a lot, talk a lot, write a lot 
of books, and am a sort of half-baked scholar. Yet, you 
know that if you talk all the time, you will never hear what 
anybody else has to say, and therefore all you will have to 
talk about is your own conversation. The same is true for 
people who think all the time, and I use the word “think” to 
mean talking to yourself, subvocal conversation, the 
constant chitchat of symbols and images and talk and 
words inside your skull. Now, if you do that all the time, 
you will find that you have nothing to think about except 
thinking, and just as you have to stop talking to hear what 
others have to say, you have to stop thinking to find out 


what life is about. The moment you stop thinking, you come 
into immediate contact with what Alfred Korzybski called 
so delightfully, “the unspeakable world”—that is to say, the 
nonverbal world. Some people would call it the physical 
world, but these words “physical,” “nonverbal,” and 
“material” are all conceptual, and it is not a concept. It is 
not a noise either; it is simply this. 

So, when you are awake to that world, you suddenly find 
that all the so-called differences between self and other, life 
and death, pleasure and pain, are all conceptual and they 
are not there. They do not exist at all in that world that is 
simply this. In other words, if I hit you hard enough, “Ouch” 
does not hurt. If you are in the state of what is called “no 
thought,” there is a certain experience, but you do not call 
it “hurt.” It is like when you were small, and children 
banged you about and you cried and they said, “Don’t cry,” 
because they wanted to make you hurt and not cry at the 
same time. That is the reason why there is in Zen the 
practice of zazen or sitting Zen. In Buddhism they speak of 
the four dignities of humanity, walking, standing, sitting, 
and lying; and incidentally, there are three other kinds of 
Zen besides zazen: standing Zen, walking Zen, and lying 
Zen. They say, “When you sit just sit, when you walk just 
walk, but whatever you do, do not wobble.” In fact, of 
course, you can wobble if you really wobble well. 

When the old master Hyakujo was asked what Zen is, he 
said, “When hungry, eat. When tired, sleep.” His questioner 
countered, “Well, isn’t that what everybody does? Aren’t 
you just like ordinary people?” “Oh no,” he said, “They 
don’t do anything of the kind. When they are hungry they 
don’t just eat, they think of all sorts of things. When they’re 
tired they don’t just sleep, but dream all sorts of dreams.” I 
know the Jungians will not like that, but there comes a time 


when you just dream yourself out, and there are no more 
dreams, and you sleep deeply and breathe from your heels. 
That is what makes zazen or sitting Zen a very good thing 
in the Western world. We have been running around far too 
much. It is all right because we have been active and our 
action has achieved a lot of good things. Yet, as Aristotle 
pointed out long ago, and this is one of the good things 
about Aristotle, “The goal of action is contemplation.” In 
other words, busy, busy, busy, but what is it all about? 
When people are busy, they think they are going 
somewhere and that they are going to get somewhere and 
attain something. There is quite a point to action if you 
know you are not going anywhere, and if you act like you 
dance, or like you sing, or play music, then you are really 
not going anywhere. You are just doing pure action, but if 
you act with the thought that as a result of action you are 
eventually going to arrive at some place where everything 
will be all right, then you are on the exercise wheel of a 
squirrel cage, hopelessly condemned to what the Buddhist 
call samsara, the round or rat race of birth and death, 
because you think you are going to get somewhere. You are 
already there, and it is only a person who has discovered 
that they are already there who is capable of action. That 
person does not act frantically with the thought that he or 
she is going to get somewhere, and can go into walking 
meditation at that point, where we walk not because we are 
in a great hurry to get to a destination, but because the 
walking itself is great and the walking itself is the 
meditation. When you watch Zen monks walk, it is very 
fascinating, because they have a different kind of walk from 
everybody else in Japan. Most people shuffle along, or if 
they wear Western clothes, they race and hurry like we do. 
Zen monks have a peculiar swing when they walk, and you 


have the feeling they walk rather the same way as a Cat. 
There is something about it that is not hesitant, they are 
going along all right, but they are walking just to walk, and 
one cannot act creatively except on the basis of stillness, of 
having a mind that is from time to time capable of stopping 
thinking. 

The practice of sitting may seem very difficult at first, 
because if you sit in the Buddhist way, it makes your legs 
ache and most Westerners start to fidget because they find 
it very boring to sit for a long time. However, the reason 
they find it boring is that they are still thinking, because if 
you were not thinking, you would not notice the passage of 
time. As a matter of fact, far from being boring, the world 
when looked at without chatter becomes amazingly 
interesting. The most ordinary sights and sounds and 
smells, the texture of shadows on the floor in front of you, 
all these things are, without being named and without 
saying, “That’s a shadow, that’s red, that’s brown, that’s 
somebody’s foot.” When you do not name things any longer, 
you start seeing them, because when a person says, “I see a 
leaf,” immediately one thinks of a spearhead-shaped thing 
outlined in black and filled in with flat green. No leaf looks 
like that; no, leaves are not green. That is why Lao-tzu said, 
“The five colors make a man blind, the five tones make a 
man deaf.” 

If you can only see five colors, you are blind, and if you 
can only hear five tones in music, you are deaf. If you force 
sound into five tones and if you force color into five colors, 
you are blind and deaf. The world of color is infinite, as is 
the world of sound, and it is only through stopping fixing 
conceptions on the world of color and sound that you really 
begin to hear it and see it. The discipline, if I may be so 
bold to use that word, of zazen or meditation lies behind 


the extraordinary capacity of Zen people to develop such 
great arts as the gardens, the tea ceremonies, the 
calligraphy, and the grand painting of the Song Dynasty 
and of the Japanese sumi-e tradition. Especially in the tea 
ceremony, or chanoyu, which in Japanese means “hot water 
for tea,” Zen masters found magic in the very simplest 
things of everyday life. In the words of the poet Ho Koji 
“Marvelous power and supernatural activity, drawing 
water, Carrying wood.” 

Do you know how it is sometimes when you repeat a 
word until you make it meaningless? Take the word “yes.” 
Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. It becomes 
funny. That is why they use the word mu in Zen training, 
which means “no.” If you say this word for a long time and 
the word ceases to mean anything, it becomes magical, and 
that is sound. The easiest way to stop thinking is first of all 
to think of something that does not have any meaning. 
Now, of course my point in talking about mu or “yes” or 
counting your breath or listening to a sound that has no 
meaning is that it stops your thinking because you become 
fascinated by the sound. Then, as your concentration 
continues, there comes a point when the sound is taken 
away and you are wide open. At that point there will be a 
kind of preliminary so-called satori, and you will think, 
“Wow-wee, that’s it!” You will be so happy that you will be 
walking on air. When Daisetsu Suzuki was asked “What is it 
like to have satori?” he said, “Well, it is like ordinary 
everyday experience except about two inches off the 
ground.” There is another saying that the student who has 
attained satori goes to hell as straight as an arrow. 
Anybody who has a spiritual experience, whether one gets 
it through zazen or through anything that gives you that 


experience, if you hold on to it, and say, “Now I’ve got it,” 
whist...it is gone, out of the window, because the minute 
you grab a living thing it is like catching a handful of water. 
The harder you clutch, the faster it squirts through your 
fingers, and there is nothing to get hold of because you do 
not need to get hold of anything; you had it from the 
beginning. 

Of course, you can realize this experience through 
various methods of meditation. The trouble is the people 
who come out of that experience and brag about it. They 
say, “I’ve seen it.” Equally intolerable are the people who 
study Zen and come out and brag to their friends about 
how long they sat and how much their legs hurt, and what 
an awful thing it was. The discipline of Zen is not meant to 
be something awful, and it is not done in a masochistic 
spirit with the puritanical outlook that suffering is good for 
you. When I went to school in England, the basic premise of 
education was that suffering builds character, and 
therefore all senior boys were at liberty to bang about the 
junior ones with a perfectly clear conscience because they 
were doing them a favor. It was considered to be good for 
them because it was building their character. As a result of 
this kind of attitude the word “discipline” has begun to 
stink, and it has been stinking for a long time. However we 
need an entirely new attitude toward this discipline, 
because without its quiet and non-striving, life becomes 
messy. When you finally let go, you have to be awfully 
careful not to melt and become completely liquid, because 
there is nothing to hold on to. 

When you ask most people to lie flat on the floor and 
relax, you find that they are full of tensions, because they 
do not really believe that the floor will hold them up, and 
therefore they are holding themselves. They are uptight 


and they are afraid that if they do not do this, even though 
the floor is supporting them, they will suddenly turn into a 
puddle and trickle away in all directions. On the other hand 
there are people who, when you tell them to relax, go limp 
like a rag. Now, the human organism is a_ subtle 
combination of hardness and softness, of flesh and bones. 
The side of Zen that has to do with neither doing or not 
doing, but knowing that you are it anyway and you do not 
have to seek it, that is Zen flesh; but the side in which you 
can come back into the world with an attitude of not- 
seeking and knowing you are it and not fall apart, that 
requires bones. Acquiring Zen bones is one of the most 
difficult things. 

A certain generation we all know about caught onto Zen 
and started an anything-goes painting, an anything-goes 
sculpture, and an anything-goes way of life. I think we are 
recovering from that today. Our painters are beginning 
once again to return to glory, to marvelous articulateness 
and vivid color, and nothing like it has been seen since the 
stained glass of Chartres. That is a good sign, but it 
requires that there be in our daily life a sense of freedom. I 
am not just talking about political freedom, I am talking 
about the freedom that comes when you know that you are 
it, forever and ever and ever, and it will be so nice when 
you die, because that will be a change, but it will come 
back some other way. When you know that, and you have 
seen through the whole mirage, then watch out, because 
there may be in you some seeds of hostility, some seeds of 
pride, some seeds of wanting to put down other people or 
wanting just to defy the normal arrangements of life. That 
is why in a Zen monastery, the novices are assigned the 
light duties and the more senior you get, the heavier your 
duties. The roshi is, for example, very often the one who 


cleans out the toilet. There is in this a kind of beautiful, 
almost princely aestheticism, because by reason of that 
order being observed all the time, the vast free energy that 
is contained in the system does not run amok. The 
understanding of Zen, the understanding of awakening, the 
understanding of mystical experience, is one of the most 
dangerous things in the world, and for a person who cannot 
contain it, it is like putting a million volts through your 
electric shaver. You blow your mind, and it stays blown. 
One who goes off in that way is what is called a 
pratyekabuddha. This person is one who goes off into the 
transcendental world and is never seen again, and they 
have made a mistake from the standpoint of Buddhism, 
because in Buddhism there is no fundamental difference 
between the transcendental world and this everyday world. 
The bodhisattva does not go off into a nirvana and stay 
there forever and ever; they come back and live ordinary 
everyday life to help other beings to see through it, too. 
They do not come back because they feel they have some 
sort of solemn duty to help humankind and all that kind of 
pious cant. They come back because they see that the two 
worlds are the same, and they see all other beings as 
buddhas. To use a phrase of G. K. Chesterton, “But now a 
great thing in the street seems any human nod, where 
move in strange democracy, a million masks of God.” It is 
fantastic to look at people and to see that they really, deep 
down inside, are enlightened, and they are it, they are 
faces of the divine. They look at you, and they say, “Oh no, 
but I’m not divine, I’m just ordinary little me.” And you look 
at them in a funny way and you see the buddha nature, 
looking out of their eyes straight at you and saying, it is 
not, and saying it quite sincerely. That is why, when you get 
up against a great guru, the Zen master, they have a funny 


look in their eye. You say, “I have a problem, guru. I’m 
really mixed up and I don’t understand.” Then they look at 
you in this queer way, and you think “Oh dear me, they’re 
reading my most secret thoughts. They are seeing all the 
awful things I am, all my cowardice, all my shortcomings.” 
They are not doing anything of the kind. They are not even 
interested in such things. Instead they are looking at, if I 
may use Hindu terminology, the Shiva in you, and saying, 
“My God, Shiva, won’t you come off it?” 

The bodhisattva, as distinct from the pratyeka-buddha, 
does not go off into permanent withdrawn ecstasy, and they 
do not go into a kind of catatonic samadhi. That is all right 
and there are people who can do that because that is their 
vocation, their specialty. Just as a long thing is the long 
body of Buddha and a short thing is the short body of 
Buddha, if you really understand Zen, the Buddhist idea of 
enlightenment is not comprehended in the idea of the 
transcendental. It is neither comprehended in the idea of 
the ordinary, nor in terms of the infinite, nor in terms of the 
finite, nor in terms of the eternal, nor in terms of the 
temporal. These are all concepts. 

I am not talking about the ordering of ordinary everyday 
life in a reasonable and methodical way and saying, “If you 
were nice people, that’s what you would do.” For heaven’s 
sake, please do not be “nice people.” Unless you do have 
that basic framework of a certain kind of order and a 
certain kind of discipline, however, the force of liberation 
will blow the world to pieces; it is too strong a current for 
the wire. 

So then, it is terribly important to see beyond ecstasy. 
Ecstasy, yes, is the soft and lovely flesh, huggable and 
kissable, and that is very good. Yet beyond ecstasy are 
bones, what we call hard facts, the hard facts of everyday 


life. But we should not forget to mention the soft facts, and 
there are many of them. The hard fact, the world as seen in 
an ordinary everyday state of consciousness, however, is 
really no different from the world of supreme ecstasy. Let 
us suppose, as so often happens, that you think of ecstasy 
as insight, as seeing light. There is a Zen poem that says, 
“A sudden crash of thunder, the mind doors burst open and 
there sits the ordinary old man.” There is this sudden 
vision, satori, and the doors of the mind are blown apart 
and there sits the ordinary old man. Little you. Lightning 
flashes, sparks shower. In one blink of your eyes, you have 
missed seeing. Why? Because here is the light, the light, 
every mystic in the world has seen the light, that brilliant 
blazing energy brighter than a thousand suns that is locked 
up in everything. Now, imagine this: Imagine you are 
seeing it, like you see aureoles around buddhas, like you 
see the beatific vision at the end of Dante’s Paradiso. Vivid, 
vivid, light so bright that it is like the clear light of the void 
in the Tibetan Book of the Dead, beyond light it is so bright. 
You watch it receding from you, and on the edges like a 
great star that becomes a rim of red, and beyond that a rim 
of orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet, and you see 
this great mandala appearing, this great sun. Beyond the 
violet there is black, like obsidian, not flat black, but 
transparent black, like lacquer and again blazing out of the 
black as the yang comes from the yin there comes sound. 
There is a sound so tremendous with the white light that 
you cannot hear it, so piercing that it seems to annihilate 
the ears. Then, along with the colors, the sound goes down 
the scale in harmonic intervals, down, down, down, until it 
gets to a deep thundering bass that is so vibrant, that it 
turns into something solid, and you begin to get the similar 
spectrum of textures. Now, all this time you have been 


watching a kind of a thing radiating out, but it says, You 
know, this isn’t all I can do,” and then rays start going, 
going, dancing, and naturally the sound starts going, 
waving, too, as it comes out. Then the textures start 
varying themselves, and they say, “Well you have been 
looking at this thing as I have been describing it so farina 
flat dimension. Now let’s add a third dimension, and it’s 
going to come right at you now.” Meanwhile, it says, “It’s 
not that we’re just going, going, like this, we’re going to do 
little curlicues, we are going to go round and round like 
this.” Then it says, “Well, that’s just a beginning, we can 
go, here, there, and everywhere, making squares and turns, 
and then suddenly you see in all the little details that 
become so intense that all kinds of little subfigures are 
contained in what you thought were originally the main 
figures, and the sound starts going, amazing complexities 
of sound, all over the place, and this thing is going, going, 
going, and you think you are going to go out of your mind, 
and suddenly it turns into—why us, sitting around here. 
Thank you very much. 


Notes 


1. Ku-tsun-hsu Yu-lu, fascicle 1, chuan 4, pages 6, 7, and 
24. 


BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 1 

2. D.T. Suzuki, Living by Zen (Freeport, Maine: Samuel 
Weiser, 1972), 178. 
BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 2 

3. It should be understood that Amitabha considered as 
“other” than oneself is not essentially different from 
what jiriki types of Buddhism call the innate Buddha- 
nature or original mind (honshin). This is easily 
understood from the analogy of the heartbeat. From one 
point of view, I (the conscious ego) am not making it 


happen, but from another point of view I (as something 
more or other than the ego) am doing it. 


BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 3 


4. Living by Zen, 130. 


BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 4 


5. Living by Zen, 179. 


BACK TO NOTE REFERENCE 5 


Sign up to receive news and special offers from Shambhala 
Publications. 


| Sign Up 


Or visit us online to sign up at shambhala.com/email- 
signup. 


