ALAN WATTS 


BEHOLD 
THE SPIRIT 


A STUDY IN THE NECESSITY 
OF MYSTICAL RELIGION 


© 


VINTAGE BOOKS 
A Division of Random House, New York 


Copyright 1947, © 1971 by Random House, Inc. 

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright 
Conventions. Published in the United States by Random House, Inc., New York, 
and simultaneously in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. 
Originally published by Pantheon Books, a division of Random House, Inc., 
New York. 
eISBN: 978-0-307-78433-9 
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 79-162581 


v3.1_rl 


TO MY FATHER AND MOTHER 


CONTENTS 


Cover 

Title Page 
Copyright 
Dedication 
Acknowledgements 


PREFACE TO THE NEW EDITION 


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 


INTRODUCTION 


PART ONE 
I. The Epoch of the Spirit 
II. The Gift of Union 
Ill. The Realization of Union 


PART TWO 
I. The Being of God 
II. The Heart of God 
Ill. The Life of Action 
IV. The Life of Contemplation 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 
About the Author 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


I am greatly indebted to the following publishing houses for 
their kind permission to make some substantial quotations from 
certain authors: to Messrs. Charles Scribner’s Sons, of New York, 
and Geoffrey Bles, of London, publishers of the works of Nicolas 
Berdyaev; to Messrs. Sheed and Ward, publishers of Mr. E. I. 
Watkin’s Catholic Art and Culture; and to Messrs. Harper and 
Brothers, publishers of Mr. Raymond Blakney’s Meister Eckhart. 


PREFACE TO THE NEW EDITION 


This book was written twenty-five years ago, during the 
experiment of trying to immerse myself in Christianity—to the 
extent of being a priest of the Anglican Communion, Episcopal 
Chaplain at Northwestern University, and an examining chaplain 
for candidates for holy orders in the Diocese of Chicago. Prior to 
this experiment, indeed since the age of fifteen, my outlook had 
been Buddhist rather than Christian even though I had been 
schooled in the heart of the Church of England and had learned a 
version of Christianity which was not that of this book. In 
adolescence I had rejected it, but as time went on the study of 
comparative religion and Christian mysticism suggested a way in 
which I might operate through the forms and in the terms of the 
official religion of Western culture. I did not want to be an 
eccentric outsider, and felt that Catholic Christianity might be 
taught and practised as a form of that perennial philosophy which 
is the gold within the sectarian dross of every great religion. 

I still believe that this experiment had validity, and I have 
consented to the republication of Behold the Spirit with the 
thought that it may prove useful to the many Catholic and 
Protestant theologians who are now revolutionary enough to 
understand it. For it speaks to their condition in their own 
language—more so, perhaps, than my later theological essays, 
The Supreme Identity (1950), Myth and Ritual in Christianity 
(1953), and Beyond Theology (1964), which last represents my 
present way of thinking within this context. 

Even twenty-five years ago this experiment had some success. I 
did not pursue it for the purely personal reason that my 
bohemian style of life did not fit well with the clerical stereotype, 
and because even then I was ill at ease with the commitment to 
spiritual imperialism which most Christians feel to be the sine qua 
non of being Christian, as if one could not be a true Christian 
without being a militant missionary. But then, and more than 
ever today, there were both clergy and laity who hungered for a 
mystical approach to Christianity, concerned with the non-verbal 


spiritual experience of the divine rather than mere doctrine and 
precept. Yet now, as then, the Church is still overwhelmingly 
didactic and verbose, both as it faces God and as it faces the 
world. Its liturgies consist almost entirely of telling God what to 
do and the people how to behave. By rationalizing the Mass and 
celebrating it in the vernacular instead of Latin, even the Roman 
Church has made the liturgy an occasion for filling one’s head 
with thoughts, aspirations, considerations and resolutions, so that 
it is almost impossible to use the Mass as a support for pure 
contemplation, free from discursive chatter in the skull. 

Today, the idea of the mystical finds greater acceptance, both 
within and outside the Church, than in 1946. A vast and well- 
informed literature on the subject has made it clear that 
“mysticism” is not a collective term for such spookeries as 
levitation, astrology, telekinesis, and projection of the astral 
body. Theologians can no longer dismiss or distort the mystical 
teachings of either East or West without revealing plain lack of 
scholarship. Scientists—now familiar with field theory, ecological 
dynamics and the transactional nature of perception—can no 
longer see man as the independent observer of an alien and 
rigidly mechanical world of separate objects. The clearly mystical 
sensation of self-and-universe, or organism-and-environment, as a 
unified field or process seems to fit the facts. The sensation of 
man as an island-ego in a hostile, stupid or indifferent universe 
seems more of a dangerous hallucination. 

At the same time it is less and less plausible to conceive God in 
the thought-graven image of a transcendental monarch modelled 
on the Pharaohs and Cyruses. But the dissolution of this idol need 
not leave us with no other alternative than the insipid humanism 
suggested by “death of God” and “religionless Christianity” 
theologians. The God of mystical experience may not be the 
ethically obstreperous and precisely defined autocrat beloved of 
religious authoritarians; but as an experience, not concept, as 
vividly real as indefinable, this God does not violate the 
intellectual conscience, the aesthetic imagination, or the religious 
intuition. A Christianity which is not basically mystical must 
become either a political ideology or a mindless fundamentalism. 
This is, indeed, already happening, and it is curious to note that, 
for lack of the mystical element, both trends fall back on the 
Bible as their basic inspiration—and it has always struck me that 


Biblical idolatry is one of the most depressing and sterile fixations 
of the religious mind. 

We now know beyond doubt that large and widely scattered 
numbers of otherwise sane and sober people have had 
experiences of “cosmic consciousness” in which the sense of life 
becomes perfectly clear. The antagonisms of good and evil, life 
and death, being and nothing, self and other are felt as the poles 
or undulations of a single, eternal and harmonious energy— 
exuding a sense of joy and love. The feeling may be purely 
subjective and without reference to “external reality” (as if 
“external” could be independent of “internal”), but it comes upon 
us with the same startling independence of wishing and willing as 
a flash of lightning. Debates as to whether this vision is or is not 
“true” seem as pointless as asking whether my sensation of green 
is just the same as yours. But the vision is not pointless because, 
when seen, it is obviously the whole point of life and, often 
enough, it transforms one’s way of living. 

In our inevitably clumsy attempts to describe this vision it 
often seems necessary to say that everything is God, that God 
alone is real, that a crumb is the whole universe, or that you and 
God are one. At the same time, the experience is somehow a 
grace: it is given and cannot be evoked by effort of will. In Behold 
the Spirit I was trying to show that the gift of the Incarnation, of 
God becoming man (virgin-born, without human effort), implied 
and fulfilled itself in this experience, and in this sense I quoted 
the saying of St. Athanasius that “God became man that man 
might become God.” But I was pussyfooting, as is always the way 
with theologians when they try to discuss the Christology of 
ordinary human beings as distinct from the Christology of Jesus. 
For the Church’s habitual assumption, having the force of dogma, 
is that Jesus of Nazareth was and is the only son of woman who 
was at the same time God. This Godhood is extended to other 
people by “participation in the human nature of Jesus,” explained 
by the tortuous Greek notion that human nature is a “real 
universal” or “substance” in which we all share. When the person 
of God the Son assumed this nature, he assumed all our natures 
and became mankind, leaving, however, the person (or ego) of 
each man distinct and separate from his own divine person. In 
other words, God the Son was the person of the particular man 
Jesus. He assumed the nature, but not the person, of such 


particular men as Peter, Paul, John and the rest of us. 

Looking back on this pussyfooting I find it somewhat less than 
a gospel—a tremendous proclamation of good news. I now find it 
easier to assume that Jesus was a man like ourselves who had a 
spontaneous (i.e., virgin-born) and overwhelming experience of 
cosmic consciousness in which it became completely clear to him 
that “I and the Father are one” and that “before Abraham was, I 
am.” But it was as tactless to say this in terms of Jewish theology 
as it still remains to say it in terms of Christian. Jesus had to 
hedge by identifying himself as the Son of Man, the Suffering 
Servant—or spiritual messiah—of Isaiah II. It would have been 
outrageous and criminal blasphemy to come right out and say, “I 
am God”—assuming the throne of the Cyrus of the universe. But, 
if we are to believe the Gospel of St. John, conviction got the 
better of tact—for in all those “I am” passages he came out with 
the simple truth of his experience and was crucified for 
blasphemy. 

The Gospel was that “in my Father’s house are many 
mansions,” that his disciples would all be one even as he and the 
Father were one, and thus perform even greater works than he. It 
is not easy for the pious Christian to realize that Jesus was not an 
expert on the history of religion, and had probably never met 
anyone whose mystical vision was as deep as his own. The only 
religious language available to him was that of the legal and 
prophetic Hebrew scriptures which, with their image of God as 
the King-Father, do not easily lend themselves to a mystical 
interpretation. Jewish mystics—the Kabbalists and the Hasidim— 
have always had to read the scriptures as complex allegories in 
order to go beyond their literal sense. Therefore Jesus had 
difficulty in saying what he felt, not only because it was officially 
blasphemous, but also because it made no sense to say that he 
was consciously and personally ruling and causing every detail of 
the universe, and attending to all prayers from everywhere. Thus 
on the one hand he could say, “I am the way, the truth, and the 
life,” and on the other, “Why do you call me good? There is none 
good but God.” But such problems do not arise for those whose 
image or non-image of God is not monarchical. 

The Gospel must therefore be the communication of Jesus’ own 
experience of Godhood. Otherwise Christians put themselves in 
the absurd situation of reproaching themselves for not following 


the example of one who had the unique advantage of being God 
or, at the very least, “the Boss’s son.” It is thus that the “saving 
truth” of the Gospel appears, not as Jesus’ experience of 
Godhood, but as his punishment for proclaiming it, and that 
sanctity in the following of Christ is chiefly measured by the 
degree of guiltiness felt in failing to come up to his example. 
Christians dare not believe that, as St. John says, they have been 
given power “to become the sons of God,” remembering that the 
expression “sons of’? means “of the nature of.” The dubious 
uniqueness of the monarchical religions (Judaism, Christianity 
and Islam) is that they overstress the difference between Creator 
and creature and, by making virtues of feeling guilty and 
frightened, inculcate a very special terror of death—which Jesus 
saw as a source of life. Is it really such a profound theological 
paradox to be trying at once to “be not anxious” and to “work out 
your salvation with fear and trembling”? To substitute the fear of 
God for the fear of the world is to exchange a finite terror for one 
that is infinite—for the terror of everlasting damnation. As an 
inheritor of the monarchical tradition, Jesus recognized this 
terror, for would not the Court of Heaven also have dungeons? 
But he saw the possibility of overcoming it in his and our 
realization of divine sonship—that is, in mystical experience. 
Lacking such experience, religion is only a futile straining to 
follow a way of life for which one has neither the power nor the 
grace, and there is no power in a merely theoretical grace which 
one has allegedly been given but does not feel. 

From this point of view it would seem that the Church has 
rendered the Gospel ineffective by setting Jesus on a pedestal of 
excessive reverence and making him so unique that he is virtually 
isolated from the human condition. By setting itself apart from 
the world-wide traditions of mystical religion Christianity 
appears, not as unique, but as an anomalous oddity with 
imperious claims. Thus the religion of Jesus became the religion 
about Jesus, lost its essence, and appeared more and more to be 
ridiculously aggressive as the context of world religion came into 
view. How can there be “one flock, one fold, and one Shepherd” 
unless it is recognized that there are already “other sheep who are 
not of this fold”? 

As might have been expected, Behold the Spirit was criticized 
for its creeping pantheism—a point of view which, in its many 


forms, is so repugnant to religious monarchists that simply to be 
named a pantheist is enough to have one’s case excluded from an 
intelligent hearing. I am no longer concerned to defend myself 
against the charge of pantheism because, from my present point 
of view, all doctrines of God—including atheism—are ultimately 
false and idolatrous, because doctrines are forms of words which 
can never be more than pointers to mystical vision, and not by 
any means the best pointers. At most I feel that some sort of 
pantheism is the least inconsistent with that vision, and by 
pantheism (or panentheism) I mean the conception of God as the 
total energy-field of the universe, including both its positive and 
negative aspects, and in which every discernible part or process is 
a sort of microcosm or hologram. That is to say, the whole is 
expressed in or implied by every part, as is the brain in each one 
of its cells. This view strikes me as cleaner and simpler than 
monotheism. 

Theoretically, pantheism may blur or confuse the distinction 
between good and evil, but where is the evidence to show that 
monotheists are better behaved than pantheists—and by whose 
standards? Moral principles and sanctions are weakened when 
absolutized, for much the same reasons that respect for law is 
diminished by judicial torture and frantic punishment for crime. 
Metaphysically and intellectually, solutions to the problem of evil 
require far more tortuous conceptualization for monotheists than 
for pantheists. Furthermore, the notion that any identity of 
Creator and creature makes a fundamental “I-Thou” relationship 
of love between the two impossible is untenable for any believer 
in the Holy Trinity. How, then, could there be mutual love 
between God the Father and God the Son, since both, though 
different, are yet one God? And the objection that the pantheist 
conception of God is too vague and impersonal to inspire 
devotion or grace could be to the point if it were no more than a 
conception, but is groundless if held against the vision which the 
concept merely represents. Inspiring and worshipful as the 
character of Jesus may be, it was not what inspired Jesus himself, 
for he was what he was because he knew of himself that “I and 
the Father are one,” and not—obviously—because he had 
accepted Jesus as his Saviour. But, from the beginning, 
institutional Christianity has hardly contemplated the possibility 
that the consciousness of Jesus might be the consciousness of the 


Christian, that the whole point of the Gospel is that everyone may 
experience union with God in the same way and to the same 
degree as Jesus himself. On the contrary, one who says, with 
Eckhart, that “the eye with which I see God is the same eye with 
which God sees me” is condemned as a heretic. 

Small wonder, for the immediate following of Jesus was Jewish 
and it was as difficult for them as for him to reconcile mystical 
experience with Biblical monotheism. Instead of following him 
they worshipped him, for they still felt that—for anyone except 
Jesus—it would be pride, presumption, and insubordination for a 
mere creature to be one with the Creator. For monotheism can 
allow only the devotional (bhakti) style of mysticism, where 
Creator and creature find union in intense mutual love, never in 
basic identity. In the context of monarchical monotheism to say, 
“T am God,” doesn’t seem to carry the implication, “And so are 
you,” because it has the same ring as saying, “I’m the boss around 
here.” Within this context the mystic is always in danger of that 
spiritual megalomania which Jung called “psychic inflation” in 
which one takes one’s ego for God instead of God for one’s ego— 
and Christianity has manoeuvred Jesus into just that position. It 
is thus that the individual Christian frustrates himself perpetually, 
always finding himself guilty for not living up to the example of 
one who had the unique advantage of being God incarnate, and 
who was by definition incapable of being guilty. 

The question then arises: Can Christianity abandon the 
monarchical image of God and still be Christianity? Why should 
this be of concern? For which is more important—to be a 
Christian or to be at one with God? Must religion be Christian, 
Islamic or Hindu, or could it simply be religion? Certainly there 
must be the same variety of style in religion as there is in culture, 
but the concern to preserve, validate and propagate Christianity 
as such is a disastrous confusion of religious style with religion. 
Indeed, this sectarian fanaticism (shared alike by Judaism and 
Islam) is all of a piece with the monarchical image and its 
necessary imperialism. Even such scholarly theologians as 
Maritain and Zaehner keep up this pitiful game of spiritual one- 
upmanship in differentiating the “natural” mysticism of Hindus 
and Buddhists from the “supernatural” mysticism of Christians, 
and continue to damn other religions with faint praise. If 
Christianity cannot be Christianity without pushing the claim to 


be the best of all possible religions, the world will breathe more 
freely when it dissolves. 

The practical problem is, what are we going to do on Sunday 
mornings? How are multitudes of ministers to continue their 
work? What is to be the use of Church buildings, funds, and 
administrative machinery? Naturally, institutional Christianity 
will, in its present form, continue to supply the demand which 
remains for a monarchical religion. But a considerable number of 
ministers and even congregations—not to mention millions of 
reasonably intelligent young people—realize that churches must 
“put up or shut up,” and that the chief business of religious 
facilities and assemblies is to provide a social milieu for religious 
experience. This is no mere matter of changing the externals—of 
having rock bands instead of organs and Kyrie eleison set to jazz, 
nor even of turning churches into social service centers with the 
idea that this would be practising Christianity seven days a week 
instead of just talking it on Sundays. Indeed, one may well hope 
that monarchical Christianity will not be practised, even on 
Sundays, since the dutiful spirit in which it dispenses charity 
breeds resentment in the giver and the receiver alike, for when 
the one gives with reluctance the other receives with guilt. 
Ministers and their congregations must instead consider what 
need there may be for churches as temples for contemplation and 
meditation, stripped of the courthouse furniture of stalls, pews, 
pulpits, lecterns and other equipment for throwing the Book at 
captive audiences. They must consider also the need for retreat 
houses and religious communities, and for guidance and 
instruction in the many forms of spiritual discipline which are 
conducive to mystical vision. They must further consider 
whether, as things now stand, they are even able to offer such 
services—sorely neglected as they have been in theological 
education. Obviously, if Christian groups cannot or will not 
provide mystical religion, the work will be (and is already being) 
done by Hindus, Buddhists, Sufis, unaffiliated gurus, and growth 
centers. Churchmen can no longer afford to laugh these things off 
as cultish vagaries for goofy and esoteric minorities—as if any 
intensive practice of religion had ever, anywhere at any time, 
been of interest to the majority of people. 

This prompts me to say that I no longer set much store in the 
notion that we are about to enter upon some great New Age of 


spiritual development, or in such theories of historical epochs as 
were proposed by Joachim of Flora and Oswald Spengler. 
Fortunately, the preoccupation with these ideas in the first 
chapter, “The Epoch of the Spirit,” is not essential to the main 
argument of the book. I am not saying that some great resurgence 
of spiritual vitality may not be coming upon us. The point is 
rather that such apocalyptic and messianic hopes for the future 
distract from the mystic’s essential concern for the Eternal Now 
and encourage a dependence upon the mere passage of time as a 
vehicle of grace and growth. The concomitance of our perilous 
ecological crisis with the sudden expansion of mass- 
communication technology does indeed suggest that the world is 
in an apocalyptic and even eschatological situation, in a period of 
catastrophic revelation and imminent disaster. At times when the 
future appears to be failing us it is only natural that there should 
be a resurgence of religion and of interest in things eternal: it is 
our only recourse. It may amount to no more than the 
superstitious comforts of fantasy and magic, or of shrieking in 
desperation to high heaven. But, on the other hand, it may be 
something like the overwhelming sensation of release and peace 
which occasionally comes to people facing death. 

For at such times there is no escaping the fact that in the 
pursuit of happiness, power and righteousness the human ego, 
with all its will and intelligence, has come to its wits’ end. Even 
the solaces of religious hope and belief seem hollow—being no 
more than refined and fantastic forms of trying to save our 
carefully fabricated personalities from coming to an end. But the 
personality is a phantom even less substantial than the body, 
being an ephemeral work of art like a musical composition that 
dies away as it is played. But when it comes to silence we hear 
another tune, for we are reduced to the guileless simplicity of 
listening to what is—now. This is really all there is to 
contemplative mysticism—to be aware without judgement or 
comment of what is actually happening at this moment, both 
outside ourselves and within, listening even to our involuntary 
thoughts as if they were no more than the sound of rain. This is 
possible only when it is clear that there is nothing else to do, and 
no way on or back. 


Wait without thought, for you are not yet ready for thought: 


So the darkness shall be light, and the stillness the dancing. 


For here, where there is neither past nor future, the doors of 
perception are cleansed, and we see everything as it is—infinite. 
Of course, those who have never let themselves be reduced to 
this simplicity will feel that it is an arid oversimplification, that 
there must be much more than this—by way of doctrines, 
precepts and practices—to an effective religious consciousness. 
Here, then, will be trotted out all the old objections to the 
negativity of mystical ideas, to the dissolution of God our Father 
into the “divine darkness” or “cloud of unknowing” of Western 
mystics, or the featureless Void of the Buddhists. One can but 
reiterate the point that the mystic is negating only concepts and 
idols of God, and in this way cleansing the doors of perception in 
the faith that, if God is real, he need not be sought in any 
particular direction or conceived in any special way. To see the 
light, it is only necessary to stop dreaming and open the eyes. 


ALAN WATTS 


Sausalito, California 
February, 1971 


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 


This book is addressed to Christians of every denomination, and more 
especially to the thousands of thoughtful and sincere persons in the 
modern world who, though deeply interested in religion, find 
themselves unable to accept Christianity in the forms in which it is 
usually presented. It is not, however, a book of apologetics. It is 
written to introduce a strangely and disastrously neglected subject— 
the meaning of Christian doctrine. For the great majority of people, 
including even clergy and theologians of every school, confuse the 
meaning of religion with its form, and when asked to explain the 
meaning give only a more detailed exposition of the form. 

The form of Christianity consists of certain doctrines and precepts 
based to a great extent on historical events. The meaning is God 
himself, the ultimate Reality, not as an idea conceived but as a reality 
experienced. When apprehended by man this meaning is a state of 
consciousness which might be called “the mind of Christ” in the sense 
of St. Paul’s words, “Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ 
Jesus.” This is that mystical and nearly immediate experience of God 
which, although ineffable and incapable of exact description, may be 
explained sufficiently to give its traditional dogmatic and _ historic 
expressions much more clarity and reality than they now convey to 
the modern mind. Without some apprehension of this meaning, 
Christian doctrines are not actually intelligible at all, and must remain 
mere formulae lacking real power to move the soul however ably their 
factual and historical truth may be defended. Obviously facts are of 
little value to us until we know something of their significance, and 
this lies not in the facts themselves but in the spiritual truths and 
principles, the eternal nature of God, which they express. 

The reader, and especially the critic, should be warned against 
trying to fit into any familiar pigeonhole the manner of interpretation 
which will be used. This is not to be a “Gnostic” approach to 
Christianity which discounts its material, sacramental and historical 
elements in favour of a “purely spiritual” religion, nor yet a Modernist 
approach which discounts them in favour of a purely moral religion— 
if such may be called a religion at all. The factual truth of Christian 


doctrine, the form of orthodoxy, will be accepted throughout as a 
matter of course. The point is rather that whether this form be true or 
not, even a detailed and well-advanced knowledge of the form is quite 
distinct from a knowledge of its meaning. 

This meaning, of which a considerable part is still outside the realm 
of the ineffable, was discussed and explained with some adequacy by 
Patristic writers, but receives such a minimum of attention in modern 
religious teaching, preaching and theological education that it scarcely 
ever reaches the general public. The study of Christian doctrine has 
come to the point where the forest cannot be seen for the trees; the 
“first principles” in reference to which the entire complex scheme has 
meaning are ignored or forgotten and Christianity will lack spiritual 
power until they are restored, though, because of the nature of the 
historic process, this restoration will be more than a reversion. 

A book of this size cannot attempt to conduct such an interpretation 
over the whole field of Christian doctrine, and at the same time take 
into account the practical applications of these doctrines when their 
meaning is understood. It has therefore been necessary to concentrate 
mainly on the doctrine of the Incarnation, which is not only the most 
fruitful for this purpose, but is also the central and characteristic tenet 
of the Christian religion. Furthermore, the truth which lies behind the 
Incarnation is of the highest importance for a correct understanding 
and practice of mystical religion, which, apart from that truth, is 
always in danger of eccentricity. So far as I am aware, no modern 
writer on mystical religion has given the Incarnation its proper and 
adequate place. 

It would be difficult to thank by name all the people who have 
directly or indirectly been of help to me in preparing this book, for 
there have been so many of them, and they have not always been 
aware that they were helping. But I do want to express my 
indebtedness to the many students of Northwestern University who 
have so pleasantly plagued me, hour after hour, with spiritual 
problems that had to be answered to the satisfaction of young, very 
modern and often keenly penetrating minds; to the Reverend A. A. 
Taliaferro, who read the manuscript and gave much time to an 
illuminating discussion of its central themes; to Mr. Harry Lorin 
Binsse for most helpful and sympathetic criticism and for the 
suggestion of a number of important corrections; and most of all to 
my wife who has not only “put up with me” during the sometimes 
temperamental and always abstracted business of writing, but also 


cheered me on and stayed up with me to the “wee small hours” when I 
needed her help and advice in thinking out many of the problems that 
arose in the course of the work. 

ALAN WATTS 


Evanston, Illinois 
February, 1947 


INTRODUCTION 


It is all too clear that our age suffers from a vast hunger and 
impoverishment of the spirit which the organized Christian 
religion, as we know it, rarely satisfies. It would be easy to blame 
the modern world for ignoring Christianity, to condemn it for a 
merely perverse heathenism, if Church religion showed any 
strong signs of spiritual life. The truth, however, is that with 
some very few and scattered exceptions Church religion is 
spiritually dead, and the best minds of the Church admit and 
deplore it openly. This is so obvious that there is no need to stress 
it except as a starting point for constructive discussion. There is 
an abundance of rather unprofitable literature by both Christian 
and non-Christian writers bewailing, grumbling or pointing scorn 
at the deadness of the Church and the general decline of religion 
of whatever sort. For the most part the constructive side of this 
literature is merely so much sermonizing and exhortation to 
“return” to the belief and practice of certain things which the 
Church knows well enough should be believed and practised but 
cannot find the heart for them. “To will is present with me; but 
how to perform that which is good I find not. For the good that I 
would I do not.” 

Outside and even within the Church, modern man is therefore 
indifferent to religion as he knows it, and yet his nervous 
restlessness, his chronic sense of frustration, his love of 
sensationalism as an escape, his fitful use of every substitute for 
religion from state-worship to getting drunk, show that his soul 
still desires that release from itself, that infusion of life and 
meaning through being possessed by a power greater than itself, 
which is found perfectly in union with God alone. Man’s— 
modern man’s—need of religion has been discussed and proved 
as much and more than the failure of Church religion to supply it. 
The point needs no further stress, for quite apart from all the 
philosophical, sociological and psychological arguments that have 
been put forward time after time, the fact that a creative and 
relatively sane society must in some way or other be dominated 


by religion is fully proved by the destructive and insane state of 
the first radically secular civilization in history—our own. 

But, lest there be any misunderstanding, we do not mean that 
man and society require simply a code of morals, whether freely 
accepted or enforced from above. Morals are a by-product of 
religion, necessary as they are. For creativity and sanity man 
needs to have, or at least to feel, a meaningful relation to and 
union with life, with reality itself. It is not enough that he be 
related to a human group or a human ideal, for he knows that 
men and peoples die, and that beyond them is a more permanent 
reality—the reality of the natural universe, and still beyond that 
the gods or God. Religion must relate man to the root and ground 
of reality and life. Without this man cannot feel that his life has 
any actual and objective meaning. Without this he feels that 
reality itself is an inane vacuum, a chaos, in which he creates 
purely artificial and make-believe meanings out of his own head. 
He feels too, however dimly, that the emptiness of reality will at 
last engulf his make-believe, and that therefore to continue with 
it is mere postponement of ultimate frustration. It is seldom, 
perhaps, that this is realized quite consciously. Absorbed in the 
creation of artificial meanings it is possible, for a while, to forget 
reality, though the sense of futility remains as an undertone of 
feeling breaking out into consciousness in times of crisis. At such 
times man knows his need of religion; at others he only feels it as 
an unexplained void in the heart. 

The present low ebb of Church religion consists in the fact that 
rarely, even for Church people, does it give the soul any 
knowledge of union with the reality that underlies the universe. 
To put it in another way, modern Church religion is little 
concerned with giving any consciousness of union with God. It is 
not mystical religion, and for that reason it is not fully and 
essentially religion. 

The truth that religion, to be of any use, must be mystical has 
always been denied by the seemingly large number of people, 
including theologians, who do not know what mysticism is. They 
associate it with ecstatic trances, with the solitary life of the 
hermit, with purely negative conceptions of God, with keeping 
one’s mind perfectly blank for hours on end, with vague 
reasoning, with pantheism, with a distaste for action and 
concrete, physical life, forgetting that all these things are the 


freaks or aberrations of mystical religion and have nothing to do 
with its essence.i Its essence is the consciousness of union with 
God and this will only involve these freaks of negativism if God is 
thought of as hostile to the world, and not as its loving creator. 

In almost any Church one cares to choose there is and has long 
been an absolute minimum of the teaching and practice of 
mystical religion. Even for intelligent congregations Church 
teaching and preaching is concerned almost exclusively with a 
multitude of minor matters having mostly to do with the smaller 
points of morality or, in liberal Protestant churches, with politics 
and vague ethical principles. One may go even further and state 
that the whole atmosphere and attitude of modern Church 
religion impresses the modern mind as having little or nothing to 
do with the Reality which controls and causes our universe. 
Science has given to our age a most impressive view of this 
universe, and this demands an equivalently wonderful and 
splendid conception of God together with an appropriate manner 
of worship. In comparison with this view of the universe, which, 
without the aid of religion, has so staggered man’s thought of 
God as to stop it, present-day Church religion seems utterly 
paltry. 

Whereas Protestantism has largely degenerated from religion 
into moralism, Catholicism2 retains certain essential elements of 
religion but expresses them in theological and sacramental forms 
which are for the most part uncomprehended both within and 
without the Church. As generally taught, Catholicism is a 
wonderfully interrelated system of doctrines and_ practices 
without ultimate meaning. Even the more intelligent Catholics 
know a great deal about their religion but little or nothing of it, 
because there is an immense confusion in their minds between 
symbols and their significance. For example, it is one thing to 
believe in the Incarnation as an historical event; it is another to 
understand, even intellectually, what it means, and still another 
to experience that meaning in terms of everyday life and 
consciousness. But because official Catholicism is little concerned 
either to explain or to experience the Incarnation and its other 
dogmatic symbols, it resembles an algebraic formula of great 
intricacy, internal rationality and even beauty, but with little 
indication of the realities to which its terms refer. Thus few 
Catholics are even aware that there are spiritual realities behind 


the celestial and historical events described in dogma, and fewer 
still experience those realities. The reasons for this will be 
explained shortly. 

These defects of Church religion cannot be cured by mere 
surface alteration of the methods of teaching and worship, 
because they are symptoms of a profound spiritual defect. The 
repellent externals of modern Church life—organizational busy- 
ness, inadequate teaching, excessive moralism, doctrinal 
obscurantism, lack of conviction, absence of reality, the very 
disunity of the Church—all are rooted in the fact that the modern 
Christian has no sense of union with God. Naturally, then, the 
Church has no spiritual power either for creative morality, for 
speaking with the conviction that converts, for understanding the 
true meaning of doctrine and dogma, and still less for building a 
Christian culture and social order to displace the barren 
confusion of our present secular culture. 

We are well aware that many of the most prominent and 
respected of our modern theologians and churchmen disagree 
profoundly with the view that the Church can only be revived 
through mystical religion. Among the rank and file of clergy a 
voice that proclaims this view is politely ignored, and treated as a 
messenger from the “lunatic fringe,” as an extremist, an 
oversimplifier. It may be, as they say, that mysticism is not the 
essential wellspring of religion. But it is at least an element, and 
an essential element, in that spring, and because it is so singularly 
absent from modern Church religion quite a lot of overemphasis 
can be afforded. The Church has always walked forward on 
extremes like a man on his two legs, and you cannot walk by 
putting both legs forward at the same time. 

The other remedies of the Church’s state that are proposed 
have two serious defects. The first is that they are superficial— 
mere corrections of the external symptoms. The second is that 
they are panicky remedies of human origin, fearful of the 
Church’s total collapse, bereft of faith in God and in the present 
operation of his Holy Spirit. They have no vision of the God- 
controlled design of human history, of the organic development 
of Christianity, and thus do not see that Christianity is about to 
begin a stage in its growth that is not only necessary for the 
Church’s revival but also as nearly certain as anything can be. 
Modern Christians are not used, however, to thinking in this way. 


They speak of the Church as if it were a God-forsaken institution 
of purely human character which will collapse and vanish from 
history if men do not do something about it. While this is not the 
place to show the error of this view, we may simply note for the 
time being that the Fathers would have found it contrary to the 
very essence of their doctrine of the Church and termed it plain 
heresy. In contradiction to these sundry remedies and their two 
defects, it will be seen that mystical religion is in no sense 
superficial, and that, so far from being a remedy humanly 
applied, mysticism has its origin in God, in the action of the Holy 
Spirit. 

What do our more wide-awake churchmen propose to do about 
the state of Christianity? Some would have the Church launch out 
boldly into the field of “progressive” politics, and sacrifice every 
doctrinal difference for the sake of Christian unity in a purely 
ethical bond; others would adapt the Church’s teaching rigorously 
to modern thought, or provide for a more effective vocational 
training of the clergy, equipping them with the tools of modern 
psychological science; yet others would have the Church increase 
in numbers by any means possible and then dominate 
governments by pressure groups and political chicanery; these are 
among the more superficial and tiresome proposals. Wiser heads 
confine themselves to a few less flighty and more difficult 
demands. They ask for a ministry of higher intellectual power, 
familiar with modern thought and skilled in apologetics; for a 
vigorous campaign of instruction, explaining Christian belief in 
terms understandable to the modern mind; for an improved 
worship as to the nature of which both Catholic and Protestant 
liturgical reformers are in considerable agreement; and, more 
important than all, for saints, for Christians of deep faith and 
moral heroism who will do more for God, for man, and for the 
Church than any number of thinkers, teachers and liturgists. 

To be sure, saints of God are our primary need. What might not 
another St. Francis or another John Wesley do for Church and 
society? But merely ethical religions seldom produce saints. 
Sanctity is the fruit of faith, among other things, and we cannot 
expect saints unless Christians believe so strongly in God that 
they are willing to give up their lives for him. No movement, no 
individual, ever had power without some kind of creed, 
something believed so intensely as to be worth dying for. Ethical 


principles do not inspire such devotion, for the thing believed in 
must have far more reality than a mode of behaviour or an 
abstract social system. It must be a person, a husband, wife or 
child that one loves, or a group of persons, a society, or, more to 
be trusted than all these, the God who is reality itself. But, as we 
have seen, modern Church religion has not great faith in God, 
and less still in Jesus Christ. In practice, and often in theory, its 
belief in God is thin and vague, and is seldom taught and 
proclaimed. Sermons about God are preached but rarely. 

We need, then, faith as well as sanctity, and what are we going 
to do about it? As for faith, the Church has the richest store of 
literature about the nature of God and the reasons for believing in 
him—the soundest and the most intellectually respectable kind of 
reasons. And as for sanctity, the Church has centuries of 
experience in spiritual disciplines, and teaches the loftiest 
morality in the clearest terms. Here are all the techniques, and it 
remains simply to practise them. But we don’t. “To will is present 
with me; but how to perform that which is good I find not.” 

The trouble is that we are still only scratching the surface. 
Technique is not enough. Mere discipline is not enough. There 
are dozens and dozens of plodding Christians, clergy and laity, 
who practise their spiritual exercises every day—say their 
prayers, observe their times of meditation, repeat the Divine 
Office, make their confessions, attend or celebrate Mass, and from 
time to time go on retreats. Others fling themselves into social 
service and works of charity, giving all their time and wealth to 
the poor. Yet somehow the fire of the Holy Spirit does not 
descend except once in a great while, seemingly by the purest 
chance. 


And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, 
and though I give my body to be burned, 

and have not charity, 

it profiteth me nothing. 


In practising spiritual disciplines as well as in trying to acquire 
faith, most of us are like monkeys. We do not understand the 
saint’s inner state, and we are trying to attain it by the mere 
mimicry of its outward signs. We copy his actions and ideas, but 
because they do not really mean anything to us the task is an 
unproductive drudgery. For example, a monkey might, with some 


accuracy, describe an orchestra as a collection of people who 
blow through metal and wooden tubes, thump upon the skins of 
pigs, and scrape the entrails of dead cats with lengths of 
horsehair. We, of course, can give a fuller and more intelligible 
description of the work and nature of an orchestra because we 
understand its true meaning, which is music. But to a monkey 
music means nothing; it is simply a succession of noises produced 
by blowing, thumping and scraping. Yet because the monkey is 
envious of human accomplishments, he may readily be persuaded 
(until bored) to imitate human actions that mean nothing to him, 
to go through the motions of playing a trumpet or a violin with 
results far from meaningful and musical. A human being, too, can 
learn and master all the techniques of music and yet never be an 
inspired musician. 

So too, the moral splendour, the interior peace, and the 
spiritual power of saints and mystics are things which millions of 
us would like to possess. But it avails nothing to ape the exterior 
actions or even the interior ideas of such inspired persons unless 
we understand the meaning which these ideas and actions 
express. Apart from knowledge and appreciation of this meaning, 
our efforts to be like the great ones are so many attempts to 
produce the cause by the effect, to make the tail wag the dog. 
Now the meaning which saint and mystic express in idea and 
action is God. They think and act as they do because they are ina 
special way possessed by this life which is God, somewhat as the 
heart and mind of a dancer are possessed by the music which he 
interprets in bodily movement. 

The idea of God is itself no more than an interpretation of the 
mysterious reality whereby the saint is moved and possessed; it is 
a life, a being, translated into a form of thought as one might try 
to represent a colour by a shape, striving to interpret beauty of 
tone by beauty of line. Such interpretations are the genesis of all 
religious doctrine, both metaphysical and moral; they are the 
instruments and techniques for expressing the divine meaning. 
But in the hands of so many persons they become like musical 
instruments in the hands of monkeys; they lack all inner 
significance to those who use them and those who watch them so 
used. The one hopes that this process of imitation will somehow 
make him a saint and a possessor of eternal life, though he knows 
not the true nature of these ideals. The other stands by in sheer 


bewilderment at so much activity without meaningful result. 

Christian faith and practice have lost force because the 
enormous majority of Christians, both devout and nominal, do 
not know what they mean. Let it be said at once that such 
knowledge is not a matter of mere learning, of philosophical and 
theological acumen. Indeed, the theologian has often just as little 
grasp of the meaning of his religion as anyone else. He knows 
ideas; he knows the relations between these ideas; he knows the 
historical events—the story of Christ—upon which these ideas are 
based. He knows the doctrines of the Trinity, the Incarnation, the 
Virgin Birth, and the Atonement and can describe them with 
accuracy. But because he does not know, or even apprehend, 
what they mean, having no consciousness of union with God, his 
description of them—while correct as far as it goes—is as 
uninformative and lacking in significance as the monkey’s 
description of an orchestra. 

This theologian does not fail to grasp the meaning of his 
religion just because he is a pure academician without interest in 
its practice. For his practice, as much as his thought, is imitation. 
Monkey-fashion, he imitates the actions of the Fathers and the 
saints along with their ideas, attributing the fact that he does not 
become a saint to not imitating hard enough. 

What interests him, for instance, about the doctrine of the 
Virgin Birth of Christ is whether and how it happened. These two 
questions are, however, much less important than why it 
happened, than the discovery of what it means. For centuries 
theologians have wrangled and armies have fought about what 
happens in the Mass—whether bread and wine can actually 
become the Body and Blood of Christ and, if so, how. Yet if all 
that energy had been turned to the discovery of what such a 
mystery might mean, what it reveals of the nature of God and of 
the way to the knowledge of God, the history of Europe might 
have been written in a somewhat happier strain. 

So long as the mind of man could accept the doctrines of the 
Church at their face value, there seemed no urgent need of 
enquiring too deeply into their meaning. It was enough that 
certain things were true, that certain miraculous events had 
happened; man could be content to worship the wonderful, and 
the simple act of exposing and submitting himself to various 
mental and ritual disciplines imparted a certain sanity to his life. 


For the monkey that imitates man is not quite so much of a 
monkey as his brother in the purely natural state. But now that 
the truth and historicity of the great dogmas have been called in 
question so seriously, it is not enough to prove and affirm once 
more that, “These things happened.” Doubts have a purpose, and 
by means of them we step backwards to take a better jump. And 
the modern doubter, if he understands correctly the void in his 
heart, will now say, “Yes, you may prove to me that these things 
are true—that there is a living God who became Man, born of a 
Virgin, who died for our salvation, rose bodily from the dead, and 
ascended into heaven, from whence he shall come to judge the 
living and the dead. But what then? What do all these events 
mean? I do not want a set of strange, though true, ideas. I am not 
particularly interested in the assurance that I, too, shall rise 
bodily from the dead, nor do I desire a code of conduct simply for 
its own sake. I want God himself. I want my own life to be joined 
and made one for ever with the meaning of all things. What 
connection has your complicated and admittedly picturesque 
religion with that?” 

Today, in Church and out of Church, there are thousands of 
souls who realize in varying degrees of clarity that what they 
want from religion is not a collection of doctrinal and ritual 
symbols, nor a series of moral precepts. They want God himself, 
by whatever name he may be called; they want to be filled with 
his creative life and power; they want some conscious experience 
of being at one with Reality itself, so that their otherwise 
meaningless and ephemeral lives may acquire an _ eternal 
significance. Hence the vogue for every kind of mystical and 
pseudo-mystical cult from Neo-Hinduism for the highbrows to 
“Unity” for the lowbrows. They do not and cannot be expected to 
know that the Church has in its possession, under lock and key 
(or maybe the sheer weight of persons sitting on the lid), the 
purest gold of mystical religion. Still less do they know that creed 
and sacrament are only fully intelligible in terms of the mystical 
life. And they do not know these things because the stewards and 
teachers of the Church do not, for the most part, know them 
either. For while holding officially that eternal life consists in the 
knowledge of God—and in nothing else—churches of every kind 
are concerned with almost everything but the knowledge of God. 
They are concerned with the grammar, the syntax, the technique 


whereby the knowledge of God may be expressed. But what is the 
use of a mastery of language when there is nothing to say, no 
meaning to express? What is the use of moral principles without 
moral power and moral vision? 

Knowledge of God, the realization of one’s union with God, in a 
word, mysticism, is necessary. It is not simply the flower of 
religion; it is the very seed, lying in the flower as its fulfilment 
and preceding the root as its origin. There is no “higher religion” 
without mysticism because there is no apprehension of the 
meaning of reality without mysticism. It is the sine qua non—the 
must—the first and great commandment, “Thou shalt love the 
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with 
all thy mind.” On this hangs all the Law. On this all rules and 
techniques depend, and apart from it mean nothing. 

And here is the problem. Mystical religion is not a technique, a 
remedy, that may be humanly applied. It is the operation of the 
Holy Spirit. Mysticism is necessary; you must love God with your 
entire being—but it cannot be achieved by imitation. There is no 
rule, no method, no formal technique whatsoever that one may 
simply copy and attain the knowledge and love of God. One thing 
is needful—is absolutely necessary—and yet we can never say, 
“Do this, and it will be yours.” Despite the countless attempts, the 
innumerable claims, to do or have done this very thing, it cannot 
be done. There are a million methods for expressing the 
knowledge and love of God, but not one for attaining it. And yet 
the thing happens—God is known and God is loved. 

We can no more find a method for knowing God than for 
making God, because the knowledge of God is God himself 
dwelling in the soul. The most we can do is to prepare for his 
entry, to get out of his way, to remove the barriers, for until God 
himself acts within us there is nothing positive that we can do in 
this direction. We may, however, be certain that he will act— 
indeed, that he is already acting—though we have difficulty in 
becoming aware of this action because we are always trying to 
put imitations and substitutes of our own in its place. We fail to 
see through the window because we are painting pictures on the 
glass. Nothing therefore can happen until we have given up every 
method and contrivance for possessing God, in the faith that 
whether we feel it or not, know it or not, God possesses us 
entirely and inescapably here and now.3 For there is no other 


possession of God than to let oneself be possessed by God. 
Mysticism is an action in the passive. 

For hundreds of years Western man has been convinced that he 
could ultimately solve every one of his problems by doing 
something about it. It is a beneficial exercise in humility for him 
to come up against a problem about which he can actually do 
nothing. Yet the problem has to be solved. The situation would be 
maddening and impossible if that were all there is to it. But that 
is not all, because, as we have seen, mystical knowledge is 
something given to the soul by God, and there is a sense in which 
it is already being given to the soul—now and always. In this 
same sense, God is the most obvious thing in the world, the most 
self-evident, and union with God is the primary and most 
unavoidable reality of our lives. Yet God is so obvious and so 
unavoidable and so close to us that we are not aware of him. To 
try to see God is like trying to look at your own eyes, for he is 
nearer to us than we are to ourselves. 

This, however, is a truth which the human mind can hardly 
accept or admit, because it is too proud and self-assertive and 
lacks the grace to receive such a gift. Man is always trying to 
manufacture God, or a sense of God, for himself and therefore 
ignores the one that is actually given, because there is no credit 
to be gained in accepting a gift. And man feels guilty if he cannot 
pile up some credit to his account. Nevertheless, this truth is the 
gospel, the good news, and the basic principle of mystical 
religion. We do not have to seek for God; he is already here and 
now, and to seek for him implies that he is not. We do not, in this 
sense, have to attain union with God; it is already given as an act 
of the divine love. To try to attain it by our own efforts is to 
slight that love and, again, to imply that the gift is not given. By 
the same principle, though this will require further explanation, 
even the mystical consciousness of God is given now, whereas to 
seek for it by some method or technique implies the contrary.4 

There is a second sense in which God acts within the soul, 
though not at so deep a level as in the first sense. There are times 
in the lives of individuals, of societies, and of the Church, when 
the Holy Spirit gives a greater capacity for the realization of these 
spiritual gifts—a capacity which should not be confused with the 
gifts themselves. Despite the fact that the immediate signs are 
unfavourable, from some viewpoints, the general pattern of the 


history and development of the Western Church suggests most 
strongly that the Church as a whole is close to a period when the 
capacity for mystical religion will be increased to a hitherto 
unknown degree. Three factors seem to be combining to shape 
the character of this period—the pressure of external events, the 
general laws of the growth and development of organisms, and 
the interior movements of the Holy Spirit.s 

Three questions now confront us. Firstly, what is this general 
pattern in the historical development of Western Christianity, and 
how and why does it require and tend towards an epoch wherein 
Christian life and thought will be increasingly mystical? 
Secondly, in what does mystical religion itself consist, what are 
its spiritual and psychological principles? Thirdly, in what ways 
can the growth of mystical religion deepen our understanding of 
Christian doctrine, leading us from the outward symbol to the 
inner meaning, and what is its contribution to and effect upon the 
living of the Christian life? 


1 Thus Reinhold Niebuhr quotes with approval the following from Mercer in 
his Nature and Destiny of Man. New York, 1941 and 1944, vol. i, pp. 135-136n: 
“By a ruthless process of abstraction they (the mystics) have abjured the world 
of sense to vow allegiance to a mode of being about which nothing can be said 
without denying it... it embraces everything and remains pure negation— 
leave us not alone with the absolute of orthodox mysticism lest we perish of 
inanition.” J. E. Mercer, Nature Mysticism. p. 10. As will be explained below, 
pp. 97-98, this misses the point completely. 


2 As generally employed here and hereafter the term “Catholicism” should be 
understood as including but not confined to Roman Catholicism. A wider use of 
the term is necessary because certain Christian communions other than the 
Church of Rome, such as the Greek and Russian Orthodox and the Anglican, 
widely separated from the Roman Church as they may be, abide by formularies 
of doctrine and worship which certainly cannot be called Protestant in the 
modern sense of the word. In theory, if not always in practice, they are much 
closer to Roman Catholicism than to the various forms of contemporary 
Protestantism. The Anglican liturgy, for example, is easily recognizable as the 
child of the Latin Mass and Office, which certainly cannot be said of the 
normal types of Protestant service. 


3 Of course this does not involve the total abandonment of spiritual 
discipline. It means abandoning it as a means to possess God, but continuing it 
simply as an act of worship. 


4 The mystical consciousness of God is, of course, distinct from the direct 
consciousness of the Beatific Vision. Mystical knowledge is still veiled, and St. 
Dionysius describes it paradoxically as the “superluminous darkness.” See 
below, pp. 91 et seq. 


5 This trend has already been noted by two of the Church’s outstanding lay 
thinkers—Nicolas Berdyaev and E. I. Watkin, whose work will be discussed 
below. 


PART ONE 


It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the 
Paraclete will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto 
you. 


Joun 16:7. 


Christian dogma is merely a symbolism of spiritual experience.... We 
cannot dispense with symbolism in language and thought, but we can do 
without it in the primary consciousness. In describing spiritual and 
mystical experience men will always have recourse to spatial symbols 
such as height and depth, to symbols of this or another world. But in 
real spiritual experience these symbols disappear; there are no symbols 
of height and depth, of this or another world. The primal creative act is 
realistic and non-symbolical; it is free from conceptional elaboration. 


Nicotas Berpyaev, Spirit and Reality. 


The one secret, the greatest of all, is the doctrine of the Incarnation, 
regarded not as an historical event which occurred two thousand years 
ago, but as an event which is renewed in the body of every one who is is 
the way to the fulfilment of his original destiny. 


Coventry Patmore, The Rod, the Root, and the Flower. 


The Now-moment in which God made the first man and the Now- 
moment in which the last man will disappear, and the Now-moment in 
which I am speaking are all one in God, in whom there is only one Now. 
Look! The person who lives in the light of God is conscious neither of 
time past nor of time to come but only of one eternity.... Therefore he 
gets nothing new out of future events, nor from chance, for he lives in 
the Now-moment that is, unfailingly, “in verdure newly clad.” 


MEIsTER ECKHART. 


Yet in my flesh shall I see God. 
Jos 19:26. 


I. THE EPOCH OF THE SPIRIT 


Philosophers and historians have been saying for years that the 
Western world is in a period of acute crisis. Today the best minds 
among them are agreed that this crisis denotes the end of a phase 
of our civilization, if not the end of that civilization itself. Beyond 
this, their views as to the nature of the crisis and the future which 
it forebodes differ widely because of their varying theories of 
history and of the development of cultures. We recognize that 
theories of history belong to a highly speculative and uncertain 
realm of thought, depending on the dangerous but necessary art 
of generalization. To interpret the “signs of the times” one is 
almost compelled to adopt a theory of history, and the one we 
have here chosen is unpopular because of the admittedly narrow 
and unfortunate way in which its chief protagonist—Oswald 
Spengler—has handled it. Because of his own exceedingly 
superficial philosophy of life he so misapplied the basic principles 
of his historical theory that the principles themselves have been 
attacked as widely and as bitterly as their misapplication. But the 
principles have been attacked with more oratory than reason. It is 
conceivable that historians would not resist Spengler’s basic 
theory quite so bitterly if they could realize, as he did not, that 
the closing phases of a civilization or culture are not times of 
pure decadence—especially from the spiritual point of view. Age 
and maturity may bring the weakening of physical powers, but 
they also bring wisdom. 


I 


For reasons that will presently be given we believe that our 
Western culture has reached the end of its physical expansion and 
vigour, and is entering the latter part of its life—the period of old 
age and spiritual, or psychological, maturity. This is why Church 
religion is finding it so hard to meet the spiritual needs of modern 
man, for it is treating him as if he were still a child, an 


adolescent, or even a young adult. We are not saying that modern 
man is the spiritual superior of his forefathers; we are saying that 
in important respects he is of a different and older type of 
psychology. Such a view depends, of course, on the theory that 
cultures have a cyclic and organic pattern of growth similar to 
the life-rhythm of individual human beings, and that, in a general 
way, they pass through the stages of infancy, adolescence, 
physical maturity, spiritual maturity (or old age), and death. 

Closely interrelated and inwardly complex as they are, it is 
obvious that individual cultures exist. It is certainly possible, by 
the analytic method, to prove that they do not exist, because 
almost anything will seem to vanish when sufficiently reduced to 
atoms. But just as there was clearly such a thing as Egyptian 
culture, there is clearly, to a person who uses his eyes instead of 
the academic microscope, such a thing as Western culture. As 
Christendom, it once had an almost perfect unity, though now its 
unity is buried beneath the excrescences of time. 

It is also obvious that these individual cultures come into being 
and pass away. If they do not disappear entirely, they degenerate 
into a kind of prolonged decomposition. This fact simply cannot 
be disputed. Roman culture has vanished; so have the Egyptian, 
the Babylonian, the Greek, the Cambodian, the Indian and the 
Chinese. New cultures are or may be active in the areas occupied 
by the old and among their descendants, but they are clearly 
new. There is no reason at all to suppose that our Western culture 
is exempt from this fate. If it is to continue just as it is any longer, 
such a fate would be almost desirable. But to say that cultures 
grow old and die is no more pessimistic than to say the same of 
persons; they would be quite horrible if they did not, for one who 
does not know how to die does not know how to live. 

If cultures have birth and death, it would seem probable that, 
like all other biological phenomena, they pass through the 
intervening stages of growth and decay. This is not the 
application of a “biological analogy” to history. There is no 
question of analogy, for cultures, being composed of men, are 
themselves biological phenomena, and we know that biological 
groups can die out as surely as individuals. Where are the 
dinosaurs and pterodactyls, and what is becoming of lions and 
tigers? Indeed, this is not even a question of biology, but rather of 
simple energy and movement, the patterns of which are almost 


invariably cyclic. The fact, indeed the beautiful fact, of cyclic 
movement is repugnant only to the discredited theorists of linear 
progress and to cultural egotists who suppose that their own 
culture-form is essential to the continuance of truth, beauty and 
goodness in the world. 

Naturally there would be individual exceptions to this rule, for 
in every period of a culture’s development there are persons both 
before and behind the times. We can say, for instance, that the 
mediaeval period represents Western culture in its childhood only 
in a general sense, for in the outstanding minds of the period 
there are dozens of individual exceptions, although none of them 
wholly surpass the general mentality of the age. Furthermore, this 
view of cultural development does not involve the idea that the 
mature stage is better than or spiritually superior to the stage of 
infancy. It is simply different in form and capacity, and no one 
will seriously maintain that adults are of necessity holier and 
better than children. The cyclic view of history involves no moral 
judgements whatever. 

Christian historians do not in general like this theory for two 
principal reasons. The first is that they have a myopic tendency to 
identify Christian history with the history of Western culture, and 
the second is that they feel it to be a naturalistic philosophy of 
history obscuring the divine design behind human events. To 
identify the history of Christianity with that of a particular 
culture is quite disastrous—to Christianity. Already the Christian 
religion has belonged to two cultures, the Graeco-Roman and the 
Western, and the former is absolutely dead and gone, while the 
latter is clearly within a few centuries of its demise, if some 
violent accident does not end it sooner. Moreover, the divine 
design habitually expresses itself through natural laws, which are 
our description of the normal way in which God works. To be an 
expression of the mind of God, history does not have to move in 
straight lines. In all probability there will be many Christian 
cultures following the late Graeco-Roman and our own, all 
exhibiting the genius of Christianity in differing ways like so 
many varied jewels adorning a crown. The unity of Christian 
history must not be confined to a single culture, for this would 
not begin to exhaust the manifold possibilities of Christian 
civilization. Christian philosophy does not make it necessary to 
suppose that we are steadily advancing to some future perfection, 


for in space and time we attain relative perfections only, and the 
glory of Christian history consists in their sum and integration 
viewed from the standpoint, not of time, but of eternity. 

It is not our purpose to expound and defend this theory of 
history in detail. Spengler, despite his limitations, has at least 
established its general principles, and even while following 
theories of history which differ from his, Christian historians and 
philosophers such as Berdyaev, Watkin and Sorokin have 
advanced views of the modern crisis which imply the same 
practical consequences.i But the reluctance of many to admit it is 
due largely to our own culture’s absurdly exaggerated view of its 
importance and to man’s natural aversion to facing the fact that 
one day he will die. The inability of many historians to discern 
the various stages of cultural cycles is due also to the confusion of 
the general mentality of a given period with that of its most 
exceptional minds and to exclusively analytical methods of 
research and study which make it impossible to see the forest for 
the trees. 

The general characteristics of the four stages of the cultural 
cycle are as follows: 

(1) Thesis. The childhood of a culture normally has its roots in 
an older culture, from which it receives a traditional body of 
wisdom which is accepted on authority and understood in a 
naive, literal and external fashion. Vigorous philosophy 
rationalizes the tradition’s external form, while mystical insight is 
fresh and deep but improperly related to the tradition itself and 
to social life. 

(2) Antithesis. The adolescent period is characterized by a 
growth of individual self-awareness, and involves rebellion 
against the parental tradition and authority. The culture discovers 
its own peculiar powers and abilities, and departs sharply from 
the patterns inherited from older cultures. The natural mysticism 
of childhood disappears by degrees. 

(3) Crisis. The culture exploits its newly found powers on the 
physical plane, but in its enthusiasm loses touch with its 
traditional roots. Imperialism and materialism flourish until they 
reach their practicable limits or collapse through loss of inner, 
spiritual meaning. 

(4) Synthesis. When physical expansion and maturity reach the 
point of frustration, the culture returns to its traditional roots, 


and, with the aid of all the experience gathered in its course of 
life, understands them profoundly and inwardly. This is the 
wisdom of old age, which may in turn become the thesis of a new 
culture. 

The relevance of this cultural rhythm to our particular problem 
—the spiritual crisis of modern man—is that if, as will be shown, 
we are now entering the phase of spiritual maturity, we are going 
to understand the Christian religion in a somewhat different way 
than in the past. To meet the spiritual needs of modern man, the 
Church will have to present Christianity in a mature form as 
distinct from the childhood form of mediaeval Catholicism, or the 
adolescent form of Reformation Protestantism. It will be shown, 
further, that the mature form differs from that of childhood in 
that it is an interior, spiritual and mystical understanding of the 
old, traditional body of wisdom—the thesis and mythos2 with 
which the cultural cycle began. What the child understood as an 
external, objective and symbolic fact, the mature mind will see 
also as an interior, subjective and mystical truth. What the child 
received on another’s authority, the adult will know as his own 
inner experience. Unless understood in this mature way, the 
traditional religion of the Church must seem incomprehensible 
and even superstitious to the modern mind. 

This mystical and spiritual synthesis which occurs in the final 
maturing of great cultures is termed by Spengler the “Second 
Religiousness,” though in spite of his otherwise profound grasp of 
cultural life-rhythms a certain emotional perversity seems to 
prevent him from grasping the full significance of this phase of 
development. After the frustration of material expansion a culture 


weary, reluctant, cold, ... loses its desire to be, and, as in Imperial 
Rome, wishes itself out of the overlong daylight and back in the 
darkness of protomysticism, in the womb of the mother, in the grave. 
The spell of a “second religiousness” comes upon it.3 


But the external symptoms he perceives quite correctly, showing 
that the Second Religiousness 

appears in all Civilizations as soon as they have fully formed themselves 

as such and are beginning to pass, slowly and imperceptibly, into the 


non-historical state in which time-periods cease to mean anything.4 


He sees that the Second Religiousness employs the “Springtime” 


or infancy forms of religion, but does not seem to realize that 
they are understood in a new, interior and spiritually creative 
sense. For Spengler this return to the infancy forms is purely 
nostalgic, and fails to grasp the inner spirit. “Nothing new is built 
up, no idea unfolds itself—it is only as if a mist cleared off the 
land and revealed the old forms, uncertainly at first, but presently 
with increasing distinctness.” 
But again he perceives the external symptoms well enough: 


The material of the Second Religiousness is simply that of the first, 
genuine [sic], young religiousness—only otherwise experienced and 
expressed. It starts with Rationalism’s fading out in helplessness, then 
the forms of the Springtime become visible, and finally the whole world 
of the primitive religion, which had receded before the grand forms of 
the early faith, returns to the foreground, powerful, in the guise of the 
popular syncretism that is to be found in every Culture at this phase.s 


Spengler rightly states that our own civilization has not yet 
entered upon the Second Religiousness, but the purely regressive 
character which he ascribes to it is typical rather of such trends 
as the nineteenth-century Gothic revival and the reversion of the 
Roman Catholic Church at that time to an extreme traditionalism 
and obscurantism against the rise of liberalism. 

The profoundest spirituality of the human race appears during 
these periods of Second Religiousness. Late Graeco-Roman culture 
gave us Plotinus, Origen, St. Augustine and the great Byzantine 
Fathers. Late Jewish culture produced the Wisdom literature, 
Philo, perhaps the Kabbalah,e and primitive Christianity itself. 
Indeed, the Hebrew-Judiac cycle is a particularly instructive 
example of the spiritual evolution of cultures, having stages that 
are marked with considerable clarity. Its period of infancy lies 
prior to 800 B.C., and comprises the establishment of the original 
priestly religion and the primitive law, and the founding of the 
nation in its Palestinian home. To the same period belongs the 
Hebrew religious mythos contained in the earlier parts of the 
Pentateuch. Between 800 and 500 we have the adolescent 
revolution of prophetism, followed by the diaspora, which was 
for the Jews an era of economic rather than political expansion, 
since they became the bankers of the ancient world. The Second 
Religiousness begins after 200 with the frustration of an 
attempted political independence, and is seen in the Wisdom 


literature, primitive Christianity and such cults as the Essenes. 
The important feature of this phase is that it gives a mystical and 
interior interpretation to the primitive religion of the law and the 
sacrificial worship of the Temple. 


For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which 
are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the 
presence of God for us.... For ye are not come unto the mount that 
might be touched, and that burned with fire.... But ye are come unto 
mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly 
Jerusalem.7 


Examples might also be cited from the Oriental cultures, for we 
find the immense insight of Mahayana Buddhism and Sankhara’s 
Advaita Vedanta in the latter phase of Indian culture, and the 
great Ch’an (or Zen) synthesis of Taoism, Confucianism and 
Buddhism after a.p. 700 in China. 

It is obvious, however, that not all aspects of a Second 
Religiousness are of equal profundity. Along with Plotinus and St. 
Augustine we have the complex but superficial theosophism of 
the Gnostics, while Philo is tedious and involved in comparison 
with St. John and St. Paul.s Thus, in our own day, the profounder 
Second Religiousness of Western Christianity must not be 
confused with the modern Gnosticisms of Theosophical “Esoteric” 
Christianity, Christian Science, and other manifestations of that 
occultism which has little in common with genuine mystical 
insight. Such movements are indeed early signs of a Second 
Religiousness, seeking an inner meaning behind traditional 
symbols. But the meaning which they discover is usually some 
form of pantheistic rationalism. 


II 


To understand the spiritual needs of modern man we must 
consider in some detail the successive phases of our own West 
European-American culture, which at present seems to be at the 
close of its physical maturity.» We have to see what are the 
factors in our life-rhythm and the elements in the modern 
situation that seem to lead up to a Second Religiousness, and 
what in terms of our rich tradition of Catholic Christianity the 
character of this era is likely to be. Why are there grounds for 


believing that in this phase Christianity will have a primarily 
mystical emphasis, quite apart from the fact that this is the only 
thing which might possibly revive and even unify the Church in 
Western civilization? Why, again, is it possible that this particular 
development in Western Christianity may constitute an epoch of 
the first importance in the whole evolution of Christian life and 
thought? 

The stages through which the life-movement of Western culture 
has already passed are fairly easy to distinguish. The period of 
infancy lies between 900 and 1400, wherein our culture receives 
its thesis and its particular mythos, which is mediaeval or Gothic 
Catholicism. Between 1400 and 1800 we have the adolescent 
antithesis of Protestantism and Humanism, of the Reformation, 
the Renaissance and the Enlightenment. The era of physical 
maturity runs from about 1700 to our own day, and with it the 
usual decline of spirituality under the dominant materialism 
common to this stage. Towards the end of this era there begins 
the sense of frustration and spiritual hunger which is the prelude 
of the Second Religiousness and spiritual maturity. 

Mediaeval men, says E. I. Watkin, 


were always children. They were naughty, very naughty, children or 
good children; rough children or gentle children; children ignorant of 
their alphabet or children eagerly learning and poring over any book 
they could lay hands on; foolish children or wise children—but all alike, 
children. That, no doubt, is the reason why, from the Renaissance to the 
present day, the conceit of raw adolescence has despised them. 10 


As a child mediaeval man lived under two mothers—Mother 
Nature and Mother Church, both of which he took for granted, 
and both of which, in different ways, he failed to appreciate and 
understand with any real depth. Like almost every people in its 
primitive, peasant state, he lived close to the soil and but rarely 
had any eye for its beauties. The peasant home was a small, 
windowless hovel, made to exclude rather than admit light and 
air. Flowers, trees, birds, animals and stars were observed, not for 
their beauty, but for a fanciful symbolism of moral and spiritual 
principles.11 The great windows of the churches were not to 
frame any vista of clouds and hills; they were spaces for a 
translucent screen of many-coloured symbols—the stained glass 
window. An abbot of Ely, watching a flight of water birds at 


evening over the fen, silhouetted against the afterglow of sunset, 
saw only a troupe of devils on their way to fetch the soul of a 
neighbouring heretic, and in the night the booming of bitterns 
among the reeds was heard only as the uproar of fiends. Until 
quite late mediaeval times art had no perception at all of natural 
or human beauty, and though to our eyes it glows with a 
supernatural beauty of its own, one may doubt whether its 
creators were conscious of it in the same way.i2 Crudely cut 
precious stones were lavished upon sacred objects—Gospel books, 
crucifixes, reliquaries—with an eye only for their value and their 
glitter, and before the work of time had mellowed them to 
loveliness, the polychrome of cathedral statues, screens and 
pillars was a gaudy riot of loud colour. 

None of this is said to deprecate mediaeval culture, but simply 
that we may perceive and love it for what it was—the work of a 
child-mind spontaneously achieving an unconscious beauty of 
form, but taking conscious delight in the brilliance of colours, 
stones and precious metals for their own sake. Yellow trees, green 
skies, blue houses, red lions are as much a feature of the stained 
glass window and the illuminated miniature as of the paintings of 
any child today, together with a crudity of outline and absence of 
perspective saved only from complete childlikeness by the greater 
muscular control of the practised artist. Yet with the wisdom 
peculiar to children mediaeval man saw, inadequately it may be, 
what modern man does not see—that man and nature are indeed 
symbols of God. “Alles Vergdngliche ist nur ein Gleichnis,” said the 
mature mind of Goethe in a much later age. To be sure, 
mediaeval man stated this symbolism in the wrong way, not by 
analogy but by clumsy and far-fetched metaphor, but at least he 
grasped the all-important point that the world is intelligible only 
as a revelation of the mind of God. 

Though he lived so close to Mother Nature, mediaeval man was 
far more concerned with Mother Church, though here again in 
childlike fashion he grasped certain essential principles with little 
understanding of their inner meaning. His religion was 
mythological—that is to say, he apprehended spiritual realities in 
concrete, external symbols, not, save in rare cases, as interior 
events in the life of the spirit. God was the majestic old man with 
the triple crown, seated above the spheres on his golden throne, 
just as he is shown on the painted roof of Ely Cathedral. Heaven 


was literally the golden city with saints and angels encircling the 
Almighty like the courtiers of an earthly monarch. Hell, situated 
geographically in the heart of the earth, was a torment of 
physical fire. Even such profound and revolutionary minds as St. 
Thomas Aquinas could ask in all seriousness, “Whether our 
atmosphere is the demons’ place of punishment?” 

The centre of his spiritual life was the mystery of the Mass, the 
miracle performed on the altar that stood in the heart of the 
community, the transubstantiation of bread and wine into the 
very Body and Blood of the risen Christ. For mediaeval man the 
sacred Host was an object of such awe that he hardly dared to 
receive it in Communion, partaking of it (unless he was a priest) 
but once or twice a year. This infrequency of Communion was the 
symptom of the fact that he did not receive the mystery of the 
Mass into himself, did not understand it interiorly. The miracle of 
transubstantiation, of the most intimate union of God the Son 
with physical matter, was a thing that happened externally, at a 
distance, localized upon the altar, but not spreading out from 
thence into human life and consciousness. In such a period the 
primacy of God’s transcendence goes hand-in-hand with a 
mythological type of religion, that is, a religion understood in 
purely external terms, wherein the divine mysteries are 
worshipped from a safe distance. The intimate mystical 
communion which the sacrament actually implied was known to 
a small circle of monks, who, though they entered the very 
depths of mysticism, were never quite successful in relating it to 
the sacramental and physical aspect of religion. Indeed, mystical 
writers of the Middle Ages, and even later, always give the 
impression that they are dragging in the sacramental life by the 
heels—just because Holy Church says it is necessary. Mediaeval 
mysticism is always in danger of Manichaeism, of denying 
altogether the importance and eternal value of matter and form, 
and of drifting off into a realm of pure abstraction. Their 
mysticism was still Neo-Platonic; it was not, and there has not yet 
been in Christianity, an incarnational mysticism which truly 
accepts and comes to terms with physical existence. Erigena, the 
Victorines, St. Francis, Eckhart, Tauler, St. Bonaventure—all were 
still at heart despisers of the world which “God so loved,” and of 
the flesh which the Eternal Word became. 

The fact that these great interior souls of the Middle Ages, as 


well as the Neo-Platonic Christians before them, so wholly 
despised the flesh has created the central moral problem of 
Christianity—how to reconcile holiness with material life. The 
problem still is and always has been most acute in regard to 
sexuality, for it was only with difficulty that they could accept 
the sacramental character of marriage. For St. Thomas, with all 
his sound, earthy common sense, marital intercourse performed 
simply for pleasure was a venial sin—and in such matters St. 
Thomas was dangerously “advanced.” Nineteenth-century Roman 
Catholicism seems rather less “advanced” than St. Thomas. Yet 
the historic opposition of holiness to sexuality has given sexuality 
an altogether unmerited importance in the Western mind, just 
because of its alleged “naughtiness.”i3 Neither Protestantism, nor 
Romanticism, nor modern Liberalism has yet solved this problem; 
they have only veered between extremes and compromise, which 
is no solution. 

The entire problem of the relation of holiness to physical 
existence remained unsolved because the original Catholic 
mythos, which contains the solution, was not inwardly 
understood even by the mystics. Absorbed in the contemplation 
of God as the “divine darkness” or the “cloud of unknowing,” 
these profound souls never really tried to penetrate the mysteries 
of dogma and sacrament; for the most part they left them politely 
on one side, and thus there was the deepest rift between the 
religion of the mystics and the religion of the common man. The 
“higher end” of the problem, the inner meaning of the dogma of 
the Holy Trinity, the significance of the Incarnation as the birth 
of Christ in the soul, was tackled by Eckhart, Ruysbroeck and 
Nicholas of Cusa, but the crux, the relation of spirit to matter, 
was barely scratched. And yet the key to the problem lay right to 
hand in the daily ritual of the Mass, in that most intimate union 
of Godhead with common material forms, and in the entire 
sacramental and incarnational character of mythos and Church. 

The adolescent revolution of Protestantism brought no solution 
to the problem because instead of using the key to unlock the 
door it threw it away. It abandoned the very elements of the 
Catholic mythos which were most revealing of its inner 
significance—the Mass, the doctrine of transubstantiation, the 
Catholic philosophy of the sacraments, and, in a later stage, even 
the dogma of the Incarnation that in Christ true God had become 


true man. It was impossible for the Protestants to see wherein 
mediaeval man was right and wherein he was mistaken. They 
could not see that Catholic sacramentalism was not purely and 
simply magic and superstition; they could not see the profound 
truth underlying the very materialism of mediaeval religion, the 
very emphasis on the union of God with physical symbols. And 
they could not see it because mediaeval man himself had not seen 
it; he had been right for the wrong reasons. He had indeed used 
the sacraments magically, for just because he was a child he 
mistook the concrete symbol for the whole truth behind it. He 
could not see that the supreme truth behind the Mass, the 
Incarnation and the sacraments was that union with God was 
given to the creation and the flesh here and now, and did not have 
to be attained by human efforts.14 He could not see this because, 
for his childlike mind, the gift stopped in its particular symbols; it 
stopped on the altar; it did not extend from thence into his own 
life and experience. And yet just because he was childlike he had 
the humility and the grace to accept the gift, as far as he could 
see it, with faith and wonder. But just because the Protestant was 
an adolescent and not a child, he was proud, and could not 
understand or sympathize with a God who could give himself so 
readily and generously to mere dust. The Protestant inherited 
from the mediaeval mystic his contempt of matter without the 
saving corrective of a sacramental Church. 

Adolescence is man’s awkward age, for which reason the 
history of our next phase, of Protestantism and Humanism, seems 
unattractive and barren. But it must not be condemned as a tragic 
historical mistake. It was absolutely necessary for the eventual 
understanding of the Christian and Catholic mythos. For the 
mythos is like a nut—a shell containing hidden fruit, a hard, 
concrete symbol embracing a spiritual truth. To extract the truth 
the nut must be broken—with reverence and respect, because 
without the shell’s protection the fruit would never have grown. 
The task of Protestantism was to break the shell, though because 
the Protestants did not fully realize this and did not know about 
the fruit inside, the job has been inexpertly and irreverently done. 
They have hammered away with gusto; they have cracked the 
entire surface; they have taken whole chunks of the shell right 
off, and, having thrown some of them away, have taken the rest 
into a corner and there tried to piece them together in a different 


form. But the fruit has not interested them. Protestantism has 
simply broken up the system of symbolism, reduced it and re- 
formed it, and, in these later times, has practically discarded the 
whole thing. The time has come for us to attend to the long- 
neglected fruit. 

Humanism and Protestantism are of one spirit, although in 
Reformation Protestantism that spirit was not quite so obvious as 
it is today. This is the adolescent spirit of revolt against nature 
and supernature, the soil and the Church. In this phase man’s end 
and god becomes man himself. 


Know then thyself, presume not God to scan; 
The proper study of mankind is man. 15 


Already in scholastic philosophy mediaeval man was awakening 
to the power of his own reason; in every direction his cleverness 
was developing, and under the stimulation of newly discovered 
books and statues from the mature age of classical culture, man 
became fascinated by his own mind and form. In every aspect of 
life symptoms of the change appear. Dante is a map of the 
celestial realms, but Shakespeare of the human soul. In painting, 
Giotto and Fra Angelico are still concerned with man only as a 
symbol of the divine mysteries, but with Michelangelo, Botticelli, 
Raphael the centre of interest shifts to the splendour of the naked 
human form.ics By degrees the agrarian culture of feudalism gives 
place to the bourgeois, mercantile culture of cities, where man is 
surrounded by his own works and absorbed in his own concerns. 
The expansion of man’s powers and his increasing absorption in 
their use from the time of the Renaissance; the development of 
science and secularism, the Church’s loss of position and strength 
before the rising might of nations and other purely human 
institutions, the unprecedented increase in man’s power over 
nature—all this is history too familiar to need elaboration, and 
leads up to the special modern conceit that there is no problem 
too great for human reason. All this gave the nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries dreams of the indefinite progress of man 
towards the fulfilment of the Serpent’s promise—“Ye shall be as 
gods.” 

In spirit, Protestantism was also grounded in the worship of 
man. As a popular revolution it was principally the work of city- 
dwellers; Geneva, Frankfurt, Strassburg, London, La Rochelle, 


Edinburgh, Leyden—these were among the many cities where 
Protestantism, mostly of the Calvinistic type, was welcomed by 
the merchant class, not just because it was a less expensive 
religion, but because it exactly suited the psychology of the new 
city-mind. This was the mind of a new economic and social 
group, young, vigorous, despised by the old aristocracy, anxious 
to prove its worth and respectability, and whose power lay not in 
lands or titles but in trade and money. Although nature has her 
freaks, she is on the whole trustworthy; generally speaking, the 
cycle of the seasons and the crops can be relied upon, and from 
her the peasant learns how to have faith in mysteries beyond his 
control. But in business and trade we are dealing with man, who 
lies and cheats and robs, and thus the man of business forms the 
habit of trusting but little. He has to be “shown.” He must “have 
it in writing.” And the new merchant class wanted its religion in 
writing; it wanted to form its own judgement on Holy Writ, for 
the mysteries of priests were not to be trusted. The Bible, the law 
book, not the Host, became the centre of Protestant worship. 

For the Mass made the businessman uncomfortable. What were 
the mysterious actions and whisperings of the priest up there at 
the altar? How could anyone prove that the bread, which still 
looked like bread, was the Body of Christ? How could one trust in 
such an intangible miracle? Not being able to trust, the 
businessman is compelled to take more and more things under his 
own conscious control. He felt safer, therefore, to receive the 
Body of Christ by the power of his own mind, by so-called “faith,” 
rather than by an external miracle which his senses could not 
verify. It was inevitable, then, that the religion of the 
businessman should become more and more dependent on his own 
will and consciousness, and less and less dependent on the unseen 
action of God. 

The boy who flouts his mother’s advice has always a deep sense 
of insecurity. She was so often right; she may still be right; 
mother is wise. But to defend himself against this humiliating 
intuition he must prove her a downright old fool by every 
available means. Hence the Protestant attitude to Mother Church, 
for the thought-habits of generations cannot be thrown off in a 
moment without inner misgivings. Protestantism had therefore to 
do everything possible to convince itself of its own rightness and 
of the damnable and wholesale corruption of Catholicism. Above 


all things it needed to be edified, to be built up and confirmed, 
and from that day to this the Protestant religion has ceased to 
worship in the full sense. Instead it has gone in for sermons, for 
Bible readings, and for fulsome and oratorical prayers which are 
for the edification of the people rather than the glory of God.i7 
And in common with the prophetism of Hebrew adolescence, 
though in strange contrast to their own doctrine of 
predestination, the Protestants have increasingly tried to make 
moral conduct the chief means of salvation. is 

The Calvinistic doctrines of predestination and irresistible grace 
may also be seen as signs of the inner sense of insecurity. They 
were the theoretical means of convincing oneself of membership 
among the elect, of being sure that one’s salvation was a foregone 
conclusion. Logically, the doctrine of predestination should 
encourage moral indifference, for if one is either damned or 
saved from all eternity, what can one do about it? But the 
Calvinist was out to prove himself saved by every possible means, 
theoretical and practical, and thus drove himself to the most 
strenuous moral efforts to prove that he was necessarily of the 
elect. And thus, by an odd paradox, the eternal and inscrutable 
decisions of God came to depend upon human effort. God was to 
be compelled to have foreordained one to salvation. 

Thus the man-centeredness of Protestantism may be seen in a 
variety of ways—the dependence of the sacraments upon human 
faith and of salvation upon human effort, the substitution of 
edification for worship, the central place of the altar surrendered 
to the pulpit, the growth of individualism since the authority of 
the Church was replaced by personal interpretations of the Bible, 
the multiplication of sects based on such interpretations, the 
disappearance of every element of mystery and symbol from the 
Church in favour of the drab, trivial and secular dress of the city. 
And perhaps above all, the adolescence, the inner insecurity, the 
lack of faith in God, the vast self-consciousness of Protestantism is 
shown in its solemnity, its seriousness, its inability to laugh. 
(Aware of this criticism, modern Protestantism has acquired a 
sort of hearty merriment which never quite rings true.) Rare 
indeed is the Protestant who can laugh about, or in terms of, his 
own religion; a Protestant Chesterton, not to mention a Protestant 
Rabelais, is well-nigh inconceivable. 

These may seem harsh things to say about a form of religion 


which has meant so much to so many sincere folk; but there is no 
question of judgement here. We are not suggesting that the 
Protestants should have done something else, for what they did 
was almost inevitable at that stage of Western history. It was part 
of the total design of that history. It was the beginning of the 
Prodigal Son’s journey into a far country, where, in a later time, 
“he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine 
did eat.” Yet when the prodigal returns he is somehow the 
spiritual superior of his older brother, who, because he has 
always stayed at home, does not really appreciate his good 
fortune. 

As might be expected, Protestantism has given way increasingly 
before the march of secular philosophy, before the rationalism 
which analyzed and explained the universe and man until it 
explained the universe and man, and reason itself, clean away. 
For neither reason nor faith can live when they lose dependence 
on God, just as the plant cannot live when uprooted from the soil. 
Isolated from God as he had formerly been apprehended under 
the symbols of Catholicism, and isolated from nature in the walls 
of the city, adolescent Western man developed an intense 
consciousness of his separation from the rest of the universe. He 
probed it, analyzed it, reasoned about it as one who was not a 
part of it, as if he sat in independent judgement upon the work of 
nature and God. Naturally, this purely analytic mode of thought 
destroyed its object; it reduced the universe to its lowest terms, 
its disjointed elements, its smallest fragments. The process of 
disintegration was so complex and the varying parts and pieces so 
multitudinous that no one man could comprehend the entire 
process. Therefore specialization became necessary. Knowledge 
was divided into a mass of subdivisions wherein each man 
learned more and more about less and less, until the work of 
analysis and disintegration was carried to its very limits. The 
view of the universe which finally emerged was the necessary 
result of the method of investigation. It was a_ totally 
disintegrated view. The universe was merely a system, if such a 
thing can be called a system, in which an incredible number of 
particles or impulses were going through haphazard permutations 
and combinations for colossal periods of time. That they had 
produced certain “ordered” forms such as the human mind, the 
solar system, vegetative life, and the like, was the result of pure 


statistical necessity. A sufficient number of monkeys typing for a 
sufficient length of time on a sufficient number of typewriters 
would be bound, at some time, to type out a continuous series of 
letters and spaces identical with those of the whole Bible. But this 
is merely the old trick of making things absurd by reducing them 
to their lowest terms. It is trying to explain away the music of 
Kreisler as a mere scraping of cats’ entrails with horsehair. 

By this process reason destroyed itself. After all, man himself 
was a part of this system, and man too was the product of 
statistical necessity, together with his reason, his theories, his 
ideas—including, we may observe, the idea of statistical 
necessity. But if all ideas were equally the result of statistical 
necessity, the possibility of a true idea vanished. Reason itself 
disappeared in meaningless mechanism. Vision became a chance 
form of blindness, consciousness a_ special form of 
unconsciousness, sense a special form of nonsense, life a special 
form of death. But a meaningless whole cannot evolve a 
meaningful part; a Godless universe cannot provide a sufficient 
cause for a rational man. Ex nihilo nihil fit—you cannot get 
something out of nothing. To defend itself against the modern 
disintegration philosophy must return to the point from which it 
began to decay, to scholasticism, and the robust common sense of 
St. Thomas. For philosophy in the Humanist age has likewise 
been isolated from reality; it has been philosophy about 
philosophy, about its own method, mere epistemology—not 
philosophy about life. It has taken seriously the proposition that 
man has no certain knowledge of anything; it has questioned the 
very validity of sense perception and reason, and thus is in no 
position to laugh when the world view of modern man reaches 
total absurdity. 

With the progress of rationalism the whole Christian system of 
symbols, Catholic and Protestant, was attacked from many 
directions—metaphysical, historical and moral—and as 
Protestantism watered itself down to meet the attack, while 
Catholicism retired into stubborn obscurantism, the rationalist 
movement began to deprive life of any meaning whatsoever. The 
opinions of rationalist thinkers became in due time the common 
sense of ordinary people, so that today urban man is bereft of all 
but habitual faith in life, which is what keeps modern man from 
being more crazy than he is. The mere intellectual decision that 


there is no God cannot wipe out the thought patterns and habits 
of many centuries all at once. But in time a faith based on 
nothing but habit will weaken, and the complete insanity of the 
meaningless life will take its place if man cannot be diverted with 
make-believe meanings—commercial enterprise, material 
“success,” absorption in political and social reform movements, 
all of which can easily be maintained in an era of physical 
expansion. Yet when that era ends, only futility is left. 

For a time, then, modern man was diverted by the free play of 
newly discovered powers in an expanding world. The novelty of 
freedom for the growing powers of the individual distracted 
attention from the necessary implications of rationalism. It was 
enough to seek freedom, and the first joy of being free made it 
seem unimportant to ask what freedom was for—save to assert 
that it was for a vague business termed “progress” and “the 
development of one’s personality.” The underlying emptiness of 
such a view of life was veiled by the thrill of new sensations, 
which, if they were to continue to thrill, must be intensified, 
multiplied, magnified, to the drowning out of the ever-growing 
presentiment of futility. Wherefore the all-absorbing concern of 
urban man became business—busy, busy—buzzing like a wasp 
trapped in a glass, busy to pass the time, busy just to make more 
business, to make money to make still more business, just to keep 
on being busier and busier—for what no one knew, except just 
that action was a good thing and idleness very dangerous. For in 
silence, in idleness, there was the boredom of being alone with 
oneself, with that inane spark of consciousness in the abyss of 
nothingness into which it was destined to vanish. 

Humanism ended in what Berdyaev terms “the destruction of 
the human image,” the disappearance of man in mechanism, of 
the social organism in the mass-state, of the human form in an art 
which depicted, often supremely well, abstract mechanisms or the 
contents of the garbage can, of human language in the tortuous 
utterances of a James Joyce, of melodic and aesthetic form in the 
purely mathematical and technological music of a Shostakovitch, 
of human education and wisdom in a university curriculum 
composed of unrelated heaps of trivial information and 
technological skills, and of the human mind in a system of 
psychology based on the reflex actions of rats and the diseased 
mental processes of psychotics. Bereft of creative power through 


loss of union with God and the meaning of life, the soul used up 
its resources and then produced simply belchings and vomit. 
Coming to the end of the statistically necessary period when they 
typed out the Bible, the monkeys reverted to mere type. 


Ill 


At the present time more and more of us are becoming aware of 
the exhaustion of Humanism, the utter shallowness of rationalism 
and its analytic view of life, and of the truth that the creative and 
meaningful life is impossible without some realization of union 
with God. But, as we have seen, the old forms of Christianity as 
presented in modern Church religion are not really attempting to 
meet this need. True, there is an interesting revival of Catholic 
philosophy, which has made many converts among the 
disillusioned intelligentsia. And though much may be expected of 
this movement, it still leaves much to be desired because for the 
most part it is simply a return to mediaevalism, albeit to the most 
exalted and permanently valuable aspects of mediaeval religion. 

Beyond this there is a ferment of all kinds of small mystical and 
pseudo-mystical groups and movements revolving around 
individual leaders—many of them influenced directly or 
indirectly by some form of Asiatic religion, and many, such as 
Christian Science and Theosophy, distinctly tinged with 
Manichaeism, the contempt for physical existence.19 These are so 
many straws in the wind. They indicate a hunger. By itself each 
one is too partial, too narrow in vision to appeal beyond a rather 
limited circle. And there is something slightly exasperating about 
the perennial appearance of the unholy alliance of mysticism and 
Manichaeism. Mysticism will only be a great cultural force when 
it learns to accept the world, to love it as God loves it, and to this 
end it must ground itself in the central principle of the Christian 
mythos—the mystery of the Incarnation, of the Word made flesh. 

It seems, then, that some five factors will predominate in 
forming the Second Religiousness of Western culture: 

(1) The obvious collapse of Humanism and secularism in all its 
aspects—philosophic, sociological, artistic and religious. In the 
coming years the bankruptcy of all political and economic 
substitutes for religion will become increasingly apparent. 


(2) The growing conviction that the basic doctrines of 
Catholicism are intellectually respectable and are, furthermore, 
essential to reason and sanity. The work of such men as von 
Hiigel, Maritain, Gilson, Garrigou-Lagrange, Berdyaev and 
Mascall, together with such popular writers as Chesterton, Noyes, 
C. S. Lewis, and others, has already achieved much in this 
direction. In comparison with modern Catholic philosophers the 
work and opinions of such as Bertrand Russell, Santayana, 
Dewey, William James, and even Bergson seem callow and 
superficial. When they treat of Catholic doctrine they invariably 
reveal an entire want of understanding and information on the 
subject, though towards the end of his life Bergson came into the 
closest sympathy with Christian belief.20 

(3) But it will be impossible for Catholic doctrine to be widely 
acceptable on the purely symbolic level. Five hundred years of 
Protestantism and rationalism, together with the slow maturing 
of Western culture, have made it impossible for the modern mind 
to be satisfied religiously by mere ideas, past events (e.g., the 
Incarnation conceived simply as an historical truth), and ritual 
actions. The mythos of Catholicism must be understood inwardly 
and mystically as well as in terms of history and theology. 

(4) The general growth of interest in mystical religion since the 
close of the nineteenth century, and the building up of mutual 
understanding on the basis of the interior life between persons of 
widely differing denomination, religion and race. 

(5) The growing influence of Oriental culture and religion upon 
Western life. Within a mere fifty years our knowledge of Indian 
and Chinese thought has increased enormously, and a vast 
quantity of both scholarly and popular literature on the subject 
has been produced in England, America, France, Germany, 
Holland, Switzerland and other Western countries.21 This cannot 
fail to have the most profound effect on the development of our 
culture, and in many directions its influence is already 
apparent.22 So far, however, it has made little impression on 
Church Christianity, where it is regarded as a dangerous and 
competitive tendency. This is a symptom of the interior weakness 
and uncertainty of Church religion, for in the great ages of 
Christian thought theology has always been able to embrace and 
absorb alien systems much to its own enrichment. In fact, every 
great advance in Christian theology has involved the absorption 


of an alien philosophy, to mention only the debt of Origen, 
Clement and St. Augustine to Platonism and Neo-Platonism and 
of St. Thomas Aquinas to Aristotle. It is not too much to predict 
that the next great step in Christian theology will be due, in part, 
to the absorption of Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism, and, perhaps, 
Mohammedan Sufiism, all of which are profoundly mystical 
religions. 23 

If these are the factors which are likely to shape the next phase 
of Christian life and thought, what will the general character of 
this phase be, and with what main problems will it have to deal? 
As already suggested, the nature and work of the period will be, 
firstly, the synthesis of former trends, and, secondly, the interior 
understanding and mystical interpretation of the original mythos 
—the translation of symbol into living experience. The factors at 
work imply this direction, the needs demand it, and the general 
patterns of the growth of cultures make it highly probable. 

Let us look, first, at some of the trends demanding synthesis. 
We begin, obviously, with the thesis and the antithesis which 
have dominated our culture to this point—Catholicism on the one 
hand and Humanism and Protestantism on the other. These 
represent respectively the life-giving mythos which is at the root 
of our culture, a symbolic apprehension of revelation of the 
deepest spiritual realities, and the negative movement which 
destroys the outward shell of the mythos in order that we may be 
conscious of the inner content. Within these two complementary 
opposites there are others, not always or necessarily coterminous 
with them, but none the less fundamental problems for our 
culture and for human life as a whole. 

There is the tension already mentioned between holiness and 
physical existence, which is expressed in the conflict between 
mediaeval Catholic ascetic-mysticism and Humanism, or between 
Protestant puritanism and liberal romanticism. Herein lies the 
basic moral problem of Christian life. Related to it is the 
opposition of transcendentalism and immanentism, finding 
expression in a whole complex of conflicts—official theology 
versus mysticism, spiritualism versus sacramentalism, traditional 
Catholicism versus Humanism, Manichaeism versus the religion 
of the Incarnation. While it has received full attention from both 
mediaeval and modern philosophers, the solutions offered are of 
the nature of compromise rather than synthesis. 


Again, there is the familiar tension between law and grace, 
works and faith, discipline and spontaneity, technique and 
inspiration, a synthesis of which is of the utmost importance for 
the living of the moral and spiritual life. Allied to it, as well as to 
the opposition of transcendentalism and immanentism, is another 
complex of tensions—between formal religion and formless 
religion, between liturgical, ritual worship and the simple 
“practice of the presence of God,” between life lived in terms of 
religion and religion lived in terms of life. 

Philosophy alone, theology alone, will never solve these 
problems; they can succeed only in so far as they are the 
instruments of the mystical life, of the realization of union with 
God. There remains, then, the supreme work of the epoch that 
lies ahead—the interior understanding of the great Christian 
symbols that the divine life which they contain may become 
conscious, that the Catholic mythos may reveal the secrets of 
union with God. Lest there be any misunderstanding, it must be 
made perfectly clear that in using the terms “symbol” and 
“mythos” we do not imply that Christian dogma is mere symbol 
and mere myth. We are not suggesting that the literal 
interpretation of the Faith should be replaced by a mystical 
interpretation, but that the mystical must come out of the literal 
and exist in addition to it. We are not concerned to discuss here 
the historicity of the great events of the life of Christ, nor 
whether or not he was in fact the incarnate Son of God. Granting 
all those events and all the claims which the Church makes for 
Christ to be factually true, they are still symbols. They are 
symbolic events revealing the nature of God and of the way in 
which man realizes union with God. 

After all, the important thing about Christ was not his exterior 
appearance but his inner character. So, too, the important thing 
about events is not how they happened but what they mean. 
Indeed, it could possibly be maintained that even if the whole 
story of Christ and all the dogmas of the Church about him were 
pure myth, none the less it would be a myth implanted in the 
human soul by God, arising out of the racial unconscious under 
the guidance of the Holy Spirit. But it still would have to be 
maintained that the myth was the work of God, and not a purely 
subjective wish-fulfilment dream of strictly human origin.24 An 
enormous amount of spiritual energy is wasted and Christian 


unity lost in argument as to whether these symbolic events 
actually happened. Granted that this is an important question; but 
it is so much more important to understand what they mean, and 
if unbelievers could be enlightened as to the inner meaning of 
these events they would be far more ready than otherwise to 
accept their factual truth. 

The whole purpose of the symbol and the mythos, which is the 
system of symbols, is to lead us to God himself, just as the 
purpose of language is to convey meaning and not mere words. 
God—the Meaning alike of the universe and the mythos—is alive; 
like wind, like moving waters, like fire, he cannot be grasped in 
some rigid form. Thus the symbolic form conveys the life of God 
as the acorn conveys an oak. In time, if the acorn is alive, its shell 
will burst; the living tree will grow out of it, and refuse to be 
enclosed in a shell any more. Likewise, God gives his life to men 
in symbols and sacraments, but if that life is to be truly lively, it 
will not stay confined in those forms or in any others. It will use 
forms; it will express itself in forms; but it will not be held in 
forms. 

Herein is the great difficulty in passing from the symbol and 
the idea to God himself. It is that God is pure life, and we are 
terrified of such life because we cannot hold it or possess it, and 
we do not know what it will do to us. “It is a terrible thing to fall 
into the hands of the living God.” Therefore we are always trying 
to possess God, it may be in some state of exalted feeling, or 
perhaps in some neat little theological formula, or even in a ritual 
act which we can perform—or leave alone. In just the same way 
we are always hanging on grimly to our own lives, protecting 
ourselves with all kinds of conventions, securities, habit- 
mechanisms, prejudices and hopes. But the more we hang on, the 
more we fail to live. The more sedulously we avoid death, the 
more certainly we avoid life. We are scared stiff to awaken to the 
truth that we are being swept along by the life of God as in a 
mighty torrent; that it sweeps us away from our possessions and 
our very selves to carry us out to the ocean of God himself. 
Therefore we cling desperately to floating logs or swim with all 
our might against the stream, not seeing that this effects nothing 
but our own discomfort and exhaustion. 

The symbol reveals God, but wrongly used it hides him. An 
idea, a doctrine, a sacrament, a spiritual exercise hides God when 


we use it as a means to hold him—that is, when we use it 
monkey-fashion as a comfortable and convenient technique for 
acquiring sanctity by imitation. Used in this way religion 
becomes a series of conventional ideas, conventional feelings, 
conventional spirituality and conventional good deeds utterly 
divorced from real life, which is to say God on the one hand, and 
on the other—walking, eating, breathing, digging potatoes, 
writing letters, watching birds, feeling sick, loving your wife and 
children, and taking a bath. “Every moment,” wrote Dom John 
Chapman, “is the message of God’s will; every external event, 
everything outside us, and even every involuntary thought and 
feeling within us is God’s own touch.” But we are scared of that 
touch; it may burn; it may kill. Therefore let it be circumscribed 
in a conventional religious pattern. Instead of laying ourselves 
open to full mystical possession by God the reality, instead of 
trusting ourselves to the living Spirit as he gives himself to us in 
every moment, we cling desperately to these symbols and idols, 
setting up new ones of our own making when the old are broken. 

The symbol is the seed of the divine life, and so long as man is 
himself a seed, a child in his mother’s protection, he must have 
the symbol. And the symbol must continue to exist because there 
will always be souls needing their religion in this form. But for 
the thousands and thousands of souls living in the modern world 
who have passed beyond that stage, what is true of the seed in 
the Gospel is true of the Catholic symbolism—“Except a grain of 
corn fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone. But if it die, it 
bringeth forth much fruit.” Or, in the words of St. Paul, “That 
which thou so west is not quickened, except it die.” 

To the literalist, the obscurantist, the idolater of symbols, that 
is of course shocking. Yet the disciples of Christ were similarly 
shocked when he likened himself to the grain of corn that must 
die. “We have heard out of the law,” they protested, “that Christ 
abideth for ever: and how sayest thou, The Son of Man must be 
lifted up?” We, too, have heard from the “law” that the Catholic 
faith as interpreted and understood “officially” will remain for 
ever the most complete exposition of the mysteries of God that 
may be found on earth. That is true enough if we add—the most 
complete symbolic exposition. But for countless souls—not for all 
—those symbols must die or have already died that they may 
bear the fruit which is their own meaning, that they may release 


the life of God which is in them. Thus the losses, the attacks, the 
weakening of faith, which the Church has suffered are a sharing 
in the Passion of Christ. The faith of Christians in the rigid 
symbolic forms of dogma is shaken and shattered that their living 
content may be discovered—that through this bodily death the 
Church and its faith may “rise with Christ” in a spiritualized 
body. For as the mortal body is to the body of the Resurrection, 
so is symbolic faith to mystical realization. 

Symbols are destroyed for us through the mercy of God in 
order that we may not rest content with anything less than his 
own divine essence, however holy that thing may be. Even the 
divine humanity of Christ had to be destroyed on the Cross, and 
the dogmatic symbols of the Church are not more holy than that. 
When the time of destruction comes the opportunity which it 
offers is altogether missed if one grasps around for new symbols 
or tries to patch up the old. It has been necessary for Western 
man, for Christendom, to go through with this passion to the 
bitter depth of “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me,” to 
the sense that his life is utterly meaningless. For just as the 
Church relives the life of Christ through the liturgical year, so the 
Church relives it again and again in the spirit. Thus as Christ was 
crucified, and as his divine humanity rose again and ascended 
into heaven, so the dogmatic symbols are destroyed only to rise 
again spiritualized and to ascend to a higher level of meaning. 
For “it is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, 
the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send 
him unto you.... When he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will 
guide you into all truth.”25 

At the close of the twelfth century Joachim of Flora conceived 
the idea that the history of the Church was divided into three 
dispensations or ages—the Age of the Father, which was the age 
of the Old Covenant of the Hebrew, the Age of the Son, which 
was to run from the birth of Christ until 1200, to be followed by 
the Age of the Holy Spirit, an age of mystical illumination in 
which, as a mediaeval monk might be expected to imagine, all 
Christians would take to cowl and cloister. The idea was, of 
course, a rather crude generalization and simplification of a 
certain truth, namely, that in the development of cultures periods 
do arise which might be termed “ages of the Holy Spirit,” which 
is to say periods of spiritual maturity. Thus the era of childhood, 


when man is under the rule of the parental mythos, might be 
called the age of the Father, and the era of adolescence, when 
man comes into his own and feels his independence, is in a 
certain sense the age of the Son, during which, incidentally, the 
worship of the human Jesus came into prominence. It can hardly 
be applied more generally than this to the whole history of the 
Church or of the human race, as these do not move in a linear 
progression, nor in a steadily ascending spiral. The Church 
embodies a constant mythos which evolves in accordance with 
the life-movement of the culture to which it is attached. 

But in terms of Western culture and Western Christianity it 
does seem highly probable that in the epoch ahead we shall think 
of God more and more as the Holy Spirit. It is significant that 
thus far the theology of the Holy Spirit is in a most undeveloped 
state. He is, as it were, the unknown Person of the Holy Trinity, 
for hitherto our attention has been focussed primarily on the 
Father and the Son. Few indeed in the Missal and the Breviary are 
prayers addressed to the Holy Spirit when compared with those 
to the Father and the Son.2« When we consider the enormous 
number of theological works on the Fatherhood of God and on 
the problems of Christology, it is amazing to see how few have 
been devoted to the Holy Spirit. Likewise, from the standpoint of 
popular devotion, the Holy Spirit has had little attention because 
his symbol is the dove, which cannot be taken too seriously. The 
popular mind has no concrete picture of him as it has of the 
Father, the Son and the Virgin Mary. 

Mystical religion, however, is the special province of the Holy 
Spirit, and in a certain sense the God of the mystics is the Holy 
Spirit, formless but fiery, impossible to picture or conceive but 
dynamic in effect.27 To this extent an epoch of mystical religion 
will be an age of the Holy Spirit. Writing of future trends in his 
recent history of Catholic art and culture, E. I. Watkin says: 


God’s presence and work in nature and man must be brought into 
greater prominence than in the past. This immanental operation, 
however, is, as we have seen, appropriated to the Holy Ghost. We are 
therefore to look for a dispensation of the Holy Spirit.... Gatholic truth 
will be grasped from within, not only by a contemplative minority but 
generally by the members of the Church. Doctrines will no longer be 
accepted solely on authority and stored unused in the mind. They will 
be vitally assimilated and practically lived. That is to say, contemplation 
will be spread throughout the Church and with it mystical experience.2s 


Because this epoch will reinterpret the mediaeval mythos, 
Berdyaev, who observes the same tendency of events, terms it the 
“New Middle Ages.” 


Thus modern history draws to an end, giving place to a new era which 
I have called by analogy the New Middle Ages. And in order to integrate 
himself anew, man must submit himself once more to a higher power. 
Certain aspects of mediaeval asceticism must be revived in a new form 
in order to allow the human personality to reveal itself again, and in 
order that the Christian ideal so essentially a part of man’s universal 
historical destiny might still prove a guiding light. We must now 
experience immanently what the Middle Ages had _ experienced 
transcendentally. 29 


The beginnings of this epoch are already among us, but 
because they are the work of the Spirit we cannot force their 
growth. At least, however, we can begin to try to understand. We 
can lay aside the petty pursuits, the small-minded notions, and 
the trifling quarrels in which modern Church religion is involved, 
and, through the fellowship of the interior life, cut across political 
and ecclesiastical boundaries and penetrate beneath the external 
surface of doctrine. At least we can stop prattling about the 
minutiae of polity, order and liturgy, and in our conferences 
make sure that we understand what we mean by the great 
fundamentals—God, the Incarnation, and the life of Prayer—since 
a thousand obvious differences about minor points are rooted in a 
few unconscious differences about major principles. At least we 
can cease from the interminable sermonizing about ethics and 
politics and small morality, and tell the people in human speech, 
as distinct from theological algebra, that the Church is where one 
comes to find union with God. Above all we can ask the Holy 
Spirit to open our minds to the realization of the truth from 
which all the joy and power of Christianity proceeds, the truth of 
the Word made flesh—that the eternal life of God is given to man 
here and now in the “flesh” of each moment’s experience. 
~ 7 Sorokin’s Crisis of Our Age (New York, 1942) is an instructive example. He 
describes the modern crisis as the end of the sensate phase of Western culture, 
and draws many parallels between the decadent symptoms of our own time 
and those of the latter centuries of the Roman Empire and other dead cultures. 
Yet he indignantly rejects the principle of culture cycles, and reserves to 
Western civilization the privilege of renewing itself entirely through a return to 


spiritual values. But Roman culture died despite the spiritual revival of 
Christianity, which was the wisdom of its old age. Western culture will likewise 


acquire a deep spiritual wisdom, but this will not prevent its death. But 
Sorokin seems almost to identify the future of Western culture with the future 
of man, urging the return to spirituality as “the road that leads not to death but 
to the further realization of man’s unique creative mission on this planet.” He 
fails, therefore, to grasp the peculiar character of the spirituality that is to 
come, and thinks of it, in effect, as a return to a mediaeval type of wisdom. 
“There will increasingly appear the partisans of the Absolute ethical norms, 
often becoming stoics, ascetics, and saints. The soul of the society in the 
transition will be split into the carpe diem on the one hand, and on the other 
into ideational indifference and negative attitude toward all the sensory 
pleasures.” Ibid., pp. 301-302. This may happen as it certainly happened before 
the collapse of the Roman Empire, but if Christian spirituality takes this turn 
again it will have learned nothing further about the Incarnation in a thousand 
years. 


2 I wish to distinguish between mythos and myth, since the latter word has 
now the sense of a purely imaginary folk tale. The mythos is the original 
symbolic story-form of a religion, in which spiritual realities are symbolized in 
events of terrestrial or celestial history—events which are not necessarily 
unhistorical and imaginary. In the child state abstract or spiritual truths can 
only be grasped in the concrete form of symbols. 


3 Decline of the West New York, 1926, vol. i, p. 108. The characterization of 
this phase as a desire to return to the womb is, of course, the Freudian 
predilection to explain the greater in terms of the less. Spengler’s emotional 
incapacity to appreciate and sympathize with a spirituality of this type is more 
evident in his Man and Technics than in the Decline. 


4 Ibid., vol. ii, p. 310. 
5 Ibid, vol. ii, p. 311. 


6 Parts of the Zohar are ascribed, at the earliest, to the tenth century, but it 
obviously embodies a much earlier tradition which existed, according to 
Edersheim, at the time of Christ. For a full discussion of this problem see A. E. 
Waite, The Holy Kabbalah. London and New York, 1929, esp. pp. 51-111. 


7 Hebrews 9:24 and 12:18-22. 


s According to Spengler, primitive Christianity, Philo, Plotinus, Origen and 
St. Augustine belong to the early or Springtime phase of Arabian culture rather 
than the late phase of Graeco-Roman and Judaic. But this is no more than to 
say that the synthesis of one culture becomes the thesis of another, for all 
cultures existing around the Mediterranean are closely interwined. Even so, 
Spengler’s view of the constituent elements of Arabian culture is most 
questionable, and he is always anxious to prove that nothing of great 
profundity can come out of a Second Religiousness. For him, old age is simple 
decadence—not the flowering of wisdom. 

9 It is impossible to determine as yet whether America actually belongs to 
the West European culture cycle. If there is to be a distinctively American 
culture, it is as yet embryonic and its thesis will emerge from the spiritual 
maturity of the West European. 


10 Catholic Art and Culture. London and New York, 1944, p. 80. 


11 A possible exception to this rule is the poetry of the Celtic monks of 
Ireland, though they are, perhaps, too early to be included in this period and in 
any case too isolated from Latin Christianity and Gothic culture to be regarded 
as in any way typical of mediaeval tendencies. An exception might also be 
made with St. Francis of Assisi, but in many respects modern writers 
sentimentalize his attitude to natural beauty. 


12 Watkin mentions a contemporary comment on Salisbury Cathedral where 
the writer admires, not the graceful form of the Gothic columns, but “the 
polish of the Purbeck marble, so smooth that you could see your face reflected 
in it.” He also shows that the pointed Gothic arch was no imitation of the 
natural arch of the forest glade but a practical device to save material by 
greater window space and to get rid of the inflammable wooden roof of the 
Romanesque Church. Catholic Art and Culture, pp. 80-83. 


13 According to the Visio Alberici (12th cent.) a special place of torture is 
reserved in hell for married couples who have intercourse on Sundays, Church 
feasts or fast-days. Op. cit., ch. 5, p. 17. Even an involuntary nocturnal emission 
required, according to Gregory III, the recitation of twelve penitential psalms. 
(Judicia congrua poenitentibus, cap. 24, in Mansi, xii, 293.) If, however, the act is 
ex cogitatione, twenty-one psalms are required. So, too, Gury describes as venial 
sin pollutio, quae fit cum imperfecta voluntate et liberertate, ut quandoque in 
semisopitis accidit. (Compend. Theol. Moralis i, 430. 2.) 


14 This is not, of course, the necessary and automatic union of God with the 
world which we find in pantheism. On the contrary, the union implied in 
Christian doctrine is the free and loving gift of the living God. The whole 
subject is discussed below in Chapter II. 


15 Pope, Essay on Man. But the thought is taken from Charron’s Treatise on 
Wisdom: “La vraie étude de l’homme c’est l’homme.” 


16 Renaissance art has little or no interest in nature as the soil. Nature is seen 
only in terms of man; landscape is a mere background for portraiture. The West 
has never produced an important school of nature-painters in the sense and 
mood of Chinese landscape-painting. 


17 The Protestant Reform party in the Church of England unconsciously 
revealed their uneasiness at having discarded the Sacrament of Penance at 
several points in the Book of Common Prayer. Thus in the Order of Holy 
Communion after a somewhat fervent and emotional general confession, the 
compilers were not content with a simple declaration of forgiveness by the 
priest; they must support it with a whole collection of scriptural passages. 

1s This is not so true of Lutheranism and Anglicanism, which were always 
ready to compromise with Catholicism, and are not, therefore, essentially 
Protestant. 

19 An interesting account of some of these will be found in Rom Landau’s 
God is My Adventure. London and New York, 1936. 

20 See especially his Two Sources of Morality and Religion. Paris, 1932 and 
New York, 1935. Also the two chapters on Bergson in Maritain’s Ransoming the 
Time. New York, 1941, pp. 52-114. 

21 On Buddhism alone there were in the English language, as late as 1939, 


well over 2000 works listed in March’s Buddhist Bibliography. London, 1935, 
with supplements for 1936-1939. The Bibliographic Bouddhique, comp. Jean 
Przyluski (Paris, 1928-1933), and the Deutsche Bibliographie des Buddhismus, 
comp. Hans Ludwig Held (Munich, 1916), list as many more in both French 
and German, and other European languages. 


22 In the realm of literature alone the influence may be noted in the work of 
some of our most outstanding writers—W. H. Auden, Aldous Huxley, Somerset 
Maugham, Pearl Buck, and, going back earlier, Thoreau and Emerson. Several 
Oriental writers are widely read today, including Tagore, Lin Yu-tang, and the 
translations of Chinese and Japanese classics by Arthur Waley. In the realm of 
psychology the debt of C. G. Jung of Ziirich to Oriental philosophy is well 
known, and through him has had a far-reaching effect on other European 
psychologists. 


23 With the exception of the earlier Jesuit scholars, the work of Christian 
writers in comparative religion has been of a rather superficial character. The 
object of most of it has been to minimize the spiritual insights of other 
religions in comparison with those of Christianity. Where this is the purpose, 
such writers invariably reveal their failure to understand these alien religions. 
Thus the manuals of comparative religion studied in theological schools are full 
of blatant misrepresentations, such as the favourite trick of dismissing Taoism 
as a mere lazy quietism by translating the term wu-wei (which denotes the 
psychological character of the mystical state) as “doing nothing.” The Advaita 
philosophy of the Upanishads and the Ch’an (Zen) Buddhism of China are 
termed mere pantheism, a conclusion which reveals nothing but the writer’s 
ignorance. 


24 It is strange that liberal Protestants who deny the historicity of such events 
as the Resurrection and the Virgin Birth as well as the actual Godhead of Christ 
have never made anything of this theory. They still insist on basing their 
religion on historical facts, however reduced in richness. Yet in order to make a 
case for their very impoverished form of religion (which they seem to want to 
do), they are logically bound to show not only that Catholicism is unhistorical, 
but also that, as a myth, it is not a divine revelation. 


25 John 16:7 and 13. As originally used, the word “comfort” did not have its 
present meaning, for a seventeenth-century document speaks of the 
schoolmaster who “comforts” his boys with a stick. Thus the Holy Spirit as the 
Paraclete, the Comforter, is a rousing force, the one who puts fire in the soul. 


26 Thus the Latin Mass has no definite Epiklesis or invocation of the Holy 
Spirit in the prayer of consecration. The more mystical Christianity of the 
Eastern Church regards the Epiklesis as an essential part of the consecration. 


27 Cf. Pascal’s Memorial: “The year of grace 1654, Monday the twenty-third 
of November, St. Clement’s Day ... from about half past ten in the evening until 
about half-an-hour after midnight—FIRE. God of Abraham. God of Isaac. God 
of Jacob, not of the philosophers and the learned. Certainty; certainty; feeling; 
joy; peace.... Forgetfulness of the world and of everything other than God.” 
Bremond, Histoire Littéraire du Sentiment Religieux en France. Paris, 1916-1928, 
vol. iv, pp. 359 et seq. 


28 Catholic Art and Culture, pp. 201-202. 


29 Berdyaev, The Meaning of History. Trs. George Reavey. London and New 
York, 1936, p. 181. The italics are mine. 


II. THE GIFT OF UNION 


To be alive spiritually man must have union with God and must 
be conscious of it. Apart from this union his religious life will be 
an empty drudgery, a mere imitation of true spirituality. But 
there is no formal technique whereby man can attain either the 
union or its conscious realization. God, the infinite life, cannot be 
grasped in forms. Because union with God is the goal, the very 
meaning, of human existence, its apparent absence shows a 
radical defect in our nature—a defect whose clear symptom is 
precisely our attempt to possess God in so many different ways. 
When the finite tries to embrace the infinite it must be radically 
selfish and proud, not to say ridiculous. Yet the very fact that we 
desire God so urgently is the sign that we are made for him, 
however twisted and perverted the desire may be. Here is the 
essence of our spiritual problem to which, as we have said, the 
Christian solution is the Incarnation. 

Throughout the history of Christianity the implications of the 
Incarnation have, relatively speaking, been so little understood 
and so consistently resisted that its true meaning is largely 
obscured. The inner meaning, the spiritual reality, which the 
Incarnation expresses, is of the essence of true spirituality 
wherever it may be found and under whatever external form it 
may be apprehended. The Christ is a cosmic and omnipresent 
reality which is always involved in higher religion under 
whatever name he may be known. For the real Name of Christ, 
the only Name under heaven whereby men may be saved, is not, 
of course, the literal composite of sounds J-E-S-U-S, but the 
spiritual and universal reality incarnate in Jesus. We have to see, 
then, why this reality is necessary for man’s union with God and 
what is its nature. 


I 


Human desire differs from animal desire in that it is at root 


insatiable. Man is characterized by a hunger for the infinite, for 
an eternity of life, love and joy which, whether he knows it or 
not, can be nothing other than God. Assuming that God exists, it 
will follow that God is man’s true end, for the appetite of a living 
organism shows its function. The stomach hungers for food 
because its function is to digest food. As physical taste and 
hunger may often be mistaken as to their true object, desiring 
nothing but caviar instead of a balanced diet, man is often 
mistaken as to the goal of his life, desiring wealth, power or 
physical pleasure instead of God. But his real appetite continues 
to be God, for which these lesser goals are always unsatisfactory 
substitutes. Those who set their hearts on finite goals are always 
discontented; they must always have more and more and more of 
what they desire, and failing this are frustrated and miserable. 
Profound content is only enjoyed by animals and primitives, in 
whom infinite hunger has not been awakened, and by the saints 
and mystics who have realized union with God. Thus it is that, 
known or unknown, God is the ultimate object of human desire, 
whether that desire is highly spiritual or grossly sensual. “Even in 
the midst of the lowest pleasures, the most abandoned voluptuary 
is still seeking God; nay more, as far as regards what is positive in 
his acts, that is to say in all that makes them an analogue of the 
true Love, it is God Himself who, in him and for him, seeks 
Himself.”1 

Assuming, further, that God is love, the goal of love is always 
union with its object. If man is therefore a creation and an object 
of the divine love, union with God is likewise the true end of man 
from the divine standpoint. From this same standpoint, the true 
end of all creatures—not man alone—is union with God, but only 
in man has the end become conscious. Only man can love God 
consciously; other creatures are drawn towards him blindly, and 
have no will in the matter. 

The conscious love of God is only possible for a free soul. In 
one sense man loves God inevitably because the finite naturally 
and necessarily hungers or moves towards the infinite. But by its 
own power it can never reach or embrace the infinite; however 
far you may climb and soar, you can never touch the sky. Though 
natural love (eras) points to God, he is beyond its reach. But man 
is capable of another kind of love which can reach to God, and 
this, following Nygren’s useful distinction, we will call agape.2 


The difference between the two is that whereas eros is a 
possessive hunger, a desire to swallow God, agape is the free, 
conscious and deliberate desire to give oneself to God. Man is 
capable of both eros and agape, for he desires both to magnify 
himself and to lose himself, to swallow the infinite and to plunge 
into the infinite. But such absolute self-surrender is a power of 
freedom alone. Love under compulsion is eros—never agape— 
which is why a successful marriage could never be contracted 
under the influence of an aphrodisiac. The consent for so deep a 
union of souls must be willing. Since, therefore, man is capable of 
agape, the type of union with God for which he is destined is of a 
peculiarly high order, a union of mutual love, a spiritual 
marriage. The union of man with God is to be voluntary on both 
sides. The union of lesser creatures with God is voluntary on 
God’s side alone. But eros cannot reach its goal without agape. 

When we say that man is made in the image of God, we mean 
that he is free. This is one of the deepest of human intuitions, and 
it can only be denied at the price of surrendering rational 
thought. If you argue that you have no freedom, you imply that 
you are compelled to argue in this way, and that thus your opinion 
is not a free and rational decision but a compulsive mechanism of 
no more significance than a nervous tic. All rational thought and 
action assume a relative freedom of will. 

The freedom to love God, to give oneself to God, involves also 
the freedom not to love. If the free soul refuses agape, it gives 
itself up to the domination of eros, which, though not evil in 
itself, becomes evil when chosen freely in preference to agape. 
Man falls when he chooses natural hunger instead of spiritual 
love as the principle of his life; he subjects his freedom, his very 
spirit, to the insatiable, ever-frustrated yearning of his natural 
soul, and becomes temporarily incapable of agape. For agape is 
God: agape in man is God in man, and once God is refused it is 
impossible to love God, since God can only be loved with his own 
power and his own love, dwelling in the human soul. 

All the problems, all the evil of human life rise from this refusal 
to love God, and we can no more say when this first happened 
than why it happened. We only know that we are now in a state 
of evil, that our freedom to love God is inhibited and is 
completely under the power of eros. We cannot possibly say why 
man chose not to love God because, when we ask this question, 


we are looking for a sufficient and necessary cause for the refusal. 
But the refusal was a free act, and in the realm of freedom there 
are no necessary causes because there is no necessity, no 
determinism. The principle of evil, the refusal to love God, is an 
entirely free, spontaneous and original action.3 To say that it is 
caused by pride is only to say that it is pride. 

This, of course, is not a solution to the problem of the origin of 
evil. There is no known solution to that problem, and speculation 
concerning it is of no practical consequence. To understand the 
origin of evil is not to be free from evil. The origin lies within 
ourselves, and we can no more seek it out and examine it than we 
can turn round and look straight into our own eyes. 

Our concern is with the present results of this refusal, and these 
are all too familiar. We know from experience that there is 
absolutely nothing which we ourselves can do to love God, to 
surrender ourselves with absolute trust and devotion into his 
hands. For every attempt we make to give ourselves to God is 
frustrated by a selfish motive. All our efforts at a spiritual life are 
prompted by self-interest. 

The original sin—pride, refusal to give ourselves to God, self- 
love, putting ourselves in God’s place at the center of the universe 
—immediately confronts us with the gulf, the opposition, 
between ourselves and all that is not ourselves. When man tries 
to usurp the throne of God, all creation, all other men, strive to 
drag him down. Thus in the Eden myth, as soon as Adam had 
eaten the fruit he became aware of his own loneliness and 
nakedness, and God pronounced upon him the curse which was 
simply a description of the inevitable conflict between self- 
centered man and nature. “Cursed is the ground for thy sake; in 
sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life; thorns also and 
thistles shall it bring forth to thee.” 

The consequence of pride is therefore fear, fear of losing one’s 
beloved self. God and nature seem to conspire together to deprive 
us of ourselves, the one out of love and the other out of 
obedience to God, and in fear of the loss we cling to ourselves 
with all our might, strangling the breath out of our bodies in the 
effort. But fear is suffering; fear threatens our pride; we would 
like to be without fear and suffering. The saints tell us that fear 
may be overcome by faith and love, by giving ourselves wholly to 
God. And so we try to follow their advice, but pride remains the 


motive. We give ourselves to God in order to protect ourselves, in 
order to flatter ourselves not only with the possession of God’s 
power and glory, but also of his love and humility. Ambition 
ceases to be worldly and becomes spiritual; but it is still 
ambition. 

Thus we find ourselves in a vicious circle. Our nature is selfish, 
and we can no more change this nature than we can lift ourselves 
up by our own belts. We are the “wrong man,” and as is said in a 
Chinese treatise on the spiritual life, “When the wrong man uses 
the right means, the right means work in the wrong way.”4 
Trying to escape fear, we run into the vicious circle of being 
afraid of fear—worrying because we worry because we worry; 
trying to escape pride we become proud of our humility; trying to 
escape sin we repent because guilt injures our self-conceit. Hence 
all our attempts at spiritual life end up as imitation and monkey 
business because we do not have the one thing that makes 
spiritual life possible and meaningful—union with God. And we 
do not have it because we have refused it. How are we to accept 
it? Why do we want to accept it? It always comes back to pride. 

Egoism is like trying to swim without relying on the water, 
endeavouring to keep afloat by tugging at your own legs; your 
whole body becomes tense, and you sink like a stone. Swimming 
requires a certain relaxation, a certain giving of yourself to the 
water, and similarly spiritual life demands a relaxation of the soul 
to God. Thus Hindu philosophy speaks of egoism as sankhocha, a 
contraction or tension in the soul, and if it is hard to relax the 
superficial tensions of jumpy nerves and insomnia, it is 
impossible to relax by any contrivance of our own a tension 
which grips the very core of our being. This entire state of 
inescapable selfishness, blended of pride and consequent fear, this 
total inability to give ourselves without reservation to God is 
what the Church terms the fallen state of man—bondage under 
the sin of Adam. Those who have developed any profound degree 
of self-knowledge are so acutely aware of this predicament that it 
brings them often to utter despair. 

The formal teaching of the Church is that we are released from 
the sin of Adam by the Incarnation, which is the assumption of 
our human nature by the Logos, God the Son, who as Jesus of 
Nazareth lives a life and dies a death wherein this human nature 
is perfectly surrendered to the divine will. As a result of this 


perfect surrender, the humanity of Jesus is transfigured and 
wholly informed by the Godhead, and, united with Life itself, it 
rises from the grave and ascends into heaven. The Incarnation is 
of effect for us men because Christ’s human nature is our nature, 
and because Christ introduced a new life, a new power, into that 
nature which made it capable of perfect surrender to God. We 
become possessors of that power by incorporation into the new 
human race which he began, the race which is his own divinized 
humanity extended in his Mystical Body the Church. In Christ, 
God did for man what man could not do for himself: God as man 
offered our human nature to the Father in a perfect sacrifice 
which effected the union (At-one-ment) of man with God, making 
us heirs of his own eternal life and his adopted sons. Generally 
speaking, the modern mind finds statements such as these almost 
wholly meaningless. They seem to bring a mythological 
complexity into the spiritual life which, even though it may have 
some deep meaning, is more of a nuisance than a help, and to 
involve the study and acceptance of a mass of historical details 
which we are in no position to verify. Surely, if God is in fact love 
and wills our salvation with his whole being, he could have 
contrived our redemption in a less tortuous way. 

It is obvious, however, that in the past this same story has been 
of the highest significance for innumerable souls. The reason, as 
we have seen, is that at certain stages of his development and at 
certain levels of his nature man can only grasp spiritual reality in 
terms of mythos. But when the time comes for him to understand 
the naked reality behind the symbol, the symbol itself appears 
confusing and unessential. When, however, the inner reality is 
seen, the symbol again appears logical and meaningful although 
its function changes. We have therefore to discover the meaning 
of the Incarnation. 


II 


There are two ways of reaching the house next door. One is to 
travel all the way round the globe; the other is to walk a few feet. 
There are two ways of finding the heavens. One is to journey 
upwards and upwards in quest of an ever-receding firmament; the 
other is to realize that here on earth you are already in the 


heavens and that our planet is in fact one of the company of 
celestial bodies. It is easy to get lost on the way round the world 
to the house next door, and easier still to fall into despair at the 
hopeless task of climbing to an infinite height. These two ways of 
approach are exemplified again and again in the history of man’s 
spiritual life. There have been religions such as Primitive 
Buddhism, Neo-Platonism, certain forms of Yoga, Gnosticism, and 
the like which have stressed the arduous ascent of man to the 
divine state. These are religions of eros, of man’s infinite hunger 
for God. Their ideal state is normally an attainment of identity 
with the ultimate Reality in which the soul, as it were, swallows 
God. On the other hand, there are religions which stress the given- 
ness of union with God, and these conceive the spiritual life as the 
acceptance and affirmation of a present reality. Such are religions 
of agape, religiones naturaliter Christianae, and include many forms 
of Mahayana Buddhism and of Hinduism, early Taoism, and, of 
course, Christianity itself. Where these religions tend to a 
pantheistic theology they contain no explicit statement of the 
given-ness of union with God since pantheism implies that union 
with God is necessary and automatic. They do, however, state 
that union does not have to be attained but realized, because it is 
a present reality from the very beginning. In other words, they 
have experienced the love of God for man, but lack a theology to 
express and interpret it. 

Quite frequently the first type of religion turns into the second. 
The soul striving to attain the divine state by its own efforts falls 
into total despair, and suddenly there dawns upon it with a great 
illuminative shock the realization that the divine state simply IS, 
here and now, and does not have to be attained. For example, the 
Zen Buddhism of China and Japan has produced an entire 
technique of meditation involving these two phases, and terms 
the sudden shock wherewith the first turns into the second satori, 
or sudden awakening.s The Incarnation, the coming of Christ, is 
satori on the plane of human history, the sudden change from the 
old order of striving for redemption through obedience to the 
law, to the new order of redemption through the gift of divine 
grace. 


While all things were in quiet silence, and that night was in the midst 
of her swift course, thine Almighty Word, O Lord, leaped down out of 
the royal throne, alleluia.« 


In the midst of the soul’s dark night of despair at the frustration 
of eros, there dawns the agape of God—the realization that 
although the soul is powerless to attain union with God, God out 
of unchangeable and infinite love has given union with himself to 
the soul. 

The meaning of the Incarnation, therefore, is simply that we do 
not have to attain union with God. Man does not have to climb to 
the infinite and become God, because, out of love, the infinite 
God descends to the finite and becomes man. Despite man’s 
refusal of God, despite his pride, his fear, his helpless and 
hopeless involvement in the vicious circle of sin, God’s nature 
remains unalterably love—the agape which consists in giving 
oneself wholly and without reservation to the beloved. Therefore 
the eternal Word, the Logos, becomes flesh, making our nature 
his nature; he assumes our limitations, suffers our pains and dies 
our death. More than this, he bears the burden of our sins: that is, 
he remains in union with us even though we crucify him and spit 
on him; he continues to dwell within us and to offer, or sacrifice, 
our lives to God even though we commit every imaginable form 
of depravity. In short, God has wedded himself to humanity, has 
united his divine essence with our inmost being “for better for 
worse, for richer for poorer, in sickness and in health” for all 
eternity, even though we elect to be damned. 


If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there; 
If I make my bed in hell, behold, thou are there also. 


All that remains for us to do is to say, “Yes—Amen” to this 
tremendous fact, and this is still within the power of our fallen 
nature. Our motive for saying it, however perverted by pride and 
fear, makes not the least difference, because the fact is the fact: 
we have been given union with God whether we like it or not, 
want it or not, know it or not. Our flesh has become his flesh, and 
we cannot jump out of our own skins. And once we realize the 
futility of our pride, that we can neither ascend to God nor, by 
reason of pride, prevent his descent to us, the proud core of 
egoism is simply dissolved—overwhelmed by God’s love. The 
function of Christian morality and spirituality is not to earn or 
deserve this gift of eternal life, but rather to appreciate and 
express it. The saint is holy not to attain union with God, but to 
give thanks for it. For this union is not, as in pantheism, a 


necessary and automatic and inherent fact of our being; it is an 
entirely free, spontaneous and unnecessary gift of the living and 
loving God, since the heart of Being is not law and mechanism 
but life. Hell consists not in being deprived of union, but in wilful 
failure to appreciate it; in a state of soul so perverse that the love 
and the gift of union are so repulsive that they appear not as the 
light of glory but as a terrible and consuming fire. The flames of 
hell are, in fact, the inescapable love of God.7 

This truth of our given union with God is precisely the “good 
news,” the Gospel, of Christianity, however much it may have 
been weakened and obscured through theological timidity and 
obscurity in the passage of time. “As many as received (ie., 
accepted) him,” says St. John in the prologue to his Gospel, “to 
them gave he authority to be the children (or, sons) of God.” The 
phrase son or child of God does not mean creature of God but one 
who is of the same nature as God, in St. Peter’s words, “partakers 
of the divine nature.” Still more plainly is the nature of the gift 
described in St. John’s report of Christ’s prayer at the Last 
Supper: “That they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in me, and 
I in thee, that they also may be one in us.... And the glory which 
thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be one even as 
we are one: I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made 
perfect in one; and that the world may know that thou hast sent 
me, and hast loved them as thou hast loved me... for thou 
lovedst me before the foundation of the world.... And I have 
given them knowledge of thy Name, and will make it known, that 
the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in 
them.”s 

That nothing can be done to escape from this union is the 
meaning of St. Paul’s celebrated words: “For I am persuaded that 
neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, 
nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor 
any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of 
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”9 The gift of union with 
God, known as the indwelling Holy Spirit who makes his temple 
in our bodies, was the major source of the tremendous 
enthusiasm of the Primitive Church—an enthusiasm lacking in 
our own day because the whole force of this truth has been 
obscured. For so many centuries Church teaching has said little or 
nothing about the gift of union with God to each individual soul 


and body, that the Christian religion has become a horribly timid 
and watered-down affair. We are given only “grace,” considered 
as a somewhat arbitrary hand-out of an impersonal power for 
goodness from a distant deity. Or else the union is watered down 
by distribution, as when it is said that it is given only to the 
Church as a whole, rather than to each individual member of the 
Church—in absolute contradiction to Christ’s clear teaching that 
every individual soul is an object of the Father’s love. “Are not 
two sparrows sold for a farthing? And one of them shall not fall 
on the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your 
head are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore; ye are of more 
value than many sparrows.”10 Salvation, heaven, eternal life has 
been discussed as something to be bought and sold at the price of 
so much virtue and merit, something which you may possibly 
“get” in the future because, propitiated by Christ’s sacrifice, God 
has at last agreed to sell it to you for a stiff fee. Christianity has 
thus degenerated into a system of morality with remote 
eschatological sanctions, and in practice is therefore a religion 
largely bereft of joy and power. 

The Incarnation is of effect for each and all, in every time and 
place, because as an historical and local event it is the projection 
into time and space of an eternal and universal reality. It occurs 
not only at a distance of two thousand years in Palestine, but 
within all human nature, all human beings, past, present and 
future. In the words of St. John’s prologue, the Logos “was the 
true light which, coming into the world, enlightens every man. He 
was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world 
knew him not.” For this reason, whenever and wherever men 
have known or glimpsed the gift of union with God, the power of 
the Incarnation has been at work. The predisposition and action 
of God towards humanity is ever the same, for his nature does not 
change, and an event in time and space does not alter his attitude 
to us; it simply reveals his attitude. B.C. and A.D. the grace and 
power of the Incarnation was always available, the truth of given 
union with God was always true. But to be communicated fully to 
creatures with spatial and temporal minds it had to be projected 
into a spatial and temporal event, and as such it had, of necessity, 
to be projected into some particular place and time. 

The vast majority of human beings have always had very 
concrete and childlike minds, and there are levels at which even 


the most highly intelligent people are still children. To get an 
abstract, universal or spiritual truth into the understanding of a 
child one must make it concrete, and the best way to do so is to 
illustrate it with a story. Because God intends the gift of union 
and its realization for all men, and not merely for an esoteric 
elite, he therefore embodies the gift in a story, a mythos, which is 
acted out in real life—in Palestine under the governership of 
Pontius Pilate. Universal realities are hard to perceive because of 
the vastness of their extent; to be brought to our attention they 
must be localized. The air is all around us, but we do not notice it 
until the wind blows. 

The Christ, the gift of union, was made concrete flesh for a still 
deeper reason: not only that it might be grasped by our concrete 
minds, but also to demonstrate that union with God is given to us 
as material as well as spiritual beings, to the body as well as to 
the soul. Physical life is therefore not at all inconsistent with 
spiritual life. Almost without exception the religions of eros have 
despised the body, and Christianity has despised the body to the 
extent that it has been contaminated with Gnosticism, Neo- 
Platonism and Manichaeism, to the extent that Christians have 
resisted the Incarnation and fallen back under the spell of eros. 
For the infinite hunger of eros eventually finds the body an 
intolerable limitation. When physical pride and ambition give 
place to spiritual pride, man longs to be the infinite and tries to 
throw off the chains of matter. This is why all eros-mysticism is 
world-despising and has no place in a sacramental and 
incarnational religion. 

But God, being without any trace of pride, loves the material 
element which he has created, and finds it in no way inconsistent 
with his spiritual dignity and purity to stoop to unite himself with 
the earth, with flesh and blood. Thus to accept the gift of union 
we do not have to cease to be men and become angels; we do not 
have to throw off our material limitations, denying our senses 
and bodies, for the Word was made flesh and our bodies are 
temples of the Holy Spirit. 

This strongly materialistic aspect of Christianity has always 
been a stumbling block to those who prided themselves in having 
“purely spiritual” religions, and, as we have seen, this kind of 
pride has appeared so repeatedly in the history of mystical 
religion that in many minds mysticism is necessarily associated 


with it. But if mysticism is the consciousness of union with God, 
this is in no way inconsistent with physical life if it is true that 
God has given himself to our flesh.i1 

These two essential principles of the Incarnation—the 
localization of the universal and the union of God with matter— 
are continued as a witness to and extension of the Incarnation in 
the sacramental system of the Church. The whole mystery of the 
Mass, for example, the intimate union of the Godhead with 
simple bread and wine, revolves around these two truths, and is 
of course despised as a “materialistic” and superstitious rite by 
those who do not appreciate God’s love of the material world. 
Bread and wine are employed in the Mass because they are, or 
used to be, our staple food and drink, the sources of our material 
life, and thus the representative symbols of that life. By the 
Incarnation this life, together with the pain and death involved in 
it, is made one with God and taken up into heaven. Thus the 
Mass is an anamnesis, a re-calling from eternity to the present, not 
only of Christ’s death and passion, but also of his “glorious 
resurrection and ascension.” The Body of Christ, the Host and the 
Church, is his risen and ascended Body. 

For the gift of union with God means that our mental and 
physical space-time life is given the dimension of eternity. Death 
is the end of our life in terms of space and time, just as the head 
of a hammer is an end of the hammer in terms of space. But as 
the hammer endures through time, with both ends present, so, 
despite our “ends”—our birth and death in time, we endure 
through eternity because God has added that dimension to our 
lives. It is the gift of his own eternal nature. Thus our eternal life, 
our ascension with Christ into heaven, does not lie in the future 
any more than the temporal endurance of the hammer increases 
its spatial length. We confuse the whole doctrine of eternal life 
when we speak of it as “future life.” Eternity is not unending 
time; it is an indestructible present, for Christ did not say, “Before 
Abraham was, I was,” but, “Before Abramham was, I am.” 
Material death and _ resurrection involves, therefore, the 
translation of consciousness into an eternal present, not into an 
everlasting future. In this state the pain and death of temporal life 
are seen sub specie aeternitatis, that is, transfigured by divine 
understanding, somewhat as in music chords that would be 
dissonant in isolation are woven into a perfect harmonic 


sequence. 

In sum, therefore, Christ is the gift of union with God to 
humanity in general and to human beings in particular. He is 
born in us; he lives in us a life of perfect abandonment to the 
divine will; he dies in us; and in and with us he rises and ascends 
into heaven, into the eternal life of the Divine Trinity. Only 
through realization of this truth as a present and already 
accomplished fact can our outward and conscious lives reflect the 
inner process, which reflection is the life of Christian holiness— 
the fruit, not the cause, of union with God. 


Ill 


It is notorious that scripture can be quoted to prove almost 
anything, and it may be asked what solid authority exists for 
maintaining this particular view of the meaning of the 
Incarnation and the doctrine of God which it involves. Setting 
aside, for the moment, certain theological and metaphysical 
problems,i2 it is sufficient to say here that it is in line with the 
deepest mystical and spiritual insights which man has been given, 
and that it involves a vision of the divine love and humility 
which human thought can hardly surpass. If God is less loving 
than this, we have conceived an idea of God more noble than the 
reality, which would make us, quite illogically, the moral 
superiors of God. 

The fact of a given union with God, given without respect to 
virtue or holiness, has been the central and secret joy of many a 
great mystic, Christian and non-Christian, in all times and places. 
The profoundly mystical writings of the Byzantine Fathers speak 
of it constantly in the boldest language. “The Logos,” wrote St. 
Gregory of Nyssa, “was already Christ and Lord. He that is 
assumed (into membership of the Church) becomes it.”i3 Or in 
the words of St. Simeon Neotheologos, “We become Christ’s limbs 
or members, and Christ becomes our members.... Unworthy 
though I be, my hand and foot are Christ. I move my hand, and 
my hand is wholly Christ, for God’s divinity is united inseparably 
to me. I move my foot, and lo! it glows like God himself.”14 And 
again, “I thank thee O God that thou, who reignest over all, art 
now in very truth and unchangeably one spirit with me,” 


following St. Paul’s “He that is joined unto the Lord is one 
spirit.”15 

The point could hardly be made more strongly than in the 
following from St. John of Damascus: 


But we hold that to the whole of human nature the whole essence of 
the Godhead was united.... He in his fulness took upon himself me in my 
fulness, and was united whole to whole that he might in his grace 
bestow salvation on the whole man. For what has not been taken (ie., 
assumed to the divine nature) cannot be healed.... Further, the mind has 
become the seat of the divinity united with it in in subsistence Just as is 
evidently the case with the body too.16 


Parallel sayings on the given fact of union with God from the 
mystics of the Western Church are familiar enough, and so 
numerous that it will be sufficient to quote as typical the 
following from Ruysbroeck: 


But our nature, forasmuch as it is indeed like unto God but in itself is 
creature, receives the impress of its Eternal Image passively. This is that 
nobleness which we possess by nature in the essential unity of our spirit, 
where it is united to God according to nature. This neither makes us 
holy, nor blessed, for all men, whether good or evil, possess it within 
themselves; but it is certainly the first cause of all holiness and 
blessedness.17 


But throughout Christian history two fears have always 
tempered the boldness of this kind of language and held this 
sublime truth under a cloud. One was the fear of pantheism, of 
abolishing the ontological distinction between Creator and 
creature, and the other the fear of presumption, of laying claim to 
salvation apart from holiness of life. Of the first, we need only say 
here that the distinction between a given union and a necessary 
union of man with God renders this view entirely different from 
pantheism. The second fear is in fact a false humility; 
presumption itself lies hidden under the fear of presumption. 

The truth is that the gift of eternal life is an insufferable blow 
to our spiritual pride, because the ego desires at all cost to be 
able to claim some of the credit for its own salvation. Even in 
avowedly pantheistic religions this pride sometimes manifests 
itself in attempts to conceal or soften the fact of union with God. 
Thus the ego increases the distance between itself and God in 
order to flatter itself with the thought of bridging that distance by 


its own efforts. By every conceivable subtlety it ignores the gift of 
union in order to have the satisfaction of manufacturing its own 
union with God. 

Three things must therefore be emphasized: 

(1) There is an infinite natural distance between man and God. 
Being finite, and also fallen, man cannot possibly shorten this 
distance by his own power. However high he may climb by his 
own efforts, he does not begin to approach the holiness and 
transcendence of God. 

(2) Because God is love, he himself annuls this infinite distance 
and gives his eternal life to man without regard to man’s moral 
and spiritual attainments. “For he maketh his sun to shine upon 
the evil and upon the good, and sendeth his rain upon the just 
and upon the unjust.” Or in the words of St. John, “This is love, 
not that we loved God but that he loved us.” 

(3) Holiness of life is the consequence and appreciation of this 
truth, and brings it to full realization. Of course it is possible, and 
almost inevitable, that one takes pride in appreciating the gift, 
but this pride is eventually dissolved in the realization that the 
gift simply 1s, pride or no pride, appreciation or no appreciation. 
Naturally, however, a gift not appreciated is a gift not enjoyed; it 
is of no good to you, and, as the Lord’s Body received unworthily 
in Communion, works only to your condemnation. “For God sent 
not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the 
world through him might be saved.... And this is the 
condemnation: that light is come into the world, and men loved 
darkness rather than light.” 

Human freedom has still, therefore, its part to play in the 
scheme of redemption, not as freedom to attain union with God 
but as freedom to appreciate, affirm and realize it. In 
contradistinction to quietism, human action has also its part, not, 
however, as effort to earn the divine state, but as effort to express 
it and give thanks for its bestowal. 

All this is simply to say that the motive power of any vital 
religion is the divine love. Christianity exists to reveal that love 
to the world in all its overwhelming and almost outrageous 
fulness. Only by contemplation and realization of the love which 
is God can we have any love for him and for our neighbours, just 
as a mirror has brilliance—power to reflect light—only when 
turned towards the sun so that it receives the image of the sun 


within itself. It is absolutely useless for the Church to moralize, to 
deplore the sinfulness and irreligion of the world, to rant and 
rave about God’s wrath and judgement like the prophets of old, 
and summon men with a solemn voice to return to religion or be 
damned, unless it attends to its principal business, which is to 
extend the Incarnation and reveal the love of God. Moralistic 
bombinations never have effected and never will effect in the 
human soul anything other than a temporary conversion through 
fear. Had they any lasting value it would have been enough for 
God to send Amos and Jeremiah with the implementation of 
Sennacherib and Nebuchadrezzar; there would have been no need 
for Christ. God’s judgement of the world is primarily and 
essentially his love, which is poured out with such extravagant 
generosity that whoever fails to respond to it is simply self- 
condemned by contrast. 

Nor will the revelation of the divine love create the least 
appetite in hungry souls if interpreted as this distant well- 
wishing, this simple opportunity to buy our way into a remote 
heaven, this vague extension of a “hand of fellowship” from 
eternity to help us to be good. Nor will it be sufficiently revealed 
in elaborate, archaic and unexplained symbolisms about our 
incorporation into the Mystical Body of the Church whose Head is 
Christ,is about being partakers of his Body and Blood, about 
being infused by divine graces as if they were so many fitful 
winds, about becoming children of God as if we were as distant 
from him as the subdued and timidly respectful offspring of the 
legendary paterfamilias of the Victorian era. 

Love, in the divine sense, is the giving of one’s whole being to 
another, and when we say that God is love we mean that he gives 
his entire infinite Self to every single object of his love, to every 
creature that he has made. Of course the gift is received in 
varying degrees by different creatures as the light of the sun, shed 
with equal brilliance upon all parts of the earth, is reflected more 
perfectly by a mirror than by a brick. Man can reflect God’s love 
more perfectly than an animal. To reflect it with absolute 
perfection, one would have to be God.i9 But while the degrees of 
reception differ, the gift is always infinite in fulness. To man and 
to atom, to star-cloud and to earth, to sun and to snow crystal, to 
mountain and to worm, to sage and to fool, to saint and to sinner, 
God, to whom size and number offer no obstacle, gives eternal 


and inescapable union with his very Self. For in God to exist, to 
create, to love and to redeem are all one pure and simple act; 
they are himself. And the gift of union with God’s own Self is the 
Logos, the eternal Word, incarnate in history and incarnate in the 
souls and bodies of men as Christ. 

“God, who is rich in mercy, by reason of his great love 
wherewith he has loved us even when we were dead through our 
sins, made us alive together with Christ, by whose grace you have 
been saved, and raised us up with him, and made us sit with him 
in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus: that in the eternal ages to 
come he might show the immeasurable riches of his grace in 
kindness towards us in Christ Jesus. For by grace you have been 
saved through faith; and this is not your own doing—it is the gift 
of God.”20 


1 Etienne Gilson, The Spirit of Mediaeval Philosophy. London, 1936, p. 274. 


2 The use of the terms eros and agape to denote these two kinds of love is 
purely modern. Tn both classical and koine Greek the words do not carry this 
distinction, and in the Johannine literature agape is used of both types of love. 
Cf. John 3:16 and 1 John 2:15. For the full discussion see Nygren, Agape and 
Eros. 3 vols. London, 1932, 1938 and 1939. 


3 It is analogous to God’s own creative action, since man’s freedom is a 
delegation of the very freedom of God. Evil is an act which the creature 
commits with God’s own power. He must use God to refuse God. 


4 Jung and Wilhelm, The Secret of the Golden Flower. London and New York, 
1931, p. 70. 


5 D. T. Suzuki has reproduced many interesting first-hand accounts of this 
process in his Essays in Zen Buddhism, vol. ii. London, 1933. Essay on “The 
Koan Exercise,” pp. 1-165. 


6 Antiphon on the Magnificat at Vespers on Sunday within the Octave on the 
Nativity. 

7 This is the clear implication of St. Catherine of Genoa’s eschatological 
doctrine. See von Hiigel’s Mystical Element of Religion. London, 1927, vol. i, pp. 
281-294. But see below, pp. 243-244. 


s John 17:21-26. The “glory” which Christ has given them is of course the 
shekinah. which in the later Judaism of the time of Jesus had come to mean 
something very close to the divine essence. “It does not indicate the radiance 
or brilliance, but the central cause of the radiance.” Marshall in HDB, vol. iv, art. 
Shekinah. Note also that they have been given God’s love which in Johannine 
theology is God himself, and further that they have been given knowledge of 
the Name of God, which, in later Judaism, again signified God himself. To 
know the Name of God is to share in the divine power and life. 


9 Romans 8:38-39. 
10 Matthew 10:29-31. 


11 The materialism of Christianity is of course quite different from the 
supposed “materialism” of modern civilization, which is in fact not materialism 
at all but sensationalism—the quest for psychic thrills. The modern world is, on 
the contrary, highly contemptuous of matter and treats this holy substance 
disgracefully. It indulges in vast material waste, covers the earth with hideous 
material structures, and eats, dresses, works and lives with a minimum of 
material refinement. It should be noted that the real alcoholic, for example, 
drinks for the sake of a psychic stimulation and not because he enjoys the taste 
of his liquor, which he swallows at a gulp. True materialists, such as the 
Chinese, admire a good drinker but despise a mere “soaker.” 


12 On which see below, Part Two, Chapter I, pp. 127-147. 

13 Antirrh. ady. Apollin., 53. 

14 Divine Hymns of Love, quoted in Orthodox Spirituality. Anon. London, 1945. 
15 1 Corinthians 6:17. 

16 De Fide Orthodoxa, iii, 6. 


17 Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage, ii, 57. Trs. Dom P. Wynschenk in his 
John of Ruysbroeck, London, 1916. For the whole passage and others of a 
similar nature from Western mystics, see below, pp. 133-136. Von Hiigel, 
Mystical Element vol. ii, pp. 151-152, quotes the following interesting passage 
attributed to St. Thomas Aquinas: “Already in this life we ought continuously 
to enjoy God, as a thing most fully our own, in all our works.... Great is the 
blindness and exceeding the folly of many souls that are ever seeking God, 
continuously sighing after God, and frequently desiring God: whilst, all the 
time, they are themselves the tabernacles of the living God ... since their soul 
is the seat of God, in which he continuously reposes. Now who but a fool 
deliberately seeks a tool which he possesses under lock and key? or who can 
use and profit by an instrument which he is seeking? or who can draw comfort 
from food for which he hungers, but which he does not relish at leisure? Like 
unto all this is the life of many a just soul, which ever seeks God and never 
tarries to enjoy him; and all the works of such an one are, on this account, less 
perfect.” De Beatitudine, iii, 3. 

1s While formerly somewhat of a cliché, the term “Mystical Body” is now 
being given intelligible content by the Catholic liturgical reformers, and to 
many Catholics it is now a meaningful expression, though the same can hardly 
be said in other quarters. 

19 As are the members of the Holy Trinity, the Son and the Holy Spirit 
reflecting the Father’s love completely and eternally. 


20 Ephesians 2:48. 


Ill. THE REALIZATION OF UNION 


To be told that union with God is given to us here and now is one 
thing; to realize it in experience is quite another. Without 
realization this truth can neither be an effective force in human 
life nor yet a statement of real meaning. To say that the 
Incarnation symbolizes the gift of union with God is in fact to 
interpret one symbol by another and _ perhaps’ more 
understandable symbol. All theological statements, sacramental 
forms and divine revelations are symbols having one object—to 
lead us to the actual knowledge of God, of the union itself, and it 
must be remembered that the very terms “God” and “union” are 
themselves symbolic. But these ideas and terms denote a reality 
which defies verbal description and yet is none the less offered 
for our experience by the love of God. 

The very fact of mystical experience belies the oft repeated 
assertion that human consciousness can never rise above the level 
of formal religious symbolism; as is maintained by those who 
hold an exclusively sacramental viewpoint in religion. Thus in the 
one-sided sacramentalism of popular mediaeval and much 
modern Catholicism, mystical experience is regarded as an 
abnormal freak—a special and extracurricular grace vouchsafed 
quite arbitrarily to a chosen few.1 This viewpoint, however, is 
perhaps to be expected in periods when the religious 
consciousness is passing through the stages of infancy and 
adolescence, for then indeed, save for some rare souls, the 
symbolic mode of understanding is the only possible way. But in 
later stages of the religious consciousness the mystical approach 
becomes not only generally possible but generally necessary—not 
by reason of any growth in sanctity, but by reason of a natural 
growth of the soul. Christianity as a complete or catholic religion 
is both sacramental and mystical. When the sacramental side of 
religion is followed exclusively, there comes a time when it 
obscures truth instead of revealing it. 

Not only is this true of the sacramental aspect of religion in its 
strict sense, but also of its dogmatic, doctrinal and historical 


aspects—of its whole symbolic structure. For all these figures and 
images of God are means and not ends. They exist to give us 
sufficient intellectual and emotional courage, sufficient faith of 
the will, to venture beyond figures and images to Reality itself, 
and at first sight this realm beyond symbols is empty, arid and 
terrifying, an unaccustomed territory where all familiar 
landmarks are left behind. Plunged into it against their will, souls 
for whom the symbolic aspect of religion is especially dear refer 
to it as a Dark Night, a Valley of the Shadow, wherein one 
experiences bitter desolation and comes close to absolute despair. 

Thus the Dark Night is a recurrent feature of later Catholic 
mysticism where maturing souls who still cling hard to symbolic 
religion are forced beyond it against their will. Deprived of 
intellectual and emotional consolations they feel deserted by God, 
and some even believed that they were lost souls. Significantly, 
Dom John Chapman points out that the Dark Night often involves 
temptations against faith, for what is actually happening is that 
the Church’s dogmatic and doctrinal symbols of God are losing 
force, are being shattered until and in order that their inner 
content may be known. But in types of Christianity where the 
mystical element is better understood, such as the Byzantine, and 
the late classical spirituality of St. Augustine and St. Gregory the 
Great, the symptoms of the Dark Night are found hardly at all.2 
The approach of the “divine darkness,” the “cloud of unknowing,” 
is expected and welcomed. 

There is a general misunderstanding to the effect that a 
spirituality which passes beyond formally religious symbols is of 
necessity acosmistic, despising form and matter, finding the 
contemplation of God wholly incompatible with any interest in 
sense experience as well as with theology, philosophy, and even 
creative morality and social action. While there have been 
pseudo-mystics who adopted this view, it is well known that truly 
great contemplatives such as Plotinus and St. Teresa of Avila 
were souls with a high degree of wisdom and skill in the 
management of material affairs and of practical charity towards 
others. The mystical state is no more incompatible with form and 
matter than a mirror is incompatible with the images which it 
reflects. The mirror transcends, is other than, its images, and for 
this very reason is able to reflect them perfectly and clearly. As 
Eckhart says, “If my eye is to discern colour, it must itself be free 


from colour.” 


I 


God is the most obvious thing in the world. He is absolutely self- 
evident—the simplest, clearest and closest reality of life and 
consciousness. We are only unaware of him because we are too 
complicated, for our vision is darkened by the complexity of 
pride. We seek him beyond the horizon with our noses lifted high 
in the air, and fail to see that he lies at our very feet. We flatter 
ourselves in premeditating the long, long journey we are going to 
take in order to find him, the giddy heights of spiritual progress 
we are going to scale, and all the time are unaware of the truth 
that “God is nearer to us than we are to ourselves.” We are like 
birds flying in quest of the air, or men with lighted candles 
searching through the darkness for fire. 

The self-evidence of God is the result of his love, and is one 
with the gift of union with himself which he bestows upon us. For 
God is not niggardly in his self-revelation; he creates us to know 
him, and short of actual compulsion does everything possible to 
present himself to our consciousness. In saying that God gives us 
union with himself here and now, we are saying also that here 
and now he exposes himself right before our eyes. In this very 
moment we are looking straight at God, and he is so clear that for 
us complex human beings he is peculiarly hard to see. To know 
him we have to simplify ourselves, and the mind is so dominated 
by the complexity of pride that it will resort to every conceivable 
subtlety to resist and avoid a truth so wholly simple. 

God and union with God are Reality; nothing is more real, 
more concrete, more actual, and more present. At the same time, 
Reality is infinitely alive. It, he, cannot be grasped in any finite 
form, whether physical, mental or emotional. Therefore, as long 
as we try to grasp God, we shall never realize him. Life itself, as 
we experience it moment by moment, proceeding as it does 
directly from God, is the perfect analogy of this truth, for to grasp 
life is to kill it, or rather, to miss it, and more than ever is this 
true of God—the Life of life. Pluck a flower, and it dies. Take up 
water from the stream, and it flows no longer. Pull down the 
blind, but the sunbeam is not trapped in the room. Snatch the 


wind in a bag, and you have only stagnant air. This is the root of 
every trouble: man loves life, but the moment he tries to hold on 
to it he misses it. The fact that things change and move and flow 
is their very liveliness, and the harder man hangs on to his life, 
the sooner he dies of worry. 

Religion, as it is generally practised, is simply an attempt to 
hang on to life and the still more lively mystery which informs it 
—God. Hence religion as generally practised is idolatry. God 
cannot be held in theologies; theism, deism, pantheism—none of 
them can grasp his truth. Nor can states of mind and feeling 
contain him; ecstasy, rapture, quiet, samadhi—these are only the 
secondary and unessential effects of his presence. Our various 
intellectual and emotional idols, our doctrines, holy books, 
sacraments, religious feelings, creeds and churches, are of use so 
long as they are understood as approximating and pointing to 
God. But when we try to possess him within them, they must 
sooner or later become millstones about our necks.3 

God, and the living creation which proceeds from his hands, 
cannot be possessed. To enjoy and to know Reality we must let go 
of it and realize that it possesses us. Beauty grasped turns into 
pain, for God is the source both of the beauty and of the pain of 
life. In its beauty he calls us to him; in the pain which comes 
from grasping he warns us that we cannot come to him in a 
possessive spirit, because in so doing we shall miss the very thing 
that we desire. To clutch the splendour of flame is to be burned. 
To enjoy anything living, whether it be fire, water, air, earth, 
flesh and blood, our own lives, or God himself, we must let go of 
it and let it be free to be itself. This is true detachment. 

This is why there is no method, no formal technique, for 
attaining the mystical state and realizing union with God. For a 
method is an attempt to possess, and has its origin in pride and 
fear. And as there is nothing that we can do to realize God, we 
must not fall into the error of quietism, which is trying to realize 
God by doing nothing; for inaction is merely an indirect form of 
action; it is trying to possess God by doing nothing instead of by 
doing something, and neither course will succeed since he cannot 
be possessed at all. 

Apparently this leaves us in a hopeless and impossible position. 
Doing something about it is wrong, and doing nothing about it is 
wrong. Seeing thus far and no further we fall into desolation, and 


undergo the experience of impasse, of reaching a blind alley. 

But we have to return to this point: the Reality which we term 
union with God simply ts, whether we realize it or not, whether 
we are doing something about it or nothing about it. Any attempt 
to grasp it, by action or by inaction, suggests that it is not 
absolutely present. The moment we look for union with God, we 
imply that we do not already have it, and this is true even when 
we look for it by not looking. 


Like unto space it knows no boundaries; 

Yet it is right here with us ever retaining its serenity and fulness; 
It is only when you seek it that you lose. 

You cannot take hold of it, nor can you get rid of it; 

While you can do neither, it goes on its own way; 

You remain silent and it speaks; you speak and it is silent; 


The great gate of charity is wide open with no obstructions whatever before 
it.4 


The focal point of Reality is now—this present moment, this 
elusive image of eternity, so small that it has no temporal length 
and yet so long that we can never escape from it. Here in this 
present moment life is most lively; here alone do we really exist. 
The past is dead; the future as yet is not. The moment assumes a 
hundred different forms—moments of pleasure, moments of pain, 
moments of elation, moments of depression, moments of quiet, 
moments of agitation; but it will not stay, it cannot be grasped, in 
any of its forms. This moment is our life, but the more we try to 
hold it, the faster it slips away. We look for it and cannot find it 
because it is too small to see, too slippery to hold, and yet this is 
where we are given union with God. If we do not discover it in 
this moment, we shall never discover it. 


O all ye who thirst! Know that you have not far to seek for the 
fountain of living waters; it springs close to you in the present moment. 
... The present moment is the manifestation of the Name of God and the 
coming of his Kingdom.s 


But while we cannot grasp the moment, arresting that flow of 
life which we call time, there remains the fact that we cannot get 
away from it. It seems, as we cling to it, to slip away, but what 
slips away is only its outward form. In reality it stays with us. 


However hard we may fight to retain the past or to hurry on into 
the future, we cannot get out of the present moment. The more 
we try to hold it, the more we fail to perceive that it holds us. 
The moment always carries us in its embrace, and wherever we 
go or whatever we do, it cannot be escaped. To understand this is 
simplicity itself. 

And here is the perfect analogy of our union with God—a 
reality which possesses and holds us as surely and as presently as 
the moment, a reality which in some sense is this moment. For 
the moment is not its forms; it is not space; it is not time; it is 
infinitesimal and thus infinite; it is Reality, Being, the eternal 
presence of God. In this moment we live and move and have our 
being, and nowhere else. What we have to realize, therefore, is 
not the getting of union with God, but the not being able to get 
away from it. It is in, it is this Eternal Now, wherein God so 
lovingly holds us. 


Whither shall I go from thy spirit? Or whither shall I flee from thy presence? 


If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold, 
thou art there. 


If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea; 
even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. 


If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night shall be light about 
me. 


Yea, the darkness hideth not from thee; but the night shineth as the day: the 
darkness and the light are both alike to thee.« 


Union with God is here and now; here and now is union with 
God. Surely God in his love could have made nothing more 
simple, but the Old Adam in us raises every possible objection to 
seeing the point. To begin with, we are all unconscious 
pantheists, trying to grasp the moment, the Eternal Now, in and 
as its various forms, trying to identify God with something in the 
moment. It may be, as in avowed pantheism, that we try to grasp 
and hold him as the concrete material life which occurs in this 
moment. More generally those inclined to the mystical and 
spiritual life will try to identify him with some profound state of 
feeling, some rapture or ecstasy, some special state of mind, 
which, again, occurs in but does not embrace the living moment. 
Such ecstasies frequently proceed from the realization of our 
inescapable union with God, but as soon as we try to hold on to 


them as if they were that union we have missed the point. 
Strangled by our grasp, the ecstasy vanishes. 


He who fondly imagines to get more of God in thoughts, prayers, 
pious offices and so forth, than by the fireside or in the stall: in sooth he 
does but take God, as it were, and swaddle his head in a cloak and hide 
him under the table. For he who seeks God under settled forms lays hold 
of the form while missing the God concealed in it. But he who seeks God 
in no special guise lays hold of him as he is in himself, and such an one 
“lives with the Son” and is the life itself.7 


Or again, we object that the whole thing is too simple and too 
easy, as some object that it is too easy to receive the Body of 
Christ by going up to the altar, kneeling down, and opening your 
mouth or holding out your hands for Communion. Why then it is 
possible for immoral and sinful people to get it! They are, of 
course, the very people for whom it is intended. Union with God 
is easy, for “my yoke is easy and my burden light,” but we do not 
want this kind of ease because it isn’t flattering; it leaves us no 
attainments to brag about. To realize union is indeed a very 
simple and childlike affair, but, as we have seen, pride loves 
complexity, avoids the obvious, and will always, when alternative 
routes are offered, choose the longer and more circuitous. 

There is then the objection that the Eternal Now is too much of 
an abstraction, an infinitesimal point too coldly mathematical, a 
thing too devoid of colour, content and life to be the source of 
mystical inspiration, of love, courage, wisdom and all the virtues 
of Christian sanctity. Surely more fire is to be gained from 
contemplating the figure of Christ, or reading the lives of the 
saints. No one will deny that very great fire may be had from 
these latter sources, especially for those whose religious 
consciousness is still wholly dependent on images and symbols. 
But there is always the danger that the imitation of Christ may 
become monkey business, and what is important for us is not so 
much the outward form of Christ as his inner spiritual state. 
Humanly speaking, his inner state, the cause of his outward glory, 
was precisely his realization of the inescapable presence (here- 
and-now-ness) of God and union with him. It is from the Eternal 
Moment that the saints derive the momentum and power of 
holiness. 

When we try to speak of the Now in words and ideas it 


naturally appears abstract and empty for the very reason that the 
mystery of God wholly transcends thought. Apparently there is 
nothing in God, and yet everything comes out of him. Sun, moon, 
stars, mountains, trees, men—all have their being in and emerge 
from the Now, from something which, when we try to think 
about it and examine it, instantly seems boundless and void. This 
is why there is so much negative language in mystical writings. In 
the words of St. Thomas: 


In treating of the divine essence the principal method to be followed 
is that of remotion. For the divine essence by its immensity surpasses 
every form to which our intellect reaches; and thus we cannot 
apprehend it by knowing what it is.s 


And again: 


We know God by unknowing, by a manner of uniting with God that 
exceeds the compass of our minds, when the mind recedes from all 
things and then leaves even itself and is united with the super- 
resplendent rays of the Divinity.... In this state of knowledge of God, the 
mind is enlightened from out of the depths of the divine wisdom which 
defy our scrutiny; for to understand that God is not only above all that 
exists but even above all that we can comprehend comes to us from the 
divine wisdom.9 


Looking at it from an intellectual and emotional point of view, 
the Eternal Now certainly seems dry and empty. From this 
standpoint, entering into it amounts to a kind of death, and the 
surrender of cherished intellectual and emotional consolations is 
indeed a sharing in the death of the Cross, from which the whole 
power of the Resurrection flows.io From this same standpoint it 
does, of course, seem incredible that creative love and life can 
come out of the seeming Void, and that God can move us to 
sanctity when we have no inspiring image of him. But this fear of 
the Void is lack of faith in the reality of God. In the mystical 
state, virtue proceeds not from an image but from God himself, 
because in the Now we meet Reality itself even though it wholly 
surpasses our comprehension. There seems no reason why 
creative life should come out of it, but it does because there is 
God himself. If faith and courage are weak we shall, of course, 
prefer to depend on an image of Reality crowded with ideas and 
concepts and precepts. In meditation we shall cause our minds to 
buzz with holy considerations for fear of entering into the silence, 


where God might not exist after all. 

Full of mysterious and infinite life, the Eternal Now lies beyond 
every concept and image, but is yet the source of all images. The 
very idea, the very word “God” may indeed distract us in the 
process of realization because it is still a symbol, a concept, 
standing between us and the Reality—Now! When we say, the 
Eternal Now is God, our minds are apt to start equating the Now 
with an idea called “God” and thus we are distracted from the 
real and present Now. At this stage the idea of God becomes 
unnecessary. Abandoning all concepts and conventional feelings 
about Reality, letting go of all devices and methods for realizing 
union with God, we approach the Now just as it is. And this 
becomes possible through the understanding that methods for 
grasping Reality, for getting God into our consciousness, are as 
absurd and as confusing as putting red paint on red roses or as 
trying to kiss your own lips. The fact of union with God simply is, 
whether realized or not, and no amount of striving to possess it 
will get rid of it. You live and move in the Now, and though you 
try to grasp the moment or flee from the moment until the end of 
time, it holds you unchangeably in its embrace. The realization 
comes and the possessive will surrenders itself when you are 
thoroughly convinced that, struggle as you may, there is no 
escape from the love of God. 


The person who is not conscious of God’s presence, but who must 
always be going out to get him from this and that, who has to seek him 
by special methods, as by means of some activity, person, or place— 
such people have not attained God.... Of what does this true possession 
of God consist? It depends on the heart and an inner, intellectual return 
to God and not on steady contemplation by a given method. It is 
impossible to keep such a method in mind, or at least difficult, and even 
then it is not best. We ought not to have or let ourselves be satisfied 
with the God we have thought of, for when the thought slips the mind, 
that god slips with it. What we want is rather the reality of God, exalted 
far above any human thought or creature. Then God will not vanish 
unless one turns away from him of his own accord.11 


The consciousness of union with God thus realized is mystical, 
that is, veiled, rather than beatific; it is not an absolutely direct 
and full consciousness, but resembles to some extent the 
consciousness which we have of our own selves. For while we 
cannot perceive our own egos directly, we know that we exist. 


We do not know what we are, but we know ourselves as existing, 
and this knowledge is present as an undertone in all other 
knowledge. Similarly, the mystical knowledge of God is a 
knowledge of God in the act of his presence and union with us, 
but is not immediate vision and apprehension of the divine 
essence. 12 

To return to the analogy of the mirror: no one has ever seen the 
true nature, or colour, of a mirror. A mirror is only present to our 
eyes by reason of what it reflects, whether light or darkness, 
white or black, shape or colour. But we are none the less aware 
that there is a mirror transcending and underlying the reflections. 
The colour of a mirror, being a “no-colour,” does not distort or 
contest place with the colours it reflects. In the same way, the 
mystical awareness of God does not contest place with other 
experiences and states of mind. Mental states, such as joy, sorrow, 
exaltation, dejection, pleasure and pain, are as a rule mutually 
exclusive. But the mystical state is inclusive, just as God and his 
love include the whole universe. There is no conflict between 
experiencing the Now and things which happen in the Now. But 
the Now, God, the mirror, is not known in isolation, apart from 
the events and images which it produces or contains, although 
something very close to this may sometimes break upon the mind 
in an ineffable flash. Such rare moments of vision do not, 
however, become the mystic’s habitual and constant state of soul. 

Many people are under the impression that the mystical state is 
one of constant ecstasy, and for that reason seek the realization of 
union as ecstasy. But as Pére Lallemant says: 


Without rapture, a soul will sometimes have a more sublime light, a 
clearer knowledge, a more excellent operation of God, than another with 
extraordinary raptures and ecstasies.... Our Lord enjoyed beatific vision 
without ecstasy. The blessed in heaven will enjoy the perfect use of their 
senses. 13 


Saudreau likewise explains that the exaltation of the feelings or 
the rapture of the senses is not 


the “rough sketch,” so to speak, of this union, nor even its prelude: it is 
possible to conceive a person who, without ever having been in ecstasy, 


might be favoured with this permanent union. 14 


While it will be seen from the above that there is some 


uncertainty as to the precise use of the terms ecstasy, beatific 
vision, and the “sublime light” which comes without ecstasy, the 
principle is clear: the latter is the characteristic of the mystical 
state, and differs both from ecstasy and from sudden 
apprehensions of the beatific vision.is In this present world-order 
God does not normally intrude the full light of his glory upon our 
minds, but rather reveals himself as the mysterious Void whose 
content wholly transcends normal thinking and feeling, and can 
only be known to the intellect by analogy. We may transcend 
images, ideas and symbols, but we are then confronted with a 
Reality which we experience but do not comprehend, a living 
mystery which imparts life, power and joy, though we cannot say 
how. When we stop to examine it, there seems to be nothing in it, 
but in use we find it inexhaustible. 

The fact that we may apprehend Reality beyond images, but 
know it as living mystery, is the reason why so many Christian 
mystics speak of knowing God by “unknowing” or “mystical 
ignorance.” For what we experience teases us out of thought, and 
the more vividly and thoroughly we experience it, the more we 
grow in wonder at the mystery of God, and the more acutely we 
are aware of his incomprehensibility. 

Now the realization produces definite effects, though no 
amount of striving for and imitating these effects will produce 
realization. It infuses our life with a deep undertone of love, joy, 
peace and spiritual freedom, and these come in part from the 
certainty and security of our union with God. From the negative 
standpoint, the surrender of the possessive will cuts at the very 
root of evil. Living to so great a degree in the present, we are 
delivered from “anxiety for the morrow.” And the vital, lively 
nature of the Eternal Now imparts a certain joie de vivre that 
expresses itself naturally and spontaneously like the song of a 
bird. It issues in a profound and joyous acceptance of the will of 
God as this is expressed in the circumstances of each moment, for 
we realize that all these circumstances are included in and 
governed by the Eternal Now, the love of God. Above all it 
appears in love, for God and for man, because we are consciously 
united with Love itself. Just how all this happens cannot be said, 
and if it could there would be no point in saying it since none of 
these effects can be produced by mimicry. We have to discover 
first our total dependence on and union with God, and then “all 


these things shall be added unto you.” 


II 


So much has been said about the surrender of devices, methods 
and techniques, that this must not be allowed to lead to a 
misapprehension. This does not mean that we are to cease 
entirely from prayer, meditation and worship in their formal 
sense; it means that we are to cease using them as ways to possess 
God. Formal religion has two functions. For those who cannot at 
present understand anything beyond forms, it is a way of 
speeding up and intensifying the attempt to possess God until 
they become quite convinced by experience that he cannot be 
possessed. In addition, it imparts a symbolic, analogical 
knowledge of God which, as we have seen, gives them courage to 
venture into the Reality beyond symbols. For those who can go 
beyond forms, it is a way not of getting but of expressing, of 
making incarnate and concrete, their spiritual realization and its 
effects. It is language and grammar at the disposal of inner 
meaning. It incarnates their love of God as works of mercy 
incarnate their love of men. 

But between these two uses of formal religion there is a 
difficult intermediate state—the state of those who can go beyond 
forms but hesitate to do so through fear or ignorance, and the 
state of those for whom the forms have lost all real meaning, or 
for whom they have become positively misleading. Little 
recognized but extremely prevalent is the problem of those who 
have at some time acquired repugnant emotional associations 
from the terms and form of the Christian religion. This is a very 
real problem for the Church, because it means that thousands and 
thousands of souls are outside her fellowship, not because of any 
wilful heresy or insincerity, but because the Church insists on the 
acceptance of certain particular analogies of God which, divinely 
revealed though they may be, cannot always and invariably be 
meaningful and helpful. 

Because the supremely important thing is God himself and not 
his analogies, the Church in this case should be great and catholic 
enough to lead these souls to God without the use of formal 
religion. Like St. Paul, the Church must be “all things to all men,” 


instead of trying to impose a uniform procedure on all souls alike, 
which is, of course, the easiest and laziest way of going about the 
teaching of religion. The dropping of formal religion in certain 
cases is not the proper work of a sect; nor is it something to be 
done universally for the whole flock of Christ. This is no mere 
question of dispensing with ritual, and trying to present the 
Christian religion in up-to-date terms. It is a question of 
suggesting, of indicating, the very essence and reality of religion 
by dropping religious forms and terms altogether in certain 
special cases and circumstances. Of course this cannot be done 
unless the essence is there to be indicated, unless there are a 
sufficient number of teachers who have adequate spiritual 
insight. 

It is quite possible to do this for the reason that the reality of 
religion and the reality of life are one and the same, though to 
many Christians this is not sufficiently clear. When Catholicism is 
exclusively sacramental it is far from clear, because the forms of 
the sacraments seem, to the modern mind, utterly remote from 
the forms of everyday life so that the problem of relating the two 
is difficult indeed. However much the worship of the Church may 
thrill the emotions and senses with its beauty, there are 
thousands of people who find it so “out of this world,” so archaic, 
so intensely symbolic, that it is impossible to relate it to prosaic, 
everyday affairs. Heaven forbid that the Church should cease this 
worship; but, again, there are cases and circumstances where she 
should work otherwise. 16 

The apparent rift between religion and life appears also on the 
doctrinal side. Exposed to the normal presentation of Christian 
doctrine, a person who is not deeply read in theology and 
mysticism receives an impression of the Christian religion which 
is extremely remote and unreal in every sphere save the ethical. 
Instead of focussing his attention on the presence of God in 
everyday life, it draws it away to the past and the future—the 
“mighty acts” of God in distant history and the promises of God 
in regard to a future life. He learns of God and Christ as 
impalpable presences alongside his life rather than in it, though 
St. Paul says, “To me, to live is Christ.... Christ liveth in me.” 

The same remoteness and unreality characterize the usual 
methods of prayer and meditation, which, from this point of 
view, have altogether too much religiosity and formality to 


become that “prayer without ceasing” which is St. Paul’s ideal of 
spirituality. Prayer considered simply as talking to or at God, and 
meditation practised largely as thinking about God, are all too apt 
to set him at a distance rather than to realize his presence. 
Furthermore, their form and content distract the mind far too 
readily from the living reality of God as the Eternal Now, because 
they comprise so much mental busy-ness, so many sentiments, 
considerations, resolutions, notions, imaginations, so much 
wordiness and conceptualism.17 

It is perfectly possible, under certain conditions, to indicate the 
present reality of God, and that with great effectiveness, without 
resorting to formal religious terminology. It has been done for 
centuries in a type of Buddhism from which we have much to 
learn, since any truth, wheresoever found, is Catholic truth. We 
have spoken already of Zen Buddhism in connection with the 
experience of satori, or sudden realization.is The characteristic 
way of teaching employed in Zen is simply to demonstrate the 
Eternal Now, Reality itself, by forms derived from everyday life 
rather than philosophy and religion. But like Christianity, Zen 
also uses the usual externals of religion—scriptures, ceremonies, 
laws, images and symbols, though there are times when it departs 
from them surprisingly, which is what gives Zen its unique 
character. This departure is effective and startling for the very 
reason that it goes along with formal religion, because, as we 
have already seen, there can be no kernel without shell. 

Zen is largely a monastic religion, although the monks do not 
as a rule take life vows since their stay in the monastery is often 
only temporary—for purposes of instruction. These monasteries 
are run somewhat on Benedictine lines, the rule consisting of 
both meditation and manual work, and the spiritual life is 
directed by a roshi or “master” distinct from the abbot, who 
attends to administrative affairs. The following instances of the 
Zen way of teaching are dialogues between masters and their 
monks or lay inquirers: 


“Ever since I came to you,” a monk complained, “I haven’t been 
instructed at all in the study of Reality.” “Ever since you came to me,” 
replied the master, “I have always been pointing out to you how to 
study Reality.” “In what way, sir?” “When you brought me tea, did I not 
accept it? When you served me food, did I not eat it? When you made 
bows to me, did I not return them? When did I ever neglect in giving 


you instruction?” Seeing that the monk did not understand, he 
concluded, “If you want to see, see directly into it; but when you try to 
think about it, it is altogether missed.” 


In answer to a question about the meaning of Reality an old master 
simply held up his fly-whisk, and another master asked one of his monks 
to explain the action. “The master’s idea,” replied the monk, “was to 
elucidate the spiritual along with the material, to reveal truth by means 
of an objective reality.” “Your understanding,” said the master, “is all 
right as far as it goes. But why are you in such a hurry to make theories 
about it?” At this the monk asked, “What, then, will be your 
explanation?” The master held up his own fly-whisk. 


Sometimes these exchanges were very brief and to the point: 


“What is the real meaning of religion?” 

“A refreshing breeze is stirred in the blue sky.” 
“What is the Tao (ie., God, Reality)?” 

“Walk on!” 

“What is Realization?” 

“Your everyday thoughts.” 

“What is the one ultimate word of truth?” 

“Yes.” 

“IT asked, what is the one ultimate word of truth?” 
“Tm not deaf!” 

“T have just come to this monastery; please give me some instruction.” 
“Have you had your breakfast?” 

“Yes.” 


“Then wash your dishes.” 


At times Zen is violently iconoclastic in its attitude to revered 
religious symbols and personages: 


“What are the characteristic features of your household (ie., school or 
teaching)?” 


“A table, a tray, a chair, a fireplace and windows.” 

“What is the religious life?” 

“In early morning, ‘How do you do?’ At night, ‘Good night.’ ” 
“What is the teaching of Buddhism?” 


“The Buddha is a bull-headed jail-keeper, and the Patriarchs are 
horse-faced old maids.” 


The above incidents may perhaps be clarified by the following 


extract, freely translated, from one of the greatest Chinese Zen 
masters: 


The truly religious man has nothing to do but go on with his life as he 
finds it in the various circumstances of this worldly existence. He rises 
quietly in the morning, puts on his clothes and goes out to work. When 
he wants to walk, he walks; when he wants to sit, he sits. He has no 
hankering after becoming a Buddha (ie., one who has attained 
Realization), not the remotest thought of it. How is this possible? A wise 
man of old says, If you strive to become a Buddha by any conscious 
contrivances, your Buddha is indeed the source of eternal bondage. 19 


The secret of the above quotations is simply that they have to 
do with a mystical state wherein religion and everyday life are 
identical. Religion is no longer something in a water-tight 
compartment; it has become so released from special forms that it 
fills all forms. God is here and now, and thus we turn our 
attention to here and now, though this must not be understood in 
any sentimental, naturalistic and pantheistic sense. When, in 
answer to questions about Reality, the masters wave a fly-whisk, 
point to a bush or make some casual, everyday remark, they are 
most decidedly not to be understood as saying that the whisk, the 
bush or the ordinary affairs of life are God. No conceptualism of 
this kind is involved here. The point is rather that Reality, God, 
the Eternal Now, is entirely beyond speech and understanding 
and attainment, but at the same time is right here. If you try to 
catch hold of it, you will miss it. But go straight ahead with your 
ordinary life, “Walk on!”, wash your dishes, think your everyday 
thoughts, and you will see that you can’t get away from it. Yet 
this is already too much conceptualism! 20 

In Zen this way of teaching has been established for over a 
thousand years, and thus has reached a point of refinement, 
subtlety and allusiveness such that a thorough understanding of it 
is quite beyond the average Occidental. These dialogues between 
masters and their disciples have been accumulated into a large 
body of literature, and are used as subjects (koan) for meditation. 
Through the years the original spontaneity of this way of 
teaching has been to some extent hardened and modified, yet 
none the less it remains one of the most effective and stimulating 
means of presenting the inner essence of religion that the world 
has ever known.21 The metaphysical background of Zen is the 
philosophy of Mahayana Buddhism, and deficient as this may be 


from a Christian standpoint there can be no doubt whatever that 
this kind of Buddhist mysticism is as genuine an experience of God 
as that ineffable mystery known in Christian mysticism as the 
“cloud of unknowing” or the “luminous darkness.”22 Christians 
cannot feel that the Buddhist’s philosophical explanation of the 
experience is adequate, because it goes no further than the 
experience itself, describing God as the “pregnant Void” 
(sunyata). It remains a total mystery as to how or why this Void 
should have produced the universe or have inspired such a loving 
and lofty moral concept as the Bodhisattva ideal.23 But to 
Christians, who know that God the Holy Trinity is love itself, this 
is somewhat less of a mystery. 

But whatever the subtleties of Zen in its present form, the 
principle of its way of teaching is clear, and whatever the 
deficiencies of Mahayana philosophy from the Christian 
standpoint, this principle is certainly applicable in Christianity. 
One cannot help feeling that something of this kind would be a 
refreshing and invigorating relief from the interminable 
explanations of theologians and sermonizings of moralists, 
necessary as these may be. It would, of course, be absurd to apply 
the principle generally as a popular stunt, but in the spiritual 
direction of individuals and small groups it would be of the 
highest value. There is no thought here of determining just how 
the principle should be applied, for this would at once lead to 
artificiality and affectation; it must spring naturally and 
immediately from the realization of union with God. It will 
doubtless develop in its own time, but when it does the Church 
should be wise enough to accept it. 

It is almost certain that something of this kind will arise as the 
inner consciousness of Christianity realizes a union with God 
beyond formal symbols and becomes free from excessive 
religiosity. This must be the ultimate development of the religion 
of the Incarnation, since the final end of the Incarnation is the 
realization of God’s union with the entire universe. As the 
Breviary hymn says: 


From that Holy Body broken 
Blood and water forth proceed; 
Earth and stars and sky and ocean 
By that flood from stain are freed. 


The Incarnation and the Mass have as their logical end the 
transubstantiation, the inclusion within the Divine Humanity, of 
the whole creation. Thus far the Incarnation process has been 
circumscribed to actions that are formally spiritual (ie., prayer 
and meditation), sacramental and moral—that is, to specifically 
religious actions. But while the historic Incarnation and the 
formal sacraments will remain the energizing centres of the 
process, the process itself will expand beyond spiritual and moral 
actions to art, literature, music, athletics, engineering, eating, 
drinking, conversation and amusement—to every single aspect of 
life from the most important to the most trivial. The Western 
world has not thus far evolved a Christian art at all. That is to 
say, it thinks of religious art in terms of liturgical art—painting, 
literature and music having formally religious subject matter 
There is no conception yet of painting a landscape, a group of 
flowers, a portrait, a street scene, in a Christian and incarnational 
way.24 There must even be a Christian way of making shoes and 
washing one’s hands, and by that we do not mean that there 
should be a crucifix and two candles beside the washbasin! 

In speaking, therefore, of a religion which goes beyond 
symbols, we are thinking primarily of theological, liturgical and 
moral symbols. In a very strict sense the human mind can never 
go beyond symbols of some kind, since in the most rigorous sense 
of the word even the Eternal Now and the mystical state 
themselves are symbols of God. 


With the growth of spirituality these mediating symbols tend to 
become more abstract; but this does not mean that they are left behind. 
The “emptiness,” the “darkness,” the “nothing,” the “Cloud of 
Unknowing” of the mystic, though they be negative statements, are still 
symbols drawn from his sensible experience, in and through which he 
seeks to actualize his obscure experience of God.25 


A knowledge of God entirely transcending symbolism would 
amount to the Beatific Vision itself, and, as we have seen, the 
mystical and the beatific modes of consciousness are different. 
The point is that the “symbol” of the Eternal Now relates God 
more effectively to every aspect of life. The very fact that 
Christianity, as modern Church religion, is not related to the 
whole of life shows its inner weakness and its unfaithfulness to 
the Incarnation. It renders it repugnant and unsatisfying to 


mature minds, and reveals its failure to realize union with God, 
which is the reason why it lacks both vision and power. “Who 
sees not God everywhere sees him truly nowhere.” 


1 This would seem to be the opinion of Poulain whose Graces of Interior 
Prayer (London, 1910) is a standard manual of spiritual direction. Garrigou- 
LaGrange, however, in his Christian Perfection and Contemplation (London and 
St. Louis, 1937) allows that the mystical state is the normal end of the spiritual 
life, extraordinary in the sense that relatively few souls attain to it. Saudreau 
takes a similar position. See his Mystical State, London and New York, 1924, 
pp. 10-13 and 199-201. St. Teresa, Way of Perfection, c.xx, says, “Yet our Lord 
has not said, Let some come by way of contemplation, and the rest by other 
paths; on the contrary, so great is his mercy that he will not hinder any from 
coming to drink at this fountain of life.” 


2 See the interesting discussion of this type of spirituality in Dom Cuthbert 
Butler’s Western Mysticism. New ed., London, 1946. 


3 In the past it has often happened that souls who recognized this left the 
fellowship of the Church and ceased altogether from the sacramental life. This, 
however, is still an adolescent procedure. Whatever individual members of the 
Church may think, the Church herself is complete and catholic enough to 
retain the loyalty of these souls. But when the mystical life results in external 
protests, such as abstaining from the eucharistic fellowship and publicly 
despising sacramental forms, there is clearly something immature and 
uncharitable about it. The true mystic discovers in these forms altogether new 
depths of meaning. Only sheer spiritual pride could stop him from worshipping 
at an altar with souls lacking his own insight. 


4 Hstian-chiao’s Cheng-tao Ke, xxxiv. Trs. D. T. Suzuki in his Manual of Zen 
Buddhism. Kyoto, 1935, p. 115. 


5 De Caussade in Abandonment to the Divine Providence, ii, 9 and 10. Trs. E. 
McMahon. New York, 1887, pp. 99-101. 


6 Psalm 139:7-12. 


7 Eckhart, sermon, xiii, in Pfeiffer’s Meister Eckhart. Tr. C. de B. Evans. 
London, 1924, vol. i, p. 49. 


s Summa Contra Gentiles, I. xiv. 

9 Comment. de Divinis Nominibus, VII. 1. iv. 

10 Part of this “death” is the sense of unworthiness which constantly beset so 
many of the Christian mystics, as for example St. Francis of Assisi. The 
simplicity and absolute given-ness of union with God made them feel acutely 
undeserving of it and inadequate in their response to it. 

11 From Eckhart’s “Talks of Instruction,” in Blakney’s Meister Eckhart. New 
York, 1941, pp. 8-9. 

12 Presumably this is only possible when actual death has removed the ego 
from standing in its own light. 


13 Spiritual Doctrine, princ. VII, c. iv, a. 7. 
14 The Mystical State, pp. 99-100. 


15 I have used “ecstasy” in a very loose and popular sense to cover all 
experiences of an ineffable character which involve an exaltation of the 
feelings or a suspension of the mind’s normal activities, including sudden 
flashes of the beatific vision—which would certainly stun the ordinary human 
mind. But in Catholic mystical theology the term ecstasy is restricted to the 
suspension of mental faculties, which, according to Catholic theologians, does 
not occur to the blessed in heaven who behold the beatific vision. At the same 
time, they do not permit any confusion of the beatific vision with the mystical 
state. 


16 The Quakers have here a great contribution to make to the catholic 
wholeness of the Church, for a far greater use should be made of their worship 
in corporate silence. The retreat house or “school of wisdom” has great 
possibilities as an alternative and supplement to the formal church building, 
for here meditation may be carried on in normal and informal surroundings 
without the distraction of noise. 


17 The fact that this kind of prayer is still so widely taught in the Church is 
the result, firstly, of the revolt of Roman Catholic officialdom against 
mysticism in the 17th and 18th centuries, described by Dom John Chapman as 
an entire “reversal of tradition,” and secondly, of the Protestant concentration 
upon what Heiler terms “prophetic prayer,” which is essentially self-conscious 
in content, being concerned almost exclusively with petition, resolution and 
repentance. On this whole subject see below, pp. 229-238. 


is The word “Zen” is the Sino-Japanese form of the Sanskrit dhyana, 
untranslatable into English, but signifying the state of consciousness involved 
in mystical experience. Originating in India, the Zen school of Buddhism was 
brought to China by Bodhidharma in the 6th century ap. and was there 
influenced by Taoism and Confucianism. Zen as known today is a distinctly 
Chinese creation, modified by its long sojourn in Japan. For a complete 
account see D. T. Suzuki’s Essays in Zen Buddhism, 3 vols. London, 1927, 1933 
and 1934. Also my Spirit of Zen. London and New York, 1936. 


19 That is, a “bull-headed jail-keeper.” From the Lin-chi Lu, after the 
translation by Suzuki in Essays in Zen, vol. ii, p. 260. All the above quotations 
have been taken from the various works of Suzuki, though in certain cases his 
translation has been adapted for the benefit of those who have no technical 
knowledge of Chinese Buddhism. 


20 Pai-chang was asked, “I have been seeking for Reality, but do not yet 
know how to go on with my research.” He answered, “It is very much like 
looking for an ox when you are riding on one.” 


21 It remains to this day by far the most vital and spiritually mature form of 
Buddhism, and has had a profound influence in moulding the higher culture of 
the Par East. 

22 These terms are first found in St. Dionysius pseudo-Areopagite, whose 
mystical writings are the root of Catholic mystical theology. See my Theologia 
Mystica of St. Dionysius. West Park, N. Y., 1944. 

23 According to Buddhist philosophy one who attains the supreme 
Realization or Enlightenment is freed from the process of reincarnation 


whereby the unenlightened are born again and again into the world. He may 
then enter the transcendental state of bliss and peace called Nirvana. But the 
Bodhisattva is one who renounces this state out of love for all other creatures, 
and submits to reincarnation again and again through vast periods of time in 
order to be of service to the world. Anyone familiar with the Buddhist 
conception of time, rivalling the modern astronomical calculation of light- 
years, will realize what a tremendous renunciation this involves. 

24 The special type of Chinese and Japanese painting directly inspired by Zen 
almost invariably selects “secular” things for its subject matter. See the 
reproductions in Ernst Crosse’s Die Ostasiatische Tuschmalerei. Berlin, 1923. Also 
in Binyon’s Spirit of Man in Asian Art. Cambridge, Mass., 1936. 

25 Evelyn Underhill, Worship. New York, 1937, p. 38. 


PART TWO 


We are obliged to preserve the concept of the “otherness” of God from 
ourselves even though we cannot use it without distorting or at least 
wrongly stressing it.... It is an otherness which not only does not 
exclude but positively (just because it is what it is) includes and 
demands oneness—a oneness, indeed, which is actually more real and 
intimate than what we normally would describe as identification. 


R. H. J. Steuart, S.J., World Intangible. 


He taught them laws and watchwords, 
To preach and struggle and pray; 

But he taught us deep in the hayfield 
The games that the angels play. 


Had he stayed here for ever, 

Their world would be wise as ours— 
And the king be cutting capers, 

And the priest be picking flowers. 


G. K. Cuesterton, The Song of the Children. 


Let me ask you to remember some day that I have told you that the 
hatred of evil strengthens evil, and opposition reinforces what is 
opposed. This is a law of an exactitude equal with the laws of 
mathematics. 


RonaLp Fraser, Bird Under Glass. 


Eschew as though it were a hell the consideration of yourself and your 
offences. No one should ever think of these things except to humiliate 
himself and love our Lord. It is enough to regard yourself in general as a 
sinner, even as there are many saints in heaven who were such. 


CHARLES DE CONDREN. 


Our father holds it for better that in all things one should endeavour 
to find God, rather than that long continuous periods of time should be 
applied to prayer, ...in conversation, in walking, seeing, tasting, 
hearing, thinking, and in fact in all kinds of activity, for of a truth the 
majesty of God is in all things. This kind of meditation, in which one 
finds God in everything, is easier than the other, and prepares the soul 
to receive great graces from God, without it being necessary to spend a 
long time in prayer. 


St. Icnatius Loyo.a. 


I. THE BEING OF GOD 


In its fulness, the realization of union with God is the end of 
human life. But because God himself is eternal life and is 
infinitely creative, this end is no mere conclusion; it has 
immeasurable results and is for ever fecund because the infinite 
can never exhaust itself in finite expressions of its nature. Even 
though the full content of mystical experience can never be set 
down in finite forms of ideas, words and actions, those who have 
glimpsed it in any degree will try to express it and to share it 
with others. This is why mystical religion involves both doctrine 
and action, for the teachings and principles of religion, in so far 
as they are true at all, invariably begin with an experience of 
God. Thus the deeper our experience of God, the more profound 
and effective will be our understanding of doctrine. 

It is certain, therefore, that the coming of an incarnational 
mysticism and of a mature understanding of the Christian faith 
will bring a deeper comprehension of the being and the character 
of God, requiring doctrinal expression, and will also have 
important effects upon the moral and spiritual life. We turn, then, 
to the possible effects of such an awakening upon these four 
central aspects of the Christian religion—the theology of the 
divine Being, our conception of God’s character, the life of moral 
action, and the life of worship and contemplation. 


I 


A way of life and thought which denies or ignores the existence 
of God is bound to end in dissolution and self-contradiction. If 
this is not sufficiently proved by the state of futility to which 
Humanism and rationalism have brought us, a state of in 
humanity and irrationality, all that remains necessary is to reason 
the matter out. From the standpoint of reason the conclusion that 
God exists is absolutely unavoidable; to demonstrate this truth 
was the greatest and perhaps the most permanent achievement of 


mediaeval philosophy, and in particular of St. Thomas. The only 
way to escape this conclusion is to deny the validity of reason, 
which is merely to make argument, philosophy, and almost every 
form of discussion and thought impossible. 

Although our purpose here is the interpretation of Christian 
doctrine and not its evidences, this much must be said. Either the 
living God is, or he is not. Either the ultimate Reality is alive, 
conscious and intelligent, or it is not. If it is, then it is what we 
call God. If it is not, it must be some form of blind process, law, 
energy or substance entirely devoid of any meaning save that 
which man himself gives to it. Nobody has ever been able to 
suggest a reasonable alternative. To say that Reality is quite 
beyond thought, and therefore cannot be designated by such 
small, human terms as “conscious” and “intelligent” is only to say 
that God is immeasurably greater than man. And the theist will 
agree that he is infinitely greater. To argue that Reality is not a 
blind energy but a “living principle,” an “impersonal super- 
consciousness,” or an “impersonal mind” is merely to play with 
words and indulge in terminological contradictions. A “living 
principle” means about as much as a black whiteness, and to 
speak of an “impersonal mind” is like talking about a circular 
square. It is the result, of course, of misunderstanding the word 
“personal” as used of God—as if it meant that God is an 
organism, form, or composite structure like man, something 
resembling Haeckel’s “gaseous vertebrate.” But the word is not 
used at all in that sense. From many points of view the term 
“personal” is badly chosen, but it means simply that God is alive 
in the fullest possible way. 

If the ultimate Reality is indeed a blind energy or process 
devoid of inherent meaning, if it is merely an unconscious 
permutation and oscillation of waves, particles or what not, 
certain consequences follow. Human consciousness is obviously a 
part or an effect of this Reality. We are bound, then, to come to 
one of two conclusions. On the one hand, we shall have to say 
that the effect, consciousness, is a property lacking to its entire 
cause—in short, that something has come out of nothing. Or, on 
the other hand, we shall have to say that consciousness is a 
special form of unconsciousness—in short, that it is not really 
conscious. For the first of these two conclusions there neither is 
nor can be any serious argument; not even a rationalist would 


maintain the possibility of an effect without a sufficient cause. 
The main arguments against theism follow, in principle, the 
second conclusion—that the properties and qualities of human 
nature, consciousness, reason, meaning, and the like, do not 
constitute any new element or property over and above the 
natural and mechanical processes which cause them. Because 
Reality itself is a blind mechanism, so is man. Meaning, 
consciousness, and intelligence are purely arbitrary and relative 
terms given to certain highly complex mechanical structures. 

But the argument dissolves itself. If consciousness and 
intelligence are forms of mechanism, the opinions and 
judgements of intelligence are products of mechanical (or 
statistical) necessity. This must apply to all opinions and 
judgements, for all are equally mere phenomena of the 
mechanical world-process. There can be no question of one 
judgement being more true than another, any more than there can 
be question of the phenomenon fish being more true than the 
phenomenon bird. But among these phenomena are the 
judgements of the rationalist, and to them he must apply the logic 
of his own reasoning. He must admit that they have no more 
claim to truth than the judgements of the theist, and that if 
rationalism is true it is very probably not true. This is intellectual 
suicide—the total destruction of thought—to such a degree that 
even the rationalist’s own concepts of mechanism, unconscious 
process, statistical necessity, and the like, also become purely 
arbitrary and meaningless terms. To hold such a view of the 
universe consistently, one must separate oneself, the observer, 
from it. But this cannot be done, for which reason a 
contemporary philosopher has complained that man’s subjective 
presence constitutes the greatest obstacle to philosophical 
knowledge! 

Now this is pure nonsense. Man’s subjective presence is, of 
course, the very condition of knowledge both of the universe and 
of God. It is precisely the existence of man in the universe as a 
conscious, reflecting self that makes it logically necessary to 
believe in God. A universe containing self-conscious beings must 
have a cause sufficient to produce such beings, a cause which 
must at least have the property of self-consciousness. This 
property cannot simply “evolve” from protoplasm or stellar 
energy, because this would mean that more consciousness is the 


result of less consciousness and no consciousness. Evolution is, 
therefore, a transition from the potential to the actual, wherein 
the new powers and qualities constantly acquired are derived, not 
from the potential, but from a superior type of life which already 
possesses them. 

What is this superior type of life? Taking as his basic principle 
the fact that something cannot come out of nothing, or, to state it 
positively, that every effect demands a sufficient cause, St. 
Thomas both demonstrates the necessity for its existence and 
outlines its general character in five ways.1 He shows that it must 
be the First Mover, the First Cause, the Being which exists 
necessarily, the possessor of the perfect degree of every positive 
property to be found in things, and the origin of order, whereby 
all things are directed to their proper ends. The gist of the whole 
argument is simply that the universe requires an origin or cause 
other than itself, and that this cause must be absolutely self- 
sufficient. Everything in the universe is the effect of some prior 
cause; every movement is the result of a prior movement; every 
being is derived from some prior being. The universe is always 
depending on something prior to itself, and at any “moment” it 
can only be a cause, can only exist, by virtue of being an effect. It 
is therefore primarily an effect. The chain of causation cannot be 
extended back infinitely, for then we should have a system which 
is an effect without any primary cause. This is nonsense, like the 
Cheshire Cat’s grin suspended in empty space with no cat. It does 
not make it any less nonsense to increase its size, to carry the 
effects causing one another back and back and back. It only 
becomes a bigger and bigger absurdity. Carry it back to infinity, 
and you have an infinite absurdity—an infinite grin without cat. 
You must, then, arrive at an origin, a cause, which is not an 
effect, which exists in its own right—necessarily—and does not 
derive being from something else just because it is Being. 

It follows that this necessary and self-sufficient Being will have 
some astonishing properties. Because it must be the sufficient 
cause of the whole universe (otherwise it would not be the first 
cause), it will have in the most complete degree every positive 
property to be found in the wuniverse—including life and 
consciousness. It will be utterly free from other than self- 
limitation, for there is nothing prior to it to impose any limits 
upon it. It will not, therefore, be limited by time and space, and 


thus will be entirely present in every place and at every moment. 
It will not be a body, because all bodies have spatial limitations 
and are subject to change and motion. It will not be a world-soul, 
considered as the form of the universe-body, because form and 
body are mutually dependent whereas the first cause is 
necessarily independent. It will not be the universe itself 
considered as a Gestalt, a whole organism greater than the sum of 
its parts, because every organism is a dependent system which 
does not originate itself.2 It will not even be divisible into parts, 
since parts involve spatial and temporal limitations. 

In sum, reason can show that God exists, and that he is the 
unlimited fulness of life and being. Yet he is quite other than 
what we normally term life and being, that is, the universe, for 
whereas things have life and have being, God is life and is being. 
Otherwise, reason alone tells us what God is not, for beyond these 
great generalities its description of him is negative.3 

The fact that all life has its origin as well as its continued 
existence in a Being of this kind raises many problems, though 
not so many or such serious problems as it solves. It raises the 
possibly insoluble problem of evil, but solves what would 
otherwise be the far more remarkable problem of the existence of 
good. It raises the difficult question of how an imperfect universe 
can be the effect of an infinitely perfect Being, but at least it gives 
us the exceedingly welcome assurance that there is a perfect 
Being. It implies properties and qualities in this Being which 
bring thought to the limits of its power, not by their complexity, 
but by their astounding simplicity, and yet by disclosing such a 
property as God’s entire presence at every point of space and 
time, it brings him from a distant realm of abstraction to a realm 
“nearer to us than we are to ourselves.” The argument can be 
shown to imply, too, that every process, every movement from 
the circling of stars to the vibration of a gnat’s wing, is not only 
under the complete control of God, but also occupies his entire 
consciousness as if it were the only thing that was happening. 
And while this makes the problem of evil even more acute, it 
gives the splendid knowledge that life is utterly to be trusted, 
however painful, and that nothing is easier than to have 
communion with God. 

But the argument raises one particularly serious problem which 
is both practical and theoretical—a problem of the greatest 


importance for mystical religion and for the whole work of 
realizing union with God, a problem for which Christian 
philosophy, Thomist or otherwise, has not yet found a satisfactory 
answer. It is the problem of the true relation between God and 
the universe, the Creator and the creature. 

From the purely philosophic standpoint the problem is that 
while the Thomistic argument works perfectly backwards, in 
reasoning from the universe to God, it does not work so well in 
reasoning forwards from God to the universe. It is shown quite 
clearly that the universe demands a Cause such as has been 
described. But it is not shown at all clearly how the Cause 
produces the universe. Two possible solutions have to be rejected. 
The first is that God created the universe out of some primordial, 
chaotic matter which had existed from all eternity along with but 
apart from God himself. But if this matter is not caused by God he 
is not the first cause, and we have to look for God elsewhere, 
because if we are not dealing with the first cause, we are not 
dealing with God. The second is that God created the universe 
out of his own “substance,” by a process which should be called 
emanation rather than creation. But if God is indivisible this 
involves pantheism, since every “part” of the indivisible God is 
equal to the whole—is God himself. If every single creature is 
absolutely identical with God, all differences, all grades of 
perfection, all values, become illusory. In fact the universe, as we 
understand it, does not exist at all. The problem of creation, of 
the origin of the universe, is abolished by saying that there is no 
creation. There is only God. There is also a completely 
unexplained illusion of a diversified universe. To say that God 
caused the illusion is in effect to return to the problem of 
creation, and we have to begin all over again. To say that man 
created it is to say the same thing, because man is God; or else it 
is to say that God as man became subject to the illusion. And 
again, God is not the first cause. 

Rejecting these two solutions, orthodox theology maintains that 
God created the universe out of nothing.4 The universe, together 
with its time and space, was not. And then, by a fiat of the divine 
will, it was. Of course, this is not really a solution. It is simply a 
description of what must have happened if there was no 
preexisting material and if God did not make the universe out of 
himself. God caused the universe by some other means, but we 


don’t know how. Reason here has to jump a gap, seeing no way 
out of the dilemma. The gap does not lie between God and the 
universe; it lies in reasoning, for theology knows no rational 
principle which can account for the action. It can only say that 
whereas creatures cause things out of themselves or out of pre- 
existing material, the Creator causes things in the manner proper 
to a first cause—independently of pre-existing material. But the 
point upon which orthodox theology wishes to insist is not just 
that there was no pre-existing material; it is that the universe, 
definitively and absolutely, is not God. For in ordinary logical 
terms the identification of the universe with God involves 
pantheism, which renders all moral distinctions unreal.s 

We could well afford to leave this problem alone as one of the 
unfathomable mysteries of the Godhead were it not that mystical 
experience, both Christian and non-Christian, glimpses, or intuits, 
an answer deeper than this, an answer for which theology has no 
proper terms of expression. When expressed in theological terms, 
the answer sounds like pantheism, for which reason official 
theology has always looked upon mysticism with suspicion. The 
mystic, on his side, is often somewhat dissatisfied with theology, 
because it seems to set a gulf between God and man which love 
cannot tolerate because it desires the most intimate kind of 
union. We are raising, in fact, the crucial problem of 
transcendence and immanence, the One and the Many, a problem 
that has always been troublesome for Christian theology because 
the seeming dualism of God on the one hand and the universe on 
the other has not been adequately resolved. While it remains 
unresolved the mystic must either go his own way and leave 
theology alone, or else he must be for ever wrestling with the 
adaptation of experience to theology and theology to experience, 
forever tempering his language with caution and taking care not 
to be a heretic. For the mystic knows that in some mysterious and 
indescribable manner God and his universe are one. 


II 


No system of philosophy or theology, no precise intellectual 
structure, can ever fully embrace the mystical experience of God. 
Not only is the divine Spirit as living and ungraspable as the 


wind, but the experience itself contains paradoxical elements 
which no ordinary logical procedure can reconcile. While we 
cannot hope for a theology which explains it, we may be able to 
find one which neither suspects nor conflicts with it—a theology 
in real sympathy with mysticism. Among the reasons for which 
the prevailing theology has been dubious of mysticism is that 
theology sets so great a value upon precise and definite beliefs 
and their necessity for salvation. This is partly due to the fact that 
a certain type of mind is frightened by the mutability, the 
elusiveness, and the mystery of life, and thinks of salvation as a 
state of everlasting fixity and certainty from which the 
disconcerting elements of spontaneity, surprise and mystery are 
largely removed. Yet in these same elements another type of 
mind discerns the activity of a living Spirit. For him salvation is 
an entire union with and acceptance of this mysterious Spirit, and 
with the expression of its liveliness and spontaneity in the elusive 
flux of life as we experience it from day to day. For this type of 
mind fixity is death, and instead of trying to catch and possess 
the wind of the Spirit, he lets it blow freely around and through 
him, finding peace, joy and salvation in its very movement. He 
surrenders the desire to possess it in any fixed state or form, and 
lets it possess him, affirming and joining in its unceasing and 
ungraspable movement as in some divine dance or melody. 

It is not that Spirit comes or goes, shifts or changes in itself. 
Like the present moment, it is elusive when the mind tries to 
pursue and hold it. The true movement is in its creative 
expressions, in the activity of Spirit rather than the agent, and 
this movement is not so much the quest for an attainment as a 
dance celebrating fulfilment. God is himself “unmoved, all 
motion’s source,” and in union with him the mystic feels with 
Dante that 


ma gid volgeva il mio desiro e il velle, 
si come rota ch’egualmente é mossa, 
L’amor che move il sole e laltre stelle.« 


Sometimes the mystic feels that this Spirit, this ultimate 
Reality, is inseparable from the immediate contents of daily 
experience, and on the basis of this intuition is often erected the 
theology of pantheism or immanentism. At other times he 
experiences Reality as something immeasurably other than 


himself and all created things, as a Being infinitely great, holy 
and splendid, before whom the world as we know it appears ugly, 
gross and evil. From this intuition comes the theology of 
transcendence, or else the common corollary of pantheism—the 
doctrine of the illusory universe. Again, there are times when 
Reality presents itself to him as something so alive and intelligent 
that he feels himself to be in communion with a person. At other 
times he is so impressed with its infinitude and mystery that 
anything so suggestive of man as personality seems an 
unthinkable limitation. 

All of these apparently paradoxical elements will have their 
place in a truly complete mysticism, in a full experience of union 
with God. If the union is to be perfect, God must be in the most 
intimate and inseparable union not only with the soul but also 
with its entire experience of life and the world. But if that with 
which the soul is united is to be God, he must at the same time be 
infinitely above, beyond and other than the soul and the world. 
Furthermore, if God is the source and height of liveliness and 
creative power, he cannot be anything less than a person, since a 
law or principle is simply an automatic, mechanical and dead 
mode of behaviour. On the other hand, if God is the ultimate 
Reality, the one source of all things, he must be free from the 
limitations of personality as we know it, and must not be subject 
to the mutability and the limitations of the forms in which his 
creative activity is expressed. 

To these essential paradoxes or antinomies of religious 
experience must be added another, both mystical and 
philosophic. The human mind is profoundly dissatisfied with any 
form of absolute dualism, with a religion or a metaphysic for 
which ultimate Reality is not one and undivided. The 
dissatisfaction is not only felt with such crude dualisms as the 
Zoroastrian contrast of ultimate light and ultimate darkness, 
Ormuzd and Ahriman, or the Manichaean dualism of Spirit and 
Matter; as we have seen, it is even felt with the monotheistic 
“dualism” of Creator and creature ex nihilo. On the other hand, 
reason and the moral sense rebel at pantheistic monism which 
must reduce all things to a flat uniformity and assert that even 
the most diabolical things are precisely God, thus destroying all 
values. 

No forms of compromise or via media can resolve these 


antinomies because mystical experience presents them to us in 
the most extreme and contrasted manner. Compromise would 
altogether destroy their vitality and power over human life. Nor 
can we divide these elements as the sheep from the goats, and 
term some of them “true” mysticism and others “false,” for this 
would be a ridiculous simplification. Yet compromise or division 
has been the traditional method of Christian theology. There are 
two reasons for this. Firstly, the “theological mind,” which above 
all things seeks definition, precision and fixity, has the most 
intense difficulty in accepting the mystery of paradox and the 
terrible uncertainty as to ultimate truth which it seems to involve. 
Secondly, the reasoning processes of the Western mind, grounded 
as they are in Greek logic, can never be happy with a profound 
antinomy. A proposition must be true or false, and x cannot at 
the same time be both y and not y. 

On the whole, traditional theology has leaned principally to the 
theology of transcendence, of God’s holiness and otherness. After 
the Renaissance, to meet the rise of Humanism, it combined the 
stress on transcendence with an increased emphasis on the 
personality of God as this was revealed in the divine humanity of 
Jesus. Theology and spirituality became more and more 
Christocentric, and at the same time quite alien to the traditions 
of Christian mysticism! Contemplation, as understood by the 
mediaeval mystics, was replaced by affective and imaginative 
devotion to the humanity of Jesus.7 From the standpoint of 
mysticism this was a disaster based on a misunderstanding of the 
Incarnation, for it made the divine humanity transcendent and 
humanized the mystery of God. It frustrated the very purpose of 
the Incarnation because, in practice, it did not raise humanity to 
union with God; it raised only the historic Jesus.s God was made 
at once transcendent and anthropomorphic, and with such a God 
mysticism is impossible because it makes him as remote, or 
rather, infinitely more remote than another human being. 

Mediaeval mysticism as we find it in The Cloud of Unknowing, 
in Eckhart, Tauler, the Victorines, Ruysbroeck, and even as late as 
Denis the Carthusian, St. John of the Cross and Augustine Baker 
is little concerned with devotions to the humanity of Jesus. Yet 
the intensity and intimacy of the union with God which it 
experiences can only be justified in a Christian context by the 
doctrine of the Incarnation. For, in the words of St. Athanasius, 


“God became man that man might become God,”9 and it is 
precisely on the basis of the Incarnation, its revelation of the 
eternal function of the Word,10 and its realization of God’s union 
not only with Jesus but with man and all creation, that there is 
room for a complete mysticism in Christianity. 

When, however, theology tries to achieve a compromise 
between immanence and transcendence, both are deprived of 
their effect. God is not quite immanent and not quite 
transcendent; the world conceals his omnipresent Being like a 
veil; he is “in” all things, but not thoroughly united with them, 
just as water is not fully united with the jar which contains it 
because the substance of the water and the substance of the jar 
are mutually exclusive. In this sense God and the world are 
simply mixed. They may even interpenetrate to some degree like 
air and dust, but still they are mutually exclusive. But if God and 
the world are mutually exclusive, God does not actually transcend 
the world, because mutually exclusive entities must belong to the 
same order of being. For example, different shapes are mutually 
exclusive, and although a square can be put inside a circle, it 
cannot be fully united with it. A square can in no sense be a 
circle. But colour is wholly other than shape, and there is no 
mutual exclusiveness between a circle and redness. Colour can no 
more be described in terms of shape than God can be described in 
terms of created things. Yet although the colour red is quite other 
than the shape circle, there is a sense in which a circle can be 
red.i1 

The analogy of colour and shape goes some way to solving the 
problem, showing us that the completeness of God’s union with a 
creature depends on his very transcendence. But the analogy, and 
the solution to the problem which it suggests, has three 
disadvantages. Firstly, it leads us to think of God as a substance 
out of which things are made as figures might be cut out of paper 
or wood. It would follow from this that creatures are so many 
forms of God (shapes of colour). This gives us, secondly, the 
disadvantage of suggesting that God’s immanence in creatures 
circumscribes him. Thirdly, a transcendence or otherness of this 
type would seem to eliminate all possibility of God having any 
influence on the creature, or even of creating it. Colour is not a 
sufficient cause of shape. Beauty or intensity of colour would in 
no way be able to effect beauty or clarity of shape. The two 


orders of being touch; they may even coincide; the presence of 
the latter may even be shown to depend on the former. But there 
the relationship ends. There can be, as it were, no understanding, 
no communion, no passage of influence between the two. Here 
we have, in principle, the same difficulty that we found in the 
idea of the creation of the world ex nihilo. We do not see how it 
can possibly be done, but we are doing our best to safeguard the 
transcendence of God! 

For practical purposes mystical religion has always tended to 
insist that man and the world must be utterly united with God, 
must in some sense be God. In the words of the unknown author 
of The Cloud: 


For he is thy being, and in him thou art what thou art, not only by 
cause and by being, but also he is in thee both thy cause and thy being. 
And therefore think of God in thy work as thou dost on thyself, and on 
thyself as thou dost on God: that he is as he is and thou art as thou art; 
so that thy thought be not scattered nor separated, but oned in him that 
is all; evermore saving this difference betwixt thee and him, that he is 
thy being and thou art not his.... He is being both to himself and to all. 
And in that only is he separated from all—that he is being both of 
himself and of all. And in that is he one in all and all in him, that all 
things have their being in him, as he is the being of all.12 


Or as St. Catherine of Genoa put it, “My Being is God, not by 
simple participation, but by a true transformation of my Being”; 
and again, “My me is God: nor do I know my selfhood except in 
God.”i3 “The eye with which I see God,” said Eckhart, “is the 
same eye with which God sees me. My eye and God’s eye is one 
eye, and one sight, and one knowledge, and one love.”14 And 
again, 


When a man goes out of himself to find or fetch God, he is wrong. I do 
not find God outside myself nor conceive him excepting as my own and 
in me. A man ought not to work for any why, not for God nor for his 
glory nor for anything at all that is outside him, but only for that which 
is his being, his very life within him.1s 


Upon the certainty of this union with God depends the entire joy, 
power, and world-transfiguring character of the mystical 
experience. Here, too, is the source of the mystic’s vivid sense of 
spiritual freedom: he is one with God, and “neither height nor 
depth, neither principalities nor powers” can break this union. 


The mystic knows that he has it in spite of himself; that it is God’s 
gift, and that it is given quite irrespective of his merits and 
despite his total unworthiness. 

Yet his very gratitude for the gift will demand expression in 
worship and self-oblation, acts that can only be directed to a 
transcendent God, to One other than himself and infinitely 
exceeding him in holiness and glory. The attractive feature of 
pantheism is just that it imparts this sense of certain and 
unbreakable union with God. But its danger and falsity is that it 
excludes any basis for worship and gratitude, for in pantheism 
union with God is an automatic necessity; it is not a gift. On the 
other hand, the extreme of transcendental theism reduces the 
divine gift to mere “justification”’—that is, the chance for a new 
start after the remission of past sins—coupled with the “grace” to 
imitate the divine life more perfectly. God is here assisting man 
to become one with him by analogy only; there is no union of 
natures. 

Thus for the theology of pure transcendence, union with God is 
a goal not yet achieved save in rare instances of great saintliness 
and grace. It implies that those who have attained it have done so 
either through their own merits and efforts, or else that they are 
special objects of divine favouritism. Not only does this view 
encourage spiritual pride, but it raises the question as to how a 
human soul can rise to God unless it first has God. “Console 
thyself,” wrote Pascal, “thou wouldest not seek Me if thou hadst 
not found Me.”1ie But in the view of the mystics, union with God 
is a present fact to be realized rather than attained. It is neither to 
be earned nor is it a result of special favouritism; it is given to all 
to be realized, appreciated and used, just as God “maketh his sun 
to rise upon the evil and on the good, and sendeth his rain upon 
the just and upon the unjust.” Almost all mysticism, whether 
Western or Eastern,17 has the sense of the given-ness of union with 
God, of its eternal reality which has to be accepted and 
recognized—not achieved. In the words of Ruysbroeck: 


In its created being (the soul) incessantly receives the impress of its 
Eternal Archetype, like a flawless mirror, in which the image remains 
steadfast and in which the reflection is renewed without interruption by 
its ever-new reception in new light. This essential union of our spirit 
with God does not exist in itself, but it dwells in God and it flows forth 
from God and it depends upon God and it returns to God as to its 


Eternal Origin. And in this wise, it has never been, nor ever shall be, 
separated from God; for this union is within us by our naked nature, 
and, were this nature to be separated from God, it would fall into pure 
nothingness. And this union is above time and space and is always and 
incessantly active according to the way of God. But our nature, 
forasmuch as it is indeed like unto God but in itself is creature, receives 
the impress of its Eternal Image passively. This is that nobleness which 
we possess by nature in the essential unity of our spirit, where it is 
united to God according to nature. This neither makes us holy, nor 
blessed, for all men, whether good or evil, possess it within themselves; 
but it is certainly the first cause of all holiness and blessedness. is 


This extreme immanentism or quasi-pantheism of the mystics 
only becomes a problem when we try to consider the mystical 
experience from the strictly logical standpoint of theology. In 
practice the mystic does not find any conflict in his experience of 
God; nor, save in comparatively rare instances, does his sense of 
being one with God destroy his sense of values. This remains true 
even when mysticism is related to such an extremely immanentist 
theology as Hindu Vedanta or Mohammedan Sufiism. He may say 
to himself with the Upanishads, “Thou art Brahman!” but he does 
not then proceed to claim omnipotence and omniscience. Even 
supposing this to be pure pantheism, the moral blindness which 
most theologians attribute to the pantheist is largely theoretical. 
It might well arise if the pantheist were not a mystic; but a 
mystical pantheist is scarcely ever a consistent and logical 
pantheist, because he is trying to describe a relationship to God 
which is not in fact pantheism although it seems to be when he 
uses theological terms. 

But formal and official theology will take cognizance of his 
views and attempt to pass judgement upon them as if they were 
statements of dogma. The mystic, however, knowing that he 
cannot describe his experience exactly, has not tried to make a 
dogmatic statement. He uses theological language only because he 
is talking about God, because there is no other language available 
and appropriate. His statements are poetic rather than dogmatic, 
and it is as absurd to take them literally as to imagine that the 
poet really means that his beloved has cherries for lips and 
ravens’ wings for hair. Theology, however, is always reluctant to 
admit the limitations of its language, and disturbed to see it used 
with such alarming liberty. 


The very foundation of mysticism [writes Berdyaev] is an inner 
kinship or union between the human spirit and the divine, between 
creation and the Creator. It implies the overcoming of transcendence, 
and that sense of God and man being external to one another. Thus 
mysticism is always concerned with the immanence rather than the 
transcendence of God, an immanence, moreover, which is actually 
experienced. This is why mysticism always employs terms which differ 
from those of theology, and why in theological circles mysticism is 
always suspected of heretical tendencies. But mysticism is of such a 
profound nature that we cannot apply to it the more superficial criteria 
of heresy. Mystics are always suspected of pantheistic leanings and 
indeed, when an attempt is made to understand them rationally and to 
translate their experience into the terms of theology or metaphysics, 
they certainly do come very near to pantheism. Yet while pantheism is 
in reality a highly rationalistic doctrine, mysticism uses paradoxical and 
apparently contradictory expressions, because for the mystics both the 
identity between the creature and the Creator and the gulf which 
separates them are both equally facts of existence. Mysticism cannot be 
expressed either in terms of pantheistic monism or of theistic dualism.19 


Unless, therefore, we can find some terms other than 
pantheistic monism or theistic dualism there can be no vital 
relationship between mysticism and Christian theology. The 
highly desirable goal of a presentation of Christian doctrine 
interpreted by mystical religion will be impossible. The two must 
simply agree to leave one another alone; the mystic must agree 
not to give the impression of speaking dogmatically, and the 
theologian must agree not to judge mystical pronouncements by 
his own standards, and yet permit the mystic to use theological 
terms in his peculiar alogical and paradoxical manner. 

Fortunately, however, the terms can be found, and although 
they may not completely bridge the gap between mystical and 
theological pronouncements, they give a more satisfactory result 
than anything hitherto employed, and far more satisfactory than 
mere agreement to remain aloof. Language and _ intellectual 
thought, we must repeat, can never so embrace and describe the 
mystical experience that it may be communicated from one soul 
to another by mere words and ideas. But theology can adopt a 
principle of thought which will in great measure resolve the 
antinomy of transcendence and immanence, monism and 
dualism, without resort to compromise. This will not involve the 
acceptance of any new dogma, but of a new method, a new type 
of logic and technique of thought, which will not only resolve the 


antinomy, but will also illumine the very rationale of mystical 
experience. 

The root of the difficulty is that Western theology and 
philosophy, grounded as it is in Greek thought, has an inadequate 
conception of the unity of God. Our logic, our method of 
reasoning is entirely dualistic, and therefore cannot without 
contradictions treat of a Being who surpasses duality. The unity 
of God is therefore seen as opposed to multiplicity in God. God 
has no opposite, and yet we apply to him the term unity in a 
sense which has an opposite, for unity as we conceive it is 
unthinkable without the contrast of multiplicity. But we find in 
Indian thought a method which surpasses dualism in so far as the 
intellect is capable of so doing. This method is developed in 
Sankhara’s Advaita Vedanta and in Mahayana Buddhism. 

Neither of these two systems carry the method to a conclusion 
which would satisfy the Christian because they are working with 
basic material (i.e., revelation) which he would deem inadequate. 
But this need not concern us, for what is important is the method 
itself, and not the use which Vedantists and Buddhists have made 
of it. To some extent the quest of Vedanta is the same as that of 
Christianity, namely, the transcending of dualism, the realization 
of union with God. Both are agreed that God is the one supreme 
Reality, and that no second reality stands over against him on an 
equal footing, imposing any limitation upon him. God has no 
opposite. This is a sufficient basis of agreement for the Indian 
method to have relevance for Christianity. Our difficulty is that, 
while admitting the non-duality of God, we apply terms to him in 
a dualistic sense. We speak of him rightly as one, but then go on 
to reason from the term as if it were to be used in an exclusive 
and privative sense.20 

The method itself (which is an intellectual analogy of the 
mystic way) is a process of reaching as nearly as may be to the 
idea of pure non-duality, which, as will appear, is not at all the 
same thing as one-ness in the monistic sense. It is at the same 
time a searching critique of the dualism of every idea of unity 
that falls short of pure non-duality, a critique which very swiftly 
disposes of pantheistic monism. It starts with one item of data, 
one “revealed dogma” which is the same for Vedanta as for 
Christianity: God is That which has no opposite; he is One- 
without-a-second.21 All created things have opposites whereby 


they are conditioned and limited; all creatures are of a mutually 
exclusive character in their relations to each other, for this is not 
that, I am not thou, light is not darkness, red is not blue. But God 
transcends creatures in the sense that nothing has power to 
exclude him, to set any boundaries to his being and power. He is 
absolutely free of every external restraint. In a peculiar and 
profound sense God is all-inclusive; there is nothing “outside” 
him, for had he any “outside” he would have limitations and 
would not be infinite. It may be shown, then, that God has a 
power which no creature, as such, possesses—the power to be 
what he is not, to “other” himself. 

If this can be shown, it will, on the one hand, entirely fulfil the 
mystic’s intuition that God is “all in all” and that the universe is 
one with him. On the other hand, it will also account for the 
other aspect of his intuition, which is that individual things are 
not lost and obliterated in the unity of God but transfigured, seen 
as more perfectly and uniquely themselves. For if the unity of 
God is truly all-inclusive and non-dual, it must include diversity 
and distinction as well as one-ness; otherwise the principle of 
diversity would stand over against God as something opposite to 
and outside him. This inclusion of diversity is impossible for the 
God of pantheism, who cannot comprehend real diversity. The 
universe of the pantheist is unreal. 

Thus the logic of non-duality makes short work of pantheism. If 
all things are in reality one thing, God, such one-ness is exclusive, 
dual and limited, because it excludes real multiplicity. The very 
concept of one-ness is a term of duality, because it is 
inconceivable apart from the idea of two, or of many, or even of 
none. Therefore if in our quest for non-duality we state that all 
things are one God, we are limiting God; we are implying that he 
is not free to make or be something truly different from himself, 
and such a God is still dual, and for that very reason is in no way 
superior to the realm of duality or creation. 

On the other hand, the statement that all things are not God is, 
by itself, as dualistic as the statement that they are God. The God 
so conceived still fails to transcend the creaturely realm of 
duality. Orthodox theology, and especially theology in the 
tradition of St. Thomas, failed to see that God could include and 
even be many as well as one, because it regarded multiplicity and 
diversity as a privation and not a perfection of being. It saw diversity 


as the subjection of unity to division and disintegration. 
Particular things—men, trees, stones and stars—were particular 
just because they lacked the fulness of being, and expressed only a 
fragment of the divine Being. But this was a wholly negative idea 
of particularity. It did not realize that particularity was a great 
and positive good, that God’s expression of himself in particular 
things neither added to his being nor disintegrated it. It expressed 
the splendour of the divine unity in the splendour of variety, 
which, as the proverb says, is the spice of life. But the Neo- 
Platonic background of mediaeval thought, tinged as it was with 
Manichaeism, held a prejudice against variety and multiplicity. It 
was the old story of world-hatred, so inconsistent with the 
religion of the Incarnation. 

Thus God’s “othering” of himself in the creation is not, as in 
pantheism, a maya, an illusion. The multiplicity is as real as the 
unity, since the creature is one with God in the very act of being 
other than God. Thus we must change the meaning of the 
statement that God made the world out of nothing, and 
understand the nothing as the no-thing (sunyata), the unutterable 
mystery, the divine darkness, which is God himself as he appears 
to human sense and thought and feeling. For this seeming void, 
this no-thing intelligible to the human mind and its dualistic 
mode of thought, is God as he is absolutely in himself, beyond all 
duality—neither one nor many, nor both one and many, and yet 
with equal reality one and many, and both one and many.22 
Human speech cannot surpass its own inherent duality! 

The attempt to conceive a Being beyond all duality swiftly 
brings thought to the limits of its power and reduces philosophy 
and theology to silence before the mystery of God. But it does 
leave us with some positive concepts, as true as any idea of God, 
any formulation of the infinite, can be. 

Firstly, it lays greater stress than ever upon the divine freedom. 
For every form of pantheism God’s manifestation of himself in the 
universe is necessary, because the universe, if simply identical 
with God, must be as eternal as God. But to say that God is non- 
dual is another way of saying that he is free—absolutely. He is 
free to be One, not bound to be One. He is free to include 
diversity in his unity, free to “other” himself. This “othering” of 
himself is the free gift of his Being to creatures who otherwise 
might not have existed. And these creatures are in reality other 


than God; if they were not, God could not be said to give his 
Being to others, and would not be free to include real diversity in 
his unity. Thus non-duality means that God is entirely free from 
the essential limitation of finite existence, which is that a creature 
cannot at once be itself and another. More than ever, the creature 
may thank God for the free gift of life and being, not only 
because it might not have been given, but also because the gift is 
God. 

Secondly, the idea of God’s non-duality is a new way of 
understanding his love. For love is not simply, as St. Thomas 
suggests,23 the willing of another’s good; it is giving oneself 
entirely to another being.24 God’s creation of a being is one and 
the same act as his love for it. In truth he becomes one who is in 
truth other than himself. Thus a creature fulfils God’s love and 
will for itself not by being, or trying to be, God—but by being 
itself. This is true cooperation with God, because in that creature 
God is not being himself; he is being another. If by this means the 
creature fulfils God’s will and love, the more it is truly and 
distinctly itself, the more it is truly God; for in so doing it is 
affirming and manifesting God’s non-duality, his freedom to be 
what is not himself, his freedom to be more than mere one-ness. 
Thus one of the most interesting traits of mysticism is that those 
who have experienced most keenly their union with God are 
intensely real and unique personalities. 

This corrects one of the most usual perversions of mysticism— 
the attempt to become one with God by mere flight from 
everyday life and experience. It is a perversion because it is a half 
truth. Certainly mysticism begins with the contemplation of God 
as transcendent. Because God is the maker of all sensible and 
intelligible things, he himself can neither be sensed nor known. 
As transcendent, he can never be an object of experience or 
knowledge, and, conversely, no particular experience or state of 
mind can be the immediate knowledge of God.25 For all 
experiences and states of mind belong to the realm of duality, and 
are mutually exclusive. Thus the mystical experience is neither a 
particular state of mind nor (for this, too, has an opposite) mere 
blankness of mind. Like the mirror which reflects all images yet is 
not itself an image, the mystical experience underlies and is one 
with all experience, as is God himself. When St. Dionysius speaks 
of knowing God through agnosia or “unknowing,” he means that 


we may know God in all things through not knowing him in any. 
The mystic, he explains, “by the very fact of not seeing and not 
knowing (God), truly enters into him who is beyond sight and 
knowledge; knowing this, too, that he is in all things that are felt 
and known.”26 The state of union, like God himself, has no 
opposite; it is all-inclusive, for which reason any experience may 
participate in it. 

Therefore we discover the union of ourselves and of the 
creation with God through the very realization that they are 
themselves and not God. His very transcendence effects his 
perfect immanence, for “he ascended up far above all heavens, 
that he might fill all things.”27 The distinct, individual reality of 
things is the very measure of their union with God, of their 
fulfilment and expression of his freedom to include diversity, to 
love and be what is other than himself. For this reason, and not 
because he is a pantheist, the mystic apprehends all things as one 
with God. He does not see the reality of God behind the illusion 
of the creature; he sees God in the very reality, entity and 
uniqueness of the creature, in its very distinction from God.2s 

Any view which stresses the unity of the universe with God will 
in some quarters be termed pantheistic, and any formal denial of 
pantheism will be called “merely verbal.” But, strictly speaking, 
pantheism is the very definite doctrine that God and the universe 
are coterminous; that God is solely immanent, and that God 
minus the universe equals nothing. Such a doctrine is not only 
inconsistent with Christian dogma, but also with the theology of 
the Vedanta and Mahayana Buddhism, all of which insist that the 
ultimate Reality is infinite, free from all necessity and limitation, 
and that its existence would in no way be affected by the 
dissolution of the universe. True pantheism holds, furthermore, to 
a necessary identity of God and the universe, whereas all 
doctrines holding the infinity of God do and must maintain that 
the very existence of the universe is absolutely unnecessary 
(which is probably the real meaning of the Hindu concept of 
maya). Since by definition the infinite cannot be subject to any 
constraint, the existence as well as the union of finite beings with 
it must be entirely gratuitous. Thus the essential distinction 
between the doctrines of non-duality and pantheism is that the 
former, conceiving God as infinite, regards his union with the 
universe as a free act of grace, whereas the latter, conceiving him 


to be no more than a universe of finite and composite beings, 
regards it as necessary. Certainly there is the danger that men 
may presume upon this freely given union, but in the hands of 
evil men any truth may be dangerous. 


Ill 


Underlying the element of dualism in Christian theology is the 
problem of evil, and obviously the concept of God’s non-duality 
will be unacceptable if it offers the same answer to this problem 
as pantheistic monism. Attempts have been made to escape the 
dualism of a God who utterly excludes evil through the idea that 
whereas God is Being, evil is essentially non-being, and having no 
ontological reality cannot stand over against God as an equal and 
opposite power conditioning him. But if evil is non-being, it offers 
no real problem; it is a mere illusion. The more realistic 
theologians therefore describe evil as a tendency in the direction 
of non-being, a desire, a mode of action, which is quite real 
although directed to an unreal goal. If God absolutely opposes 
and excludes this desire, it would seem that we have a clear 
dualism. But if we try to resolve this dualism by saying that this 
desire is, like everything else, an aspect of God, the whole realm 
of values will become illusory. 

From the standpoint of non-duality, evil is not and cannot be 
the opposite of God. Yet this is just what evil wishes to be, 
opposing God in the entirely futile hope that it can exclude him, 
stand over against him, and limit him as an equal; this is its 
tremendous conceit. Therefore the supremacy of God over evil 
requires that it should never be allowed to achieve this aim. Evil 
tries to oppose God, but if God were to oppose evil, he would not 
only be acknowledging it as an equal and opposite, but allowing 
it to fulfil its purpose. Hence it is not by opposing evil that God 
renders it futile; he overcomes it through his non-duality, his all- 
inclusiveness, his love, which is unconquerable and supreme 
because it does not oppose and cannot effectively be opposed. 
Evil is the attempt to pick a quarrel with God, and because it 
cannot, it wears itself out with exasperation. Although evil 
struggles to exclude and oppose God, it never succeeds because 
he always embraces it in his all-inclusive love. To evil this love 


appears like wrath and opposition, though this is its own wrath 
and opposition projected on the “mirror” of God and inflamed by 
perpetual frustration. It tries to mar the purity of the mirror by 
making it reflect its own loathsomeness. But the loathsomeness is 
simply reflected back to its origin with perfect clarity, and serves 
only to demonstrate the inherent purity of the mirror. 

Not only is evil unable to oppose and exclude God, but it also 
achieves the very contrary of its aim. In spite of itself, it achieves 
greater and greater demonstrations of the divine love, just as in 
trying to destroy Christ, Judas achieved unwittingly the salvation 
of the world. This was because Christ accepted the injury done to 
him with the all-inclusive love of God. “Father, forgive them, for 
they know not what they do.” The greater the evil, the greater it 
proves the love of God to be, because that love simply “enlarges” 
itself to include and embrace it. 

Evil originates, not in God, but in the real otherness of the 
creature, to which God is giving his own Being. He permits it to 
originate, because in refusing he would destroy the real 
individuality, the very freedom, of the creature. He would then 
be making the creature one with himself by identity instead of 
distinction. He permits it, also, because he knows that it cannot 
truly oppose him and, in the long run, can only demonstrate his 
glory and holiness. Theology, however, can never admit that God 
is responsible for evil. Yet although God is not responsible for 
evil, he makes himself responsible. Evil, to its own fury and 
confusion, finds itself adopted by God, finds that it cannot escape 
from union with him, finds it impossible to alienate itself from 
the love of God. “If I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there 
also!” Thus God renders the evil desire futile by his very 
immanence in it; yet if he were only immanent, this would 
amount to his condonement of and subjection to evil. But because 
at the same time he transcends evil, and is in himself perfect 
goodness and holiness, he can give himself to evil without 
subjection as the pure mirror is untainted by a vile reflection.29 
Thus evil is overcome by love and acceptance when the One who 
loves is in principle greater than evil. But love and acceptance 
become condonement and subjection when applied to evil by one 
who is not greater in principle, which is why man is incapable of 
overcoming it by his own efforts. For man is involved in a 
dualistic relationship with evil. Evil is the opposite of creaturely 


goodness, but not of the goodness of God. It destroys creaturely 
being, but not the Being of God. Of himself, man can only 
condone evil or fight it. But to fight it is like trying to smooth 
raging waters with a flatiron, or to drown out an abominable 
noise by singing hymns; the result is only an increased turbulence 
and discordance. 

Man can only overcome evil by grace, by realizing his union 
with God. Through this he awakens to the transcendent 
immanence of God in his own evil, which effects the forgiveness 
of sins. He discovers that to whatever depths of depravity he may 
descend, he can neither escape nor separate himself from that 
given union with God which he has by distinction as a creature, 
as an “othering” of God himself. Because of this he participates in 
the divine Being over which evil has no power. If this does not 
move him to such gratitude for the gift of union with God that he 
sets his will firmly against evil, he shows himself incapable of 
appreciating the gift, incapable of appreciating an eternal and 
unbreakable unity with Love itself. And lacking appreciation he 
excludes himself from the Beatific Vision, which is precisely 
hell.30 

In practice the truth of the non-duality of God is difficult to 
accept for psychological rather than moral or theological reasons. 
Man is slow to accept union with God as a living fact. It involves 
high responsibilities. It involves an unwelcome deflation of that 
pride whereby man is always trying to attain union with God by 
his own efforts and merits. But union with God is a gift, a reality 
already achieved by the love of God. Man can only realize this 
when he ceases his proud effort to be God and wholeheartedly 
accepts his manhood, his very separateness, individuality, and 
limitation. In this sense only is he one with God. 

Again, non-duality designates something essentially free, alive 
and ungraspable, which eludes all precise definition. It indicates 
the impossibility of possessing God, the mystery of life, in any 
fixed form of thought or feeling, or in any particular state of mind 
and activity, or in any graspable mode whatsoever, of which one 
may say, “Now I have it.” Yet man is frightened of this living, 
ungraspable mystery, and is always trying to have it securely 
boxed up in some philosophical, ethical, theological, or 
psychological formula, where its vitality is destroyed. Thus when 
mystical union is understood as some special state of mind or 


feeling that may be imitated, some particular experience that may 
be gotten and possessed, this is a false and devitalized mysticism. 
In trying to hold God in one fixed form, we exclude him from all 
others, and, so far as our apprehension of him is concerned, 
“devitalize” him in the one that we hold. We lose his immanence 
because we try to grasp and draw down his transcendence. 

Pride, and fear of the living spontaneity and mystery of God, 
together contribute to an intellectual and spiritual rigidity which 
deadens Christian life and keeps God and man safely apart. 
Theistic dualism, which preserves the scheme of values but 
frustrates the union of man and God, is as much a petrifaction of 
the spiritual life as pantheistic monism, which affirms the union 
but invalidates the scheme of values. Compromise, which is in 
practice the usual solution, virtually puts God into the same order 
and hierarchy of being as man, only in an immeasurably superior 
position. Under such conditions the union of God and man is at 
best a mixture, and can be little more complete than the union of 
two human persons. None of these views fit the facts of mystical 
experience, of which the predominating type is the sense of union 
so complete that the mystic feels himself to be of one life and one 
being with God, and yet somehow still man, lacking the 
omnipotence and omniscience of Godhead and laying no claim to 
it. 

No more do these partial conceptions of God harmonize with 
the doctrine of the Incarnation. Salvation is the union of man and 
God, and the Incarnation is the means of salvation because it 
achieves the union of man as man with God as God. It does not 
involve the conversion of man into superman or demigod, 
because union with God is given to man as he is—in his 
creaturely nature, as an individual human person distinct from 
the divine Person. The consistency of distinct human personality 
and perfect union with God is only possible in terms of the non- 
duality of God. For this union is more than a harmony of wills or 
a contact of beings absolutely external to one another. It is a 
union beyond the realm of duality where to be and not to be God 
presents no contradiction, where the creation in all its 
creatureliness is yet one with God. 

1 Summa Theologica, I. Q. ii, a. 3. 


2 The Gestalt or configuration theory of the universe is perhaps the only 
serious alternative offered to the various systems of mechanism or vitalism in 


the whole field of modern philosophy. It explains the development of 
organisms very satisfactorily until it tries to reach a final, or first, organism— 
the universe-as-a-whole, greater than the sum of its parts. But such a universal 
organism would be self-originating, and therefore utterly unlike all other 
organisms—utterly different in principle. Yet the Gestalt theorists assume it to 
be the same in principle, and reason accordingly. For a brief exposition see R. 
H. Wheeler, The Laws of Human Nature. New York and Cambridge, 1932, esp. 
pp. 1-66. 


3 The foregoing is intended as nothing more than a résumé of the basic 
philosophical argument for belief in God. For the detailed argument see Summa 
Theologica, 1. QQ. 1-26; E. L. Mascall, He Who Is. London, 1944; Farrell, A 
Companion to the Summa, vol. i, chs. 2-5. New York, 1941. Mascall’s work is a 
particularly valuable discussion of the argument in relation to recent 
philosophical trends. 


4 This does not, of course, mean that the “nothing” was in any sense a 
material out of which the universe was constructed, nor yet should we imagine 
it even as an empty space apart from God within which it was made. 


5 The term pantheism is commonly used much too vaguely, and here must be 
taken in its strict sense, namely that God and the universe are two names for 
the same thing, that God - universe = 0. Sometimes confused with pantheism 
is emanationism, the doctrine that the universe is a finite form of part of the 
divine substance. But the argument which follows assumes that the infinite is 
indivisible and can have no parts. 


6 Paradiso, xxxiii. 143-145. “But now my desire and my will were revolved, 
like a wheel which is moved evenly, by the Love which moves the sun and the 
other stars.” (Norton.) 


7 See on this the excellent article “Roman Catholic Mysticism” by Dom John 
Chapman in Hastings’ Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics. 


8 The dogma of the Incarnation insists that in Christ God became man, not a 
man. That is to say, in Christ there are two natures, but only one person. The 
person is divine—God the Son—but it is in hypostatic union with a complete 
human nature, though not with a human person. Thus the humanity of Christ 
is representative of all humanity, and by this means the gifts of the Incarnation 
are bestowed upon the whole race and not upon the historic Jesus alone. 


9 De incarn. verbi, 54. iii. Some would prefer to translate, “God became man 
that man might become divine.” Cf. Irenaeus, “non ab initio dii facti sumus, sed 
primo quidem homines, tunc demum dii.” 


10 Cf. Irenaeus, Adv. haer., 3. xvi. 6. “His only-begotten Word is always 
present with the human race, united to and mingled with his own creation, 
according to the Father’s pleasure.” Again, ibid., 3. xviii. 7: “And unless man 
had joined to God, he could never have become a partaker of incorruptibility. 
... Wherefore also (the Word) passed through every stage of life, restoring all 
to communion with God.” 

11 For clarity of thought here, one must avoid the mental picture of uniting 


the colour red with a white circle outlined in black. The shape circle must be 
thought of as quite abstract until the colour gives it substance. In rather the 


same way creatures are purely abstract until God gives them being. 


12 The Epistle of Privy Counsel, ch. 1, in The Cloud of Unknowing. Ed. Dom 
Justin McCann. London, 1943, p. 96. 


13 From the Vita e Dottrina, quoted in Underbill’s Mysticism. London, 1930, 
pp. 129 and 396. 


14 Meister Eckhart’s Sermons. Trs. Claud Field. London, n.d., p. 32. 
15 Pfeiffer’s Meister Eckhart. Trs. C. de B. Evans. London, 1924, vol. i, p. 163. 


16 Cf. St. Bernard, De diligendo Deo, cap. 7: “Nemo te quaerere valet, nisi quod 
Prius invenerit.” 

17 On the sense of given-ness in Eastern mysticism see my article “The 
Problem of Faith and Works in Buddhism” in the Columbia University Review 
of Religion of May, 1941. 


1s Adornment of the Spiritual Marriage. Bk. II, cap. 57. Trs. Dom P. Wynschenk 
in his John of Ruysbroeck London, 1916. 


19 Berdyaev, Freedom and the Spirit. Trs. O. F. Clarke. London, 1935, p. 242. 
The entire chapter is a most competent and suggestive discussion of the 
problem. 


20 Cf. Summa Theol., I. Q. xi. a. 3: “Although in God there is no privation, 
still, according to the mode of our apprehension, he is known to us only by 
way of privation and remotion. Thus there is no reason why certain privative 
terms should not be predicated of God, for instance, that he is incorporeal, and 
infinite; and in the same way it is said of God that he is one.” But terms of 
privation are used to show God’s freedom from limitation. The term one as 
used here does not do this. It confines God within the dualistic and mutually 
exclusive opposition of one and many. If St. Thomas had substituted the term 
non-dual for one, he would have had a term analogous to incorporeal and 
infinite. 

21 “The Lord our God is one God.”—Deut. 6:4. “Before me there was no God 
formed, neither shall there be after me.”—Isaiah 43:10. “Is there a God beside 
me? Yea, there is no God; I know not any.”—Isaiah 44:8. 

22 Cf. St. Dionysius pseudo-Areopagite, Theologia Mystica, cap. 5: “Neither is 
he ... one, nor oneness, ... neither is there any entire affirmation or negation 
that may be made concerning him.” 


23 Summa Theol, I. Q. 20, a. 2: “To love anything is nothing else than to will 
good to that thing.” 


24 “Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his 
friends.”—John 15:13. To lay down one’s life is, of course, to give oneself 
entirely, which is precisely what God does in the Incarnation and Atonement. 
So too St. Dionysius, De Divinis Nominibus, IV. 13: “On behalf of the truth we 
must dare to affirm that the Cause of the universe himself, by his abounding 
love and goodness, is placed outside of himself in his providence toward all 
things that have being ... and so is drawn from his transcendent throne above 
all to dwell within all, through a transcendent and ecstatic power whereby he 
yet remains within himself.” 


25 This same “apophatic” approach to God may be found in Advaita Vedanta. 


All things sensed and known belong to the realm of dvaita or duality, for they 
have opposites and thus are not God. So to each of them the seeker says, “Neti, 
neti,”—“Not this, not this.” Cf. St. Dionysius, Ep. ad Gaium Therapeutem: “And if 
anyone, seeing God, were to understand what he saw, he would not have seen 
God, but some one of his creatures that exist and may be known.” 


26 Ep. ad Dorotheum Liturgum. 
27 Ephesians 4:10. 


28 Probably the nearest thing to the concept of God as non-dual to be found 
in Christian philosophy is the work of Nicholas of Cusa, Cardinal Bishop of 
Brixen (1401-1464). But he seemed to find the unity and multiplicity of God 
necessary aspects of the divine Being, even though the necessity of creation was 
internal and not external to God. Otherwise the parallel is close. Thus, “Idem 
ipsum Deus et creatura: secundum modum datoris Deus, secundum modum dati 
creatura.” De dato, Il. p. 286. See his Vision of God. Trs. E. G. Salter. London, 
1928. Also Henry Bett, Nicholas of Cusa. London, 1932, esp. Part II, chs. 1 and 
2. 


29 Cf. Faber, Creator and Creature. London, 1928, p. 71: God “distinctly 
permits and actually concurs with every exercise of them (our faculties) in 
thinking, loving or acting. This influx and concourse of God ... gives a peculiar 
and terrific character to acts of sin.... Everything is penetrated with God, while 
his inexpressible purity is all untainted, and his adorable simplicity unmingled 
with that which he so intimately pervades, enlightens, animates and sustains.” 


30 On the implications of the foregoing section for practical morality, see 
below, pp. 200-212. 


II. THE HEART OF GOD 


“If we may credit certain hints contained in the lives of the saints, 
love raises the spirit above the sphere of reverence and worship 
into one of laughter and dalliance: a sphere in which the soul 
says:— 


‘Shall I, a gnat which dances in Thy ray, 
Dare to be reverent?’ ” 


In these words Coventry Patmorei expressed a truth which is of 
the very essence of union with God and which, on the surface, 
seems contrary to the whole mood of the Christian religion as we 
have known it. As the mystical experience illumines our 
conception of the Being of God, so too it gives us a deeper 
knowledge of his character, and as the former kind of knowledge 
is expressed in the symbols of metaphysical thought, the latter is 
expressed in symbols of moral qualities. Of necessity our symbols 
of God’s character will be the more anthropomorphic of the two, 
and, since we are men, we shall always be to some extent 
compelled to talk, think and feel about God in our own image. 
This manlike symbol of God has, in the history of Hebrew- 
Christian religion, undergone many changes parallel to the 
growth of moral ideals. Like every other form of religious 
symbolism it will deteriorate and become obstructive when not 
informed by mystical insight and when we outgrow it in mental 
and emotional development. For just these two reasons the moral 
image of God largely prevalent in modern Church religion is 
inferior, and all too often inspires us with feelings quite other 
than those implied in Patmore’s words. 

In general it may be said that our moral image of God is more 
or less good and true, but not particularly beautiful. It is lacking 
in Beauty and Beauty’s handmaidens—joy, laughter and, in its 
sublimest sense, playfulness, a virtue which is at the very root of 
creative art. Of that trinity of virtues, the Good, the Beautiful and 
the True, the Beautiful has always been somewhat problematic 


for Christian thought, since it has felt that so many things are 
beautiful which are neither true nor good. The restoration of 
Beauty to its proper place in our image of God is one of the more 
important results of an incarnational mysticism, for Beauty is at 
once the most spiritual and the most material of the three virtues. 

It is the most spiritual because it is the least serious and the 
least necessary; it is thoroughly gratuitous and _ entirely 
characteristic of God’s loving freedom. A dead and mechanical 
God could be true in the sense of real and good in the sense of 
existing; such a God would be blind necessity itself. But only a 
living God can be inherently beautiful, because, as our 
civilization bears witness, beauty is not necessary for mere 
existence. However, in its freedom, its gratuitousness, its playful 
absence of ulterior motive, beauty is of the essence of spiritual 
life. 


Spirit lacks all gravity and in so far seriousness. Seen from Spirit, 
nothing is heavy; it takes all things lightly. Not only the concept of toil, 
even that of suffering finds no object in it. There is toil only from the 
viewpoint of Gana (the flesh); and man knows pain and sorrow only as a 
creature of feeling and emotion.... Thus, in the first place, spiritual man 
must needs impress man of the earth as wanting in seriousness. This is 
true already of the man of courage, for he puts his life to the stake; that 
is to say: he plays with his life, which is indeed the current French and 
German way of expressing the same. But the believer, above all, must 
appear most sadly deficient in seriousness to the man of heavy 
earthliness. Consciously, he stakes on what is uncertain. He trusts most 
rashly despite the opinions of the sententious and the objections of the 
grave.2 


On the other hand, beauty is the most material because it 
expresses itself in perfection of form, a perfection which is 
unnecessary from the standpoint of a limited truth and goodness. 
To Christians infected with Gnosticism beauty is suspect just 
because it is associated with matter and especially with woman, 
the symbol of Mother Earth. But because the Incarnation 
expresses God’s love of the earth, and began its historical 
manifestation in God’s love for a woman, this suspicion must be 
heretical from a truly Catholic viewpoint. Obviously, any one of 
the trinity of virtues can be perverted—goodness by self- 
righteousness, truth by lack of charity in the telling, and beauty 
by licentiousness. 


But the three virtues are essential to each other’s perfection, 
and a God not seen as fully beautiful is for that reason less good 
and true, and, above all, less living. In the Eternal Now we 
experience not only the love and the mystery of God but also his 
liveliness and creative joy which, expressing themselves in the 
beauty of nature, reflect the inherent beauty of God. Ex divina 
pulchritudine esse omnium derivator.3 

Beauty is, too, the object of our most spiritual as well as of our 
most material perceptions, of mystical vision and of sense and 
feeling. Because man is so powerfully controlled by the latter, an 
image of God deficient in beauty is of small appeal to him; and 
this is especially true of that stratum of the modern mind which 
we have been considering throughout this book—the educated, 
sincere, thoughtful and spiritually hungry pagan. He is repelled 
by the downright ugliness and joylessness of so much that passes 
for Christianity. This cannot be changed by mere external 
adjustments in ecclesiastical art and manners, or of the mere tone 
and style of teaching and preaching. It must proceed from an 
inner experience of the beauty and the joy of God. 


I 


Western man has attained a far greater degree of culture and 
discipline in his thinking than in his feeling—so much so that the 
idea of evaluating religion from an aesthetic as well as from an 
intellectual standpoint seems to him quite frivolous. He considers 
the beauty or ugliness of religious symbols and concepts quite 
irrelevant to their truth, and, of course, it is truth which matters. 
Yet however much their truth may matter, their power lies more 
than we care to admit in their effect upon our feelings. Mature 
and disciplined feelings have as much right to evaluate the worth 
of a religion as the intellect, since they reflect upon an aspect of 
reality which is hidden from pure thought—a fact almost 
incomprehensible to the overdeveloped intellectualism of 
Western philosophy. But if our feeling were as highly developed 
an instrument as our intellect, the acceptance of certain ideas 
would depend both upon their being thought true and felt true. 
Only because of the disproportionate growth of our thinking do 
we consider it a more reliable judge of spiritual values than 


feeling which, for us, is as unreliable as primitive man’s intellect. 
Our feelings mislead us just as the primitive’s thinking misleads 
him—simply because it has never been developed. There is no 
inherent deficiency in the faculty itself. 

It is otherwise with a people such as the Chinese. From our 
standpoint their strictly intellectual development leaves much to 
be desired, for we find their philosophical reasoning, for instance, 
lacking in coherence. But in feeling and aesthetic judgement they 
are so far beyond us that we cannot really translate much of their 
philosophic literature into any Occidental language. They have, 
for example, more than a hundred words expressing nuances of 
aesthetic experience for which we have absolutely no equivalents. 
While we may regard this as a decadent overrefinement of 
culture, we must not forget that our own high degree of 
intellectual subtlety could give them a similar impression. But the 
Chinese “aesthete” is not at all decadent, for he has what the 
Occidental aesthete usually lacks—strength of character and 
amazing emotional control. He is a philosopher of feeling as 
distinct from a philosopher of thinking. Not only in art but also in 
religion and morals his standards of judgement are aesthetic 
rather than intellectual. This has seldom been taken into account 
in presenting the Christian religion to the Chinese. The best 
minds of China find it unconvincing and repellent because of an 
entirely unnecessary ugliness which we have had neither the 
wisdom nor the imagination to avoid, giving them, to cite one 
illustration, translations of the Bible so atrocious in style that 
they look upon the best efforts of Christianity as we look upon 
uncouth religious cults from the backwoods. 

In view of our emotional immaturity it is not surprising that we 
have given little serious consideration to the aesthetic aspect of 
our image of God. Just because of their lack of cultivation, most 
theologians are apt to regard the feelings and emotions as the 
special province of the devil, since they yield so easily to his 
temptations, and to pass over all the objections of feeling to our 
image of God as unworthy of attention. But in neglecting these 
objections we overlook one of those great opportunities for the 
amplification and profounder understanding of Christian truth 
which, when neglected, estrange so many from the Faith.4 

In the last thousand years Western man has undergone a 
development which has made certain primitive notions of God 


unacceptable to him. Christian thought has kept pace with this 
development, constantly deepening and purifying the intellectual 
conception of God so that no one is asked to think of him as an 
old man with a white beard sitting upon a cloud-borne throne 
among the stars. But so far from there having been any parallel 
deepening of our aesthetic conception, most theologians consider 
such sensitivity to the beauty of an idea a sign of a womanish 
softening of the brain, thinking that when confronted with a 
logically sound truth the duty of the feelings is simply to “take 
it,” as if there were some salutary medicine in the very pain of 
the feelings. This attitude denies the divine intention of the union 
of the whole man with God, wherein man contemplates him 
perfectly with all the faculties of the soul. Those, therefore, who 
neglect the aesthetic contemplation of God are remaining 
insensitive to him, and even at discord with him, in an important 
part of their souls. 

There is a reciprocal relation between the aesthetic image of 
God and the response of our feelings towards him. And since, 
whether we like it or not, the quality of feeling dictates the whole 
atmosphere of piety, generations of immature feeling build up a 
collective image which, although it has many slight variations, 
permeates Christian piety as a crude perfume will linger in the 
draperies of a house. Many people who might be capable of a 
mature response of the feelings of God come into contact with 
this collective image (one can hardly avoid it), with the result 
that it calls out from them an infantile and immature response 
and perpetuates the bad tradition. Popular Christian piety of the 
post-Renaissance period is as awkward, sentimental and self- 
conscious as an adolescent boy’s first love affair. 

The spell of this bad atmosphere is tremendous and, to a great 
degree, unconscious. Undeveloped as our feelings are, they are 
none the less powerful, and in practice they mould our religion to 
a far greater degree than our thinking. Saturated in this 
atmosphere, otherwise mature souls are retarded in their growth 
and remain content with a piety which, lacking the genuine 
naiveté and unaffected simplicity of the child, has rather the bad 
infantilism and maudlin emotionalism of prolonged adolescence. 

This problem is particularly acute for Christianity because it 
knows God as a person and not as a principle. A person, a living 
being, affects the feelings much more violently than an 


impersonal Absolute. In Christianity the personality of God is 
more strongly emphasized even than in Judaism and 
Mohammedanism because of its central belief that the highest 
symbol of God is the human character of Jesus. Intellectually, we 
know that while God is a person he is not a man, or even an 
infinitely glorified, cosmically proportioned superman. He 
transcends entirely the hierarchy of created forms and natures. 
But this lofty intellectual discernment of God, having no parallel 
in the realm of feeling, has little effect upon piety, which still 
responds to God as to a man, often as crude in conception as vast 
in proportion. 

Our collective image of God is frequently inferior to accepted 
human standards of perfection. Such inferiority would be 
understandable if it were caused by unavoidable limitations of 
vision. But the limitations of our image of God are by no means 
unavoidable. There is no reason at all why we should not 
recognize in God the beauty which we perceive in nature and 
create in art, and why we should avoid such recognition on the 
poor excuse that the beauty of God is so great as to be 
inconceivable. For while it is equally true that God is 
intellectually inconceivable, we have not therefore refused the 
task of intellectual contemplation, which, although it can never 
be more than the merest approximation to truth, has certainly 
deepened our understanding of God and even increased our love. 
Devout and thoughtful Christians will vaguely acknowledge that 
all the beauty and mystery, the gaiety and exuberance, which we 
see in nature and art exist supremely and perfectly in God, but 
there is little sign of any real appreciation of these qualities in 
their piety. 

The effort of appreciation involved is great not only because 
God is great and mystical vision is rare, but also because the dead 
weight of the present aesthetic conception is hard to overcome. 
This is partly due to the fact that those who mould the Church’s 
life and live most deeply within it are largely unaware of the 
defect. They do not realize that many, many souls prefer 
impersonal ideas of God, not because they are more satisfying 
intellectually, but because they do not offend the aesthetic sense, 
even though they may not stimulate it so much. They prefer the 
impersonal God, not because they believe that God is a blind and 
mechanical principle, but because the personal God or 


Christianity has been presented to them as an uninspiring or even 
offensive kind of person. Nor has this picture of God been helped 
by certain prevalent conceptions of the personality of Jesus. 


II 


Despite the fact that while God is living he is not a man, and that 
while he is called “he” (for “it” would indicate something 
lifeless), God has no sex, the image of God which determines so 
great a part of our relations with him is that of an immeasurably 
great man and of a male. This is true not only of popular notions 
of God, but also of that important type of Catholic mysticism in 
which the soul plays the female role of the Beloved, while God 
the Lover is the male who “ravishes” the soul. For the history of 
the Christian idea of God begins in the patriarchal culture of the 
Hebrews where the supremacy of the male was unquestioned.s 
Yahweh was the King of kings and Lord of lords, titles of those 
Oriental tyrants of whom he became the heightened image. 
Philosophically, we do not think of God as having the peculiar 
personal characteristics of a tribal patriarch, nor yet of an 
Oriental despot of uncertain temper and undoubted power, whose 
every whim is law and before whom all must grovel in the dust. 
Even when this awesome creature is endowed with a sense of 
perfect justice and mercy, he does not fit our philosophic 
conception, because he is still very much of a man—ridiculous in 
that he takes himself too seriously. Nearer to our intellectual idea 
of God is the type of emperor envisaged by Lao-tzu, who advised 
the would-be ruler to be like the Tao, governing his subjects 
without letting them know that they were being governed. 


The great Tao pervades everywhere, both on the left and on the right. 

By it all things come into being, and it does not reject them. 

Merits accomplished, it does not possess them (or, lay claim to them). 

It loves and nourishes all things but does not dominate over them.... 
Because it never assumes greatness, therefore it can accomplish greatness. 


Therefore the Sage (as ruler), in order to be above the people, must in words 
keep below them; 


In order to be ahead of the people, he must in person keep behind them. 
Thus when he is above, the people do not feel his burden; 
When he is ahead, the people do not feel his hindrance. 


Therefore all the world is pleased to hold him in high esteem and never get 
tired of him. 
Because he does not compete, no one competes with him.« 


In our spiritual tradition this sublime idea of the greatness of God 
consisting in his humility appears first in Deutero-Isaiah’s 
conception of the “suffering Servant,” and finds its highest 
expression in the humility of Christ, for “whosoever will be chief 
among you, let him be your servant.” 

But in our working image of God the masculine element of the 
Oriental tyrant and the “feminine” element of the mysterious and 
self-effacing servant of the universe have not been quite happily 
combined. However incomplete and crude it may be, there is 
something gloriously robust and splendid in the figure of the wise 
and all-merciful King of kings, enthroned on high in infinite 
majesty, whose gaze is so terrible that none may look upon it and 
live. This conception lives on in the Mohammedan picture of 
Allah, and, for all its limitations, is aesthetically sound. 

The problem is to synthesize the feminine qualities of 
cherishing love, self-effacement, compassion and graciousness 
with a figure so positively and aggressively male, and to achieve 
a result which is not mere effeminate masculinity, a “wishy- 
washy” compromise. With this symbolically feminine element go 
also the qualities of beauty and playfulness, which have, as we 
have seen, to be included in an image of God almost exclusively 
righteous and purposeful. Lacking the feminine element this 
righteousness is stiff and solemn, and incompatible with all forms 
of beauty excepting the sculptural and architectural. Purely 
masculine righteousness is rigidity and tension, unbending self- 
control and fixity of principle. Here, projected upon God, is all 
that fear and distrust of suppleness and charm which man on the 
defensive associates with “woman’s wiles.” A woman may yield 
easily to tears while, for shame of being thought a woman, a man 
will grit his teeth and remain as unmoved as a rock. Yet a rock is 
more damaged by a hard blow than yielding water, which may be 
struck and cut a thousand times without leaving any wound. And 
rock, for all its hardness, is easily worn away or cracked by the 
softness of water and plants. 


Man when living is soft and tender; when dead he is hard and tough. 
All animals and plants when living are tender and fragile; when dead 


they become withered and dry. Therefore it is said: the hard and tough 
are parts of death; the soft and tender are parts of life.7 


A purely male God is therefore dead. 

The root of the matter is this: that an image of God in which 
the rigid qualities predominate, which excludes the beautiful, the 
fluid, the playful and the feminine, simply mirrors that fear of life 
and Reality which we saw as the chief obstacle to our realization 
of union with God. The rigid, male God embodies the ideal of the 
possessive will—to grasp and hold the mystery of life, to freeze 
the desired form of the living moment into an eternal and 
immobile possession. And so frozen, the thing is quite dead. The 
moment, the movement, the life has passed on and gone free. The 
feminine element is lacking in our image of God because we fear 
it in life as the beauty which burns our fingers when we try to 
hold it—the supple, flowing, changing aspect of things which so 
exasperates us because we desire to possess it and cannot, since it 
is the created reflection of the life and the mystery of God. Here 
is the origin of all the Manichaean and Gnostic horror of the 
earth and of woman which has so infected the Christian Church. 

This fear, too, was responsible for involving our theology so 
deeply with Neo-Platonic and Aristotelian conceptions of the 
divine nature as the impassive and unmoving One, as if the 
suppleness of movement implied some imperfection, perfection 
being identified with the finished, the complete and the 
symmetrical, which is again the dead. Bound up with this 
particular idea of perfection, theology has never been able to 
explain how or why this inert Unity should have produced such 
an active multiplicity as the created universe. But in God 
conceived as non-duality rather than unity, or oneness, there is 
room for movement and life. 

With all his robust masculinity, the God of the Hebrews is a 
long way from this frozen rigidity. He is the embodiment of true 
manliness, however crudely conceived, because his nature 
contains a subordinate feminine element, for he is above all a 
creative artist, and the great symbol of his presence is not rock 
but fire—the burning bush of Horeb. Passage after passage in the 
Old Testament dwells on his delight in beauty, for there is not a 
trace of Manichaeism in the Hebrew religion. The woman is 
subordinate, but not despised. But for those who conceived God 


as the impassive, primal Unity, the creation was always 
problematic; the process whereby the One produced the many 
amounted to a “progressive disintegration” through a hierarchy of 
intermediary principles or aeons, the number of which was 
multiplied in proportion to the horror in which the physical 
world was held. But this device solved and explained nothing. 
The hierarchy of aeons was the mere postponement of having to 
admit an impossibility—the causing of the universe by a static 
and quiescent Principle of pure oneness. With a similar view of 
the divine Unity, Christian theology has, as we have seen, been 
unable to bridge the gulf between the Creator and creation. The 
ex nihilo doctrine is simply a confession of ignorance. 

But the living God of the Hebrews is an infinity of 
inexhaustible life and being—not a mathematical and abstract 
infinity—and, as the mythos makes plain, he transcends the 
dualism of activity and rest. The merely one God, in the Greek 
sense of unity, is bound to rest, but the non-dual God is free both 
to rest and to move, for he worked for six days and rested the 
seventh. Thus there is nothing in the truly Biblical image of God 
hostile to the feminine principle; it is there in potentiality, and 
our religious consciousness has never brought it into full 
actuality. Femininity lies hidden in the artistic nature of the 
Hebrew God, but when, in Christianity, this God was explained 
according to Neo-Platonic and Aristotelian principles, the 
feminine was wholly abstracted and the remaining masculinity 
became rigid and dead. For man is not truly man without woman. 

Nearly all expressions of beauty involve the feminine quality of 
suppleness, whether in nature as wind, water, clouds, fire, trees 
and plants, or in art as music, dancing, painting and poetry.s But 
that aspect of the Hebrew image of God which has impressed 
itself on the Christian mind is the picture of the Father Almighty 
sitting in immense dignity upon his throne, propounding a law of 
righteousness as rigid as the tables of stone upon which it is 
engraved. And yet, “He shall come down like rain upon the mown 
grass: as showers that water the earth.”9 If we may be permitted 
to say, in imagery, that God sits upon a throne, there is no reason 
why he should not play the flute like Krishna or dance like Shiva. 


St. Francis tried to bring that music into our religion; but we think 
him quaint, odd, even a little mad. There was a time when the dance 
began to steal into our worship; but it has been expelled, and now we 


only bow and kneel as if we were at Court.10 


But Western, and especially Anglo-Saxon, man’s inhibited feeling 
nature does not want to let this gracefulness enter into his image 
of God. He has the adolescent’s fear of emotion and of the 
dangerous allurements of life into which he is being thrust, and as 
he has neither courage nor wisdom in the exercise of feeling, it 
emerges, under pressure, as mere sentimentality. 

What has been said about the absence of beauty and the 
feminine element from religion applies largely to Protestantism. 
Popular Catholicism, the religion of the less inhibited Latin 
peoples, has found a workable though at root unsatisfactory 
solution—the virtual deification of the Virgin Mary. We 
Christians know, in theory, that God has these symbolically 
feminine attributes of love, compassion, mercy and beauty, but it 
has been hard for us to reconcile them with the image of the King 
of kings. Thus the demand of the heart for God as Mother as well 
as Father found an answer, adequate enough for the childlike 
mediaeval soul, in the gracious figure of the Queen of Heaven, 
although it meant, in practice, that the Holy Trinity became the 
Holy Quarternity. She it was rather than the Father who had 
given the world the means of redemption, and Adam of St. Victor, 
her twelfth-century laureate, could hardly find enough divine 
attributes wherewith to adorn this “Mediatrix of all graces.” She 
was the “Temple of Eternity,” the “Ruler of the Angels,” the 
“Empress of the Highest.” His Assumption hymn tells even of her 
birth in eternity: 


Salve, Mater Salvatoris! 
Vas electum! Vas honoris! 
Vas coelestis Gratiae! 

Ab aeterno Vas provisum! 

Vas insigne! Vas excisum 
Manu sapientiae!11 


Hardly less fervent in their adoration were the official hymns of 
the Breviary: 


Ave, Regina coelorum, 

Ave, Domina angelorum: 
Salve radix, salve porta, 

Ex qua mundo lux est orta.12 


In the Mass and the Office of several of her feasts she is implicitly 
identified with the Wisdom of God by the use of the lesson 
Dominus possedit me: 


The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works 
of old. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the 
earth was. When there were no depths, I was brought forth. 13 


Whatever they may have meant to theologians, there can be no 
doubt as to the popular significance of such terms as Mother of 
God, Queen of Heaven, Mistress of the Angels, or of the hymnody 
which praised her as the “glorious Lady throned in rest amidst 
the starry host above,” and as “she that riseth up as the morning, 
fair as the moon, clear as the sun.” Mary, rather than Jesus, was 
the image where mediaeval man (as well as the simple Catholic 
of today) understood the love and beauty of God, the fertility and 
creative power of the divine nature. The most sublimely poetic 
passages of the Western Liturgy are those devoted to the Mother 
of God. 

To her the most depraved sinner could pour out his heart in the 
certainty that he would be accepted in a loving embrace as 
infinite and all-inclusive as the sky that was symbolized by her 
star-decked robe of blue. In the image of the Mother, God was so 
much more approachable, more loving and forgiving, more 
tender and careful of her children. 


Mary, we hail thee, Mother and Queen compassionate; Mary, our 
comfort, life, and hope, we hail thee.... To thee we are sighing as 
mournful and weeping we pass through this vale of sorrow. Turn thou, 
therefore, O our intercessor, those thine eyes of pity and loving-kindness 
upon us sinners.14 


In Mary, the Queen of Heaven, this tenderness is entirely 
beautiful, but thus far our attempts to mix it in with the image of 
the King of kings have been quite disastrous. By a curious 
perversion of the doctrine that in the Passion Christ suffers for all 
human sin, there has come about the sad incongruity of a 
victorious king-God with “tender feelings.” Much of the bad 
emotionalism which often passes for penitence is occasioned by 
remorse for having “hurt God’s feelings,” as if, to move men to 
repentance, he had been reduced to the last resort of the 
incompetent mother with her naughty children—to sit down and 


cry. Or when we try to combine righteousness and love in one 
symbol the result is often that most unedifying type of moral 
tyrant who enforces his tyranny by constant harping on how 
much his children’s misbehaviour “wounds his love” for them, 
and administers judgement with the “this hurts me more than it’s 
going to hurt you” line. We allow in God what we deplore in 
parents and teachers. 

Our picture of Jesus has fared no better. With all the love and 
graciousness of God concentrated in the symbol of the Virgin, the 
mediaeval Christ was the Christus Victor—robed in glory, stately, 
austere, hardly human. But this conception was in fact 
Monophysite; the humanity was lost in the divinity, and after the 
rise of Humanism both the Catholic and the Protestant 
conceptions of Jesus attempted to realize his humanity—the 
former in order to counteract the false man-worship of 
Humanism, the latter in an effort to discover the Jesus of the 
Bible and of history. Yet the result was compromise. The 
humanity of the human and the divinity of the divine became 
muddled and clouded, as did likewise the two elements of justice 
and mercy, masculine strength and feminine grace. This 
compromise is the hermaphroditic Christ of popular Church art- 
wax images, Bible illustrations—solemn, effeminate, 
sanctimonious, moralizing, ethereal, neither red-bloodedly 
human nor majestically divine. And because, having forsaken the 
image of Mary, we look for the Mother in God’s incarnate Word, 
the result is “gentle Jesus, meek and lowly,” the pure schmalz of 
“Abide with me,” “Rock of Ages,” and such hymnodic 
abominations as the following from Hymns Ancient and Modern: 


I need Thee, precious Jesu: 
I need a friend like Thee, 
A friend to soothe and pity, 
A friend to care for me. 

I need the Heart of Jesus 
To feel each anxious care, 
To tell my every trouble, 
And all my sorrow share. 


All that we have managed to assimilate to our image of God 
and of his Christ is the tenderness of the feminine, but none of 
the beauty, the vitality or the allure. That aspect of the feminine 
we have associated with the devil, because in seeking to possess it 


we come to grief. But in fact it is the whole mystery and 
enchantment of God for which we hunger so sorely and which 
always slips from our fearful grasp. It is Life itself, which we do 
not trust. It is la belle dame sans merci, until we love it enough to 
let go. 


Because to us our Father which is in Heaven means the God whom in 
our timidity we have emptied of all enchantment, we do not see Christ 
among the poets and music-makers, his peers, but among the preachers 
and edifiers. We place him among his own commentators as if he 
commented on life. He did not: he made music about it, he spoke of it 
like a poet, but with an audacity beyond theirs. They have seen the fairy 
angel and desired her, but despaired; he said, Live for her and forget 
everything else; for she is God. Her beauty is not incompatible with life; 
to see it is to know eternal life. The universe is not malign, tempting you 
with siren songs. Its music does not come and go, but sounds for ever if 
you will hear it.1s 


For more people than we imagine the very names and phrases 
“God,” “Our Heavenly Father,” “Jesus Christ,” are so 
contaminated by this bad imagery that, reason as they and we 
may, the ugliness cannot be driven out. Now we cannot simply sit 
down and retouch or redraw the picture. We cannot simply issue 
an order to our clergy, artists and liturgists, saying, “More beauty 
and mystery, less sentiment and slush.” We cannot institute a 
systematic program of teaching and worship that is self- 
consciously designed to propagate a more glorious image of God. 
The only way to get rid of the bad associations which clutter our 
religious imagery is to go behind the images and get right at the 
heart of religion itself. Whoever is troubled by the present images 
must do this, though he must not force it upon others. He must go 
to that mystical centre which is beyond all ordinary forms of 
symbolism, and there touch the Life which will, in due time, 
express itself in a nobler image of God and enable him to see a 
more splendid Christ in the pages of the Gospels. 

There is no doubt that, in the years to come, many Christians 
will do this, and as a result the Christian religion will undergo 
one of its periodic changes of emphasis. From it will emerge an 
image of God with the principal emphasis laid upon the Holy 
Spirit, whom until now our imagery, worship and thought have 
left so much alone. As in the Western Church’s infancy the 
emphasis was upon God as Father-Mother,ic and in adolescence 


upon the Son, the suffering Christ, the Jesus of history, so in 
adulthood the immanent Holy Spirit will occupy the foreground. 
He, as the One who shall lead us into all truth, will teach us the 
inner meanings. Above all he will lead us to a fuller 
understanding of the Incarnation, because he will be Christ’s 
Spirit, and not just his image, in our hearts, and because with the 
Father he loves the world, he will show us the meaning of the 
Word made flesh in all the events, objects, actions and encounters 
of everyday life, and Christ in our brethren. In our hearts he will 
unveil the heart of God. 


Ill 


The symbols of the Holy Spirit are wind and fire—wind which is 
masculine in its strength and feminine in its softness, and fire 
which is masculine in its brilliance and feminine in its warmth 
and volatility. Water, too, is associated with the Spirit as the 
agent through which it works, for “unless a man is born of water 
and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.” 
Wind, fire and water—all three are symbols of that Life, that 
Eternal Moment, which ever eludes the grasp of the possessive 
will and yet, because it is the love of God, never separates itself 
from us. The Holy Spirit is the breath of God’s life, the flame of 
his glory, and the stream of his love. In its elusiveness it is God’s 
mystery; in its liveliness it is his playfulness and beauty; in its 
inescapable presence it is his faithfulness. Through the Holy Spirit 
we come to know God most intimately, because he is not God 
above us, the Father “who dwelleth in light unapproachable,” nor 
yet God over yonder, the Jesus of history, but God within us. In 
the revelation of God as the Father we learned that he is the just 
Creator; in the Son we learned that he is love; in the Holy Spirit 
of love we learn that the heart of God is absolute joy. For this is 
the love which, as Patmore said, raises the soul above the sphere 
of reverence and worship to the sphere of laughter and dalliance. 
It teaches us why God made the universe and man within it, and 
invites us to share in that lofty secret. 

Creation springs from the divine joy. It is the celebration and 
the sharing of God’s interior happiness or, as it used to be called, 
beatitude. There are, of course, the most solid philosophical 


grounds for asserting that God, who embraces the infinite 
perfection of Being, possesses an absolute happiness and joy. 
“Beatitude,” says St. Thomas, “belongs to God in a supreme way. 
For nothing else is understood by the term beatitude than the 
perfect good of an intellectual nature which is capable of 
knowing that it has a plentitude of the good it possesses.”17 But to 
understand the divine happiness profoundly, the philosopher has 
to come down from his desk and play with the children on the 
floor, for it is written that “except ye be converted and become as 
little children, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of God.” 

The natural creation and the spiritual life are on the whole 
meaningless unless it is understood that in the very heart of God 
there is that colossal gaiety which is represented in the symbol of 
the angelic choirs encircling the presence of God in an eternal 
dance of ecstasy. For it is said that when the foundations of the 
world were laid, “the morning stars sang together and all the sons 
of God shouted for joy.” The meaning of the creation is not 
something solemn and terrible as if God wished to have creatures 
to impress with his dreadful majesty. Viewed as a work of 
“serious purpose” the creation simply does not make sense. For a 
great part of the universe seems to have no purpose at all; there is 
much more of it than is necessary; there is a prodigious waste of 
space and energy; and it is inhabited by a stupendous variety of 
weird organisms that apparently have nothing better to do than 
reproduce themselves in alarming quantities. But the preachers 
have always talked, rather vaguely perhaps, about God’s purpose. 
“God,” says the hymn, “is working his purpose out as year 
succeeds to year.” One might think that God is purpose 
personified, but his universe is on the whole a whimsical 
contraption filled with much rather glorious nonsense. 

Children (and adults who have their wisdom) are usually the 
most happy when they are doing things that have no particular 
purpose—making up lunatic stories with friends, walking 
aimlessly through fields and hitting at old stumps with a stick, 
whittling hunks of wood just for the sake of whittling, drawing 
wayward and interminable designs on scraps of paper, and 
mixing horrible concoctions of all the various types of household 
liquid from paint-remover to cod-liver oil. There is a timeless and 
peaceful satisfaction in these actions, a fascination such that it 
would seem possible to go on with them for all eternity. To sit 


and watch the changing shapes of clouds, or specks of dust 
floating in the sunlight, or the patterns of concentric circles made 
in a pool by the falling rain—the contemplative happiness of 
these things belongs to that childlike wisdom which must be 
learned again before one may enter the kingdom of heaven, for 
the reason, it must be, that the activity of heaven is of a similar 
kind. Traherne recalls the memory of this vision of the world in 
trying to explain what it means to become a child again in the 
kingdom of God: 


The dust and the stones of the street were as precious as gold, the 
gates were at first the ends of the world. The green trees when I saw 
them first, through one of the gates, transported and ravished me.... 
Boys and girls tumbling in the street, and playing, were moving jewels. I 
knew not that they were born or should die. But all things abided 
eternally as they were in their proper places. Eternity was manifest in 
the light of day.... The streets were mine, the temple was mine, the 
people were mine. The skies were mine, and so were the sun and moon 
and stars, and all the world was mine, and I the only spectator and 
enjoyer of it. I knew no churlish proprieties, nor bounds, nor divisions; 
but all proprieties and divisions were mine; all treasures and the 
possessors of them. So that with much ado I was corrupted, and made to 
learn the dirty devices of this world, which I now unlearn, and become, 
as it were, a little child again that I may enter into the kingdom of 
God.is 


This may be somewhat shocking to modernists in religion who 
like to think of eternal life as an everlasting progress towards the 
realization of ever higher ethical ideals, where purpose rises 
beyond purpose, goal beyond goal, in an infinite series of 
ascending peaks. Such a conception is weak philosophically 
because it confounds eternity with unending time, and accords 
not at all with the traditional symbolism of heaven which speaks 
of the blessed (i.e., happy) ones as playing upon harps, engaged in 
a timeless celebration of the glory of God. When it is said that 
their delight is to praise him for ever, it does not mean that they 
are to surround him as so many flatterers, courtiers and dancing- 
girls about an Oriental potentate. The point is that the blessed are 
one with God, and their praise is simply the expression of God’s 
own essential joy which they experience within themselves. 

Rightly understood, this old scriptural symbolism will quickly 
dissipate the dour image of God which so many have formed, as 
well as the obvious discrepancy between such a martinet for 


earnestness and the extravagant, fanciful universe which he 
creates. We shall then understand that God’s creative activity is 
not his labour but his play. It is his “work” only in the sense of 
something done by him.i9 It proceeds not from the seriousness 
and earnestness of one who strives and schemes towards a goal, 
but from the sheer joy of one who is himself the fulness of Being 
and of all possible perfection. Speaking absolutely, God has no 
purpose. There is nothing beyond his own infinite glory which he 
could possibly strive to attain, and because he lives not in time 
but in eternity, there is for God no future wherein he might 
possess something which he does not have now. 

God has purpose only in relation to the imperfection of man, 
purposing that man shall attain the divine life of purposelessness. 
“If one can attain purposelessness through purpose, then the 
thing has been grasped.”20 For a life without purpose is not 
necessarily a life without meaning, and it is meaning rather than 
purpose which gives life its justification. The perfect life has no 
purpose because it is the life of God. God is the end of every 
purpose, but as purpose ends in God, meaning begins in him.21 
That is to say, in so far as man has not realized union with God 
he has purpose but no meaning; but in so far as he has realized it 
he has meaning and no purpose. A purpose is justified by 
something beyond itself, but a meaning is its own justification. 
Thus the inner life of God and its created reflection is not 
purposeful; like the greatest achievements of human art, it is 
meaningful and playful. 

Music at its highest, as in Bach or Mozart, is pure play. The 
preludes and fugues of Bach are simply a complex arrangement of 
glorious sounds, entirely sufficient in themselves. They need no 
programme notes to explain a moral or sociological message, or 
to call our attention to effects imitating natural noises or 
conveying emotional qualities. The intricate melodies flow on and 
on, and there never seems any necessity for them to stop. He 
composed them in tremendous quantities, with the same Godlike 
extravagance to be found in the unnecessary vastness of nature. 
Inferior music, however, needs props and commentaries, since it 
proceeds from human purpose rather than that playfulness of 
divine perfection which we find not only in Bach and Mozart, but 
also in the long Alleluias of Gregorian chant, the arabesques of 
Persian miniatures, the illuminated margins of mediaeval 


manuscripts, the wind-swept bamboos of Chinese painting, and 
the entirely satisfying and purposeless figures of the dance as it 
may sometimes be seen in Russian ballet. Such playfulness is the 
very nature of the divine Wisdom. 


The contemplation of wisdom is rightly compared with games for two 
things to be found in games. The first is that games give pleasure and 
the contemplation of wisdom gives the very greatest pleasure, according 
to what Wisdom says of itself in Ecclesiasticus, My spirit is sweet above 
honey. The second is that the movements in games are not contrived to 
serve another end but are pursued for their own sake. It is the same with 
the delights of wisdom.... Hence divine Wisdom compares its delight to 
games: I was with him forming all things and was delighted every day, 
playing before him at all times: playing in the world. 22 


Probably there was never such a purposeful, scheming 
civilization as our own, a people that lived so entirely for the 
future and with so great a degree of anxiety for the morrow. 
There was never, for that reason, such a meaningless civilization. 
It is not surprising, then, that in contemplating the universe we 
cannot make it consistent with our idea of God, that we cease to 
believe in God, and worship instead the plan-ridden soul of man. 
For we have discovered that this vast system of stars is neither 
the host of angelic choirs, nor a map of human destinies, but only 
lumps of burning gas and mud. They blaze away so many billion 
kilowatts of energy to no effect; vacant planets have millions of 
square miles of unexploited territory going to waste; flowers 
bloom in their myriads in impenetrable jungles where none may 
see or pluck them; weeds, insects, fish, birds, micro-organisms 
swarm in senseless profusion. And since efficiency, plan, economy 
and parsimony are our bourgeois virtues, we cannot see this 
universe as the creation of a virtuous and intelligent God. 

We would like to see all the squandered energy of the stars 
harnessed to drive something at a profit, and the vacant planetary 
wastes colonized and exploited. We are secretly offended because 
all those hidden flowers and their surplus seeds cannot be sold on 
the market. We are baffled because the intricately fashioned jewel 
of the snowflake lasts but a few moments. We are disgusted at the 
swarms of mosquitoes and bugs and snakes which protect the 
jungles from human civilization. 

Every attempt to find plan and purpose and respectable 
rationality in this universe, whether on a supernatural or a 


merely naturalistic basis, is bound to end in absurdity, and of the 
two the naturalistic explanations are the more absurd. Perhaps 
the song of birds is “explainable” simply as a device for sexual 
attraction; perhaps the radiant wings of insects are no more than 
protective colouring; perhaps the beauty of the morning-glory is 
merely to entice the bee, appealing no doubt to his acute 
aesthetic appreciation of colour and form. Perhaps. But if the aim 
of so much splendour is merely to stimulate the sexual processes 
of purely instinctual organisms, the mountain has laboured and 
brought forth a mouse. 

The trouble is that we are too proud to be children and 
appreciate the playing of God. It is just this pride which has 
brought tragedy into the universe, marred the happiness which 
God creates us to share, and made necessary a redemption 
through the Cross. For sin is precisely the adult, unplayful action 
of taking oneself seriously. It involves, as is told in Genesis, the 
curse of labour. And as man likes to conceive God in his own 
image, it is to be expected that the proud will conceive a serious 
and unplayful God. Celsus objected to the idea of the Incarnation 
because he felt it an undignified procedure for the Lord of the 
universe. By sin man kills the child in himself, thinking the 
playful will of God beneath him and desiring to be God in his 
own right, working out his own serious and weighty schemes. But 
if you give yourself weight you fall down to hell. 

The way of the Cross is, however, the love and joy of God in 
contrast to sin, appearing in the so-called “serious” virtues of 
moral heroism. But the moral heroism of Christ and his saints 
consists in the very fact that they do not take their own lives 
seriously. As Keyserling pointed out, they play with their lives 
and stake them recklessly, as safe and respectable souls would 
say, on absurdly lofty visions of the Good. In their attitude to 
human suffering, which is God’s, they are warm, sympathetic and 
sincere—but never serious. It is not that they feel no suffering; it 
would not have been suffering that Christ and his saints 
experienced on the Cross if it was not felt. But even in feeling it 
to the core they cannot take it seriously, because of the 
conviction which they burn to share—that Reality itself, to which 
all temporal suffering must give place, is the eternal joy which sin 
refuses. 

There is no such thing as a saint without joy, without God’s 


own happiness. One may perform all the good works under the 
sun and be subject to the most rigorous spiritual disciplines, but 
one cannot have true holiness without joy. St. Francis of Assisi is 
of course the classic example of this spirit, seeing no 
inconsistency between the most rigorous asceticism and a 
spiritual gaiety which expressed itself in the lilting melodies of 
the troubadours. 


Drunken with the perfect love and compassion of Christ, blessed 
Francis on a time did such things as these. For the most sweet melody of 
spirit boiling up within him, frequently broke out in French speech, and 
the veins of murmuring which he heard secretly with his ears broke 
forth into French-like rejoicing. And sometimes he picked up a branch 
from the earth and, laying it on his left arm, he drew in his right hand 
another stick like a bow over it, as if on a viol or other instrument, and, 
making fitting gestures, sang with it in French unto the Lord Jesus 
Christ.23 


4 


For those “veins of murmuring” were no doubt strains of that 
angelic music which Dante described as the laughter of the 
universe24—to us a strange phrase to use of a hymn of glory to 
the Holy Trinity. 

Such joy is the gift of the Spirit; to try to manufacture it oneself 
produces only that superficial effervescence of heartiness which 
some Christians affect to show that religion may be had without 
tears. This joy is merely surface joy, like the sugar on a pill, and 
those who take themselves seriously will of course think of 
religion as a pill. Yet the joy of the Spirit is available the moment 
pride is swallowed and the free gift of union with God accepted. 
Whoever takes himself seriously will never be able to accept this 
gift because his pride will insistently drive him to try to earn it by 
his own efforts and merits. 

In giving up this pride one becomes again as a child, and, as a 
child of God, one’s virtues, actions and attitudes are no longer 
proud and purposeful but humble and playful because they 
express the happiness of God. The saint sees that doing the will of 
God is joining in the play of God, for he is no longer like the 
sulky, precocious children in the market place to whom, as Christ 
said, their playmates call: 


We have piped unto you, and you have not danced; 
We have mourned unto you, and you have not wept. 


The playfulness of the child, the saint, and of God are alike in 
this: that they are all actions in the mood of eternity rather than 
the mood of time. In this present world-order eternity is known in 
its ever-moving focal point—the present moment, and the child in 
his play and the saint in his holiness both live in the present. 
Absorbed in twisting string or dropping stones in a pool, the child 
lives in a timeless realm where a game that goes on and on 
without goal is like the planets which go round and round to 
nowhere at God’s command. Following the precept of Christ to 
learn from the birds of the air and the flowers of the field, the 
saint worries no more about tomorrow and yesterday, and 
concerns himself simply with doing the will of God as it is 
presented to him in the circumstances of each moment, sensing 
his whole life to be, in Patmore’s image, the dancing of a gnat in 
the ray of God. 

And in the fulness of eternity the triune God, the Father and 
the Son in the unity of the Spirit, is ever at the play of love, the 
divine subsistencies giving themselves one to another in an 
ageless dance whose finite image is the blaze of aimless splendour 
that fills the heavens in celebration of the joy of God. This divine 
activity, the movement of the Spirit, never palls because in 
eternity there is no yesterday to remember and no tomorrow for 
which to plan; there is simply Now for ever. There are those who 
resent such lightness of spirit at the heart of Being, as criminals 
resent others’ virtue; they say that a Godhead at play while the 
world suffers is like a Nero who fiddles while Rome burns. But 
this is the sulkiness of pride and envy. For there is so much 
tragedy on the surface of life that were there not somewhere, 
right in the centre of things and in the centre of each and every 
pain, a state of absolute and unconfined joy accessible to all, the 
whole realm of Being must be damned. The joyous centre is 
there, and the heart of God is open, in the very midst of every 
experience that can befall us. To sense and thought it is strait and 
narrow and impossible to find—smaller than a point, fleeter than 
light itself. But to love it is wider than space and more enduring 
than all the ages of time—embracing every creature that was, is 
or shall be. It is the instant and inescapable presence of the 
Eternal Moment, the movement of the Spirit of God. 


1 The Rod, the Root, and the Flower. “Aurea Dicta,” 39. London, 1907. 
2 Keyserling in South American Meditations. London, 1932, p. 373. 


3 St. Thomas, De Divinis Nominibus, iv. 5. “The being of all things is derived 
from the divine beauty.” 


4 The growth of sects and cults is nearly always a sign that the Church is 
falling short of catholicity. Christian Science, for example, is the result of the 
Church’s neglect of spiritual healing. 


5 One of the cults which the prophets denounced most harshly was the 
worship of Ishtar or Ashtoreth, the Queen of Heaven (melekheth hash- 
shamayim). Cf. esp. Jeremiah 44:17-19, 25. Her cult was especially popular 
with the women of Jerusalem. 

6 Tao Te Ching, xxxiv and Ixvi. Trs. Ch’u Ta-kao. London, 1937. 

7 Ibid., lxxvi. 

s Occidental painting and design tends to be architectural and symmetrical, 
and lacks the living fluidity of Chinese painting where beauty is always 
associated with lack of symmetry. The Chinese idea of God as Tao has an 
essentially fluid quality, and is likened by Lao-tzu to water. “The highest 
goodness is like water. Water is beneficent to all things but does not contend. It 
stays in places which others despise. Therefore it is near Tao.” Tao Te Ching, 
viii. 

9 Psalm 72:6. But his fluidity is in no way incompatible with his 
righteousness—“Let judgement run down as waters, and righteousness as a 
mighty stream.” Amos 5:24. 


10 A. Clutton-Brock in “Spiritual Experience,” a contribution to The Spirit. Ed. 
B. H. Streeter. London and New York, 1919, p. 292. The whole essay is a most 
suggestive discussion of beauty and the feminine element in religion. 


11 “Hail, Mother of our Saviour! Chosen vessel! Vessel of honour! Vessel of 
heavenly Grace! Vessel prepared from eternity! Vessel pre-eminent! Vessel 
wrought by the hand of wisdom!” 


12 Final Antiphons of the BVM., 2. From the Purification to Wednesday in 
Holy Week. “Hail, Queen of the heavens! Hail, mistress of the angels! Greeting 
to thee, O root and portal whence the light of the world is risen.” 


13 Proverbs 8:22-24. Used for the Epistle in the Masses of the Conception 
and the Birthday. The Mass for the Common also uses Ecclesiasticus 24:9, “He 
created me from the beginning before the world, and I shall never fail.” 
According to the modern Russian sophiological school, she is the incarnation of 
the Holy Spirit. “She is, in personal form, the human likeness of the Holy 
Ghost. Through her, with her human form become entirely transparent to the 
Holy Ghost, we have a manifestation and, as it were, a personal revelation of 
him.” Bulgakov in The Wisdom of God. London and New York, 1937, p. 183. 


14 Final Antiphons, 4. Trinity Sunday to Advent. 
15 A. Clutton-Brock, op. cit., p. 290. 


16 The Monophysite Christ of mediaeval art is simply a mirror of the Father; 
the divine humanity of the Son is hidden. 


17 Summa Theol, I. Q. 26, a. 1. 
18 Centuries of Meditation, i, 62. 


19 “The world is the symbol of that which transpires in the spiritual sphere, 
the reflection of God’s ‘abandon’ as fulfilled in the spirit.” Berdyaev in Freedom 
and the Spirit, p. 33. 

20 Jung and Wilhelm, The Secret of the Golden Flower, p. 50. 

21 Cf. Romans 10:4, “Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every 
one that believeth.” 

22 St. Thomas, Opusc. Ixviii, in libr. Boetii de Hebdom., princ., quoted in 
Maritain’s Art and Scholasticism, pp. 34-35. The final scriptural passage is 
Proverbs 8:29-31. The AV renders “play” as “rejoice” but the former is more 
exact. 

23 Speculum Perfectionis, cap. 93. 

24 Paradiso, xxvii. 4. 


Ill. THE LIFE OF ACTION 


The intellectual revolt of the modern world against what has been 
understood as Christian morality cannot be dismissed as mere 
perversity. The picture of the Church as a valiant minority 
holding grimly to its position against a vast rebellion inspired by 
the devil is an oversimplification which may appeal to those who 
love to strike heroic attitudes, but it renders the conventional 
Christian blind to his own moral failure. While it is true that the 
“Old Adam” always resents the yoke of Christian love, there are 
three reasons why this revolt must not be attributed to mere 
deviltry. The first is that it reflects, in part, the dissatisfaction of 
mature souls with the morality of infancy and adolescence. The 
second is that official teaching and popular practice of Christian 
morality have degenerated largely into legalism or surface 
imitation of the good life without understanding of its inner 
meaning—the realization of union with God. The third is that this 
teaching and practice have not, on the whole, been faithful to the 
principles of the Incarnation, having adopted an attitude to 
physical life which is Manichaean rather than Christian. To some 
extent, therefore, the revolt against so-called Christian morals 
expresses a perfectly sincere desire for the good life. The 
widespread and, indeed, growing tendency of Church people to 
ascribe it to mere perversity is to be deplored, and one may hope 
that it will subside when the special thrill of congratulating 
themselves as members of a heroic and reactionary band of 
stalwarts has worn off.i 

In the mind of the general public the Christian, and especially 
the Protestant, religion is essentially a way of morality. Its entire 
aim is to move men to good actions and to get rid of evil actions. 
Dogmas, sacraments and forms of worship are of use so long as 
they assist the growth of morality, but are in general late 
accretions to the “simple religion of Jesus,” which was in essence 
the new moral law proclaimed in the Sermon on the Mount. Thus 
when the system of morality attributed to Jesus by members of 
the Church is called in question, the whole structure of 


institutional Christianity falls into disrepute. 

Thoroughly erroneous as it is to say that Christianity is simply 
and primarily a system of morality, and that Jesus was primarily 
a moral teacher, it will take hundreds of years to get rid of this 
impression. Churchmen have fostered the error by the persistent 
preaching and teaching of morality to the exclusion of doctrine, 
worship and the interior life. But because the general public does 
identify Christianity simply and solely with a certain type of 
morality, the influence of the Church in the world depends 
largely on the moral attitudes of Christians. And because the 
Christian moral ideal is in itself a thing of tremendous power, 
perversions of the ideal will have a strong negative influence. 
Therefore it is absolutely necessary for us to understand Christian 
morality in the light of the gift of union with God and of the 
deeper vision of his nature which realization of the gift brings, 
and spiritual maturity renders possible. 

But one thing must be clear from the start: God himself, and 
not morality, is the end and aim of the Christian religion. 
Morality is a by-product of union with God, and its purpose is the 
ever deeper enjoyment, or contemplation, of that union by 
oneself and others. 


All other human operations seem to be ordered to this as to their end. 
For perfect contemplation requires that the body should be 
disencumbered, and to this effect are directed all the products of art that 
are necessary for life. Moreover, it requires freedom from the 
disturbance caused by the passions, which is achieved by means of the 
moral virtues and of prudence; and freedom from external disturbance, 
to which the whole governance of the civil life is directed. So that, if we 
consider the matter rightly, we shall see that all human occupations 
appear to serve those who contemplate the truth.... Man’s ultimate 
happiness consists solely in the contemplation of God.2 


The Christian feeds the hungry, heals the sick, clothes the naked 
and disciplines himself that all may share and enjoy the very 
greatest of goods—God himself. Because God is love, to love 
another soul is to give him God. 


I 


In Western Christianity the understanding and practice of 


morality is going through the same course of evolution as the 
understanding of doctrine—the three stages of infancy, 
adolescence and maturity. In the stage of infancy, the Church’s 
moral teaching is of necessity authoritarian and legalistic but, 
save for a chosen few, not too rigorous. Mother can afford to 
wink at a certain amount of childish naughtiness. In adolescence, 
where there is not open revolt, morality becomes the 
individualistic, intensely earnest and _ self-consciously heroic 
following of extremely lofty ideals. In maturity we return 
somewhat to earth, and find the source of morality neither in 
external authority nor remote ideals, but in the consciousness of 
God himself in the heart. A morality which proceeds from the 
inner presence of God is the only morality which is strictly 
Christian, but prior to maturity the indwelling Holy Spirit 
operates secretly. To the child he gives holiness as a love of 
obedience; to the adolescent he gives it as a love of new, 
tremendous and even impossible ideals. But in the mature soul he 
arouses holiness by revealing his own inner presence. 

Lacking experience and the power of reason, all children need 
authority, and the beginning of any art, whether music, writing, 
or living itself, involves the mastery of certain rules. Inspiration 
and freedom in the use of rules come later. Some of these rules 
are quite peculiar to childhood, such as an absolute tabu against 
the use of fire, or against crossing the street without an adult. If 
the child shows any tendency to disregard the rules the usual, if 
not always the wisest, way to restore order is to give or threaten 
punishment, appealing to the sense of fear. Certainly this is the 
quickest way, if the need for order is immediate and urgent. In 
general, however, the mother will try to win the child’s obedience 
through love and respect, or, sometimes, through mere bribery. 
Considering the immense and unruly nature of the mediaeval 
Church’s brood of children, it is not hard to understand why she 
resorted mostly to threats and bribes—appealing to the fear of 
eternal damnation, or to the longing for “pie in the sky,” or, in 
the last resort, to the terror of hell here and now in the shape of 
the Holy Inquisition. In so far as she appealed to the fear of Hell 
and the Inquisition she was, of course, less than Christian; for 
punishment, or the fear of it, has no creative result by itself. In 
default of higher powers of persuasion, punishment is an effective 
way of protecting children from themselves and from each other 


until they can learn by love. 

Nor is it surprising that Mother Church had to impose certain 
rigid tabus against things that, while not evil in themselves, are 
as dangerous for an infant culture as a box of matches for a two- 
year-old. Chief among these was liberty of religious thought and 
speech, because a young culture will disintegrate rapidly without 
intellectual and spiritual unity. A multitude of strong and 
discordant propagandas would have worked havoc with the 
credulous and uncritical mind of mediaeval man, to judge from 
its confusing effect in our own slightly less credulous age. Even 
when Europe felt the full force of the Reformation, there was a 
far greater degree of spiritual unanimity than we can dream of 
today. 

Little observed as they were, the mediaeval Church tried to 
impose the strictest controls upon sexuality. However licentious 
the modern world may be, mediaeval man’s appetite for sex, like 
his appetite for food, was greater and more easily roused than 
ours. Modern urban man’s erotic desires have to be titillated with 
sexual suggestions of a subtlety unknown to peasant and 
primitive, for he has far less physical virility and leads a sexual 
life which, to a great degree, is purely mental. His enormous 
mental obsession with sexuality is a clear symptom of the 
difficulty of physical satisfaction. But when intense physical 
passion is quickly and easily roused, there is more immediate 
danger of chaos in family relations and loss of conscious control. 
Modern man (of the educated, civilized, urban type) is highly 
conscious and deliberate in his licentiousness; more primitive 
man is suddenly “swept off his feet” by a violent outburst of 
passion, which he satisfies without any great degree of subtlety, 
and thus his psychic integrity must at all costs be protected from 
complete submersion by physical forces. Modern man’s problem 
is not to guard his soul against the powers of his body, but 
against those of his mind. “We wrestle not against flesh and 
blood, but against principalities, against powers, ... against 
spiritual wickedness in high places.” 

The danger, common to all cultures in the state of childhood, of 
losing the sense of ego, of personal identity, under the flood of 
some natural and physical urge explains much of the failure of 
the mediaeval Church to teach a truly incarnational morality. We 
moderns are in no such danger, and we confuse our moral 


problem disastrously when we speak of guarding against “the 
sinful desires of the flesh,” when we should be speaking of the 
sinful desires of the mind. As we grow in self-consciousness and 
psychic awareness, we discover the source of evil, not in the 
external realms of the material, fleshly elements or of the 
demons, but ever more and more within ourselves. Herein lies the 
exasperating moral problem of modern man. 

As the morality of the mediaeval Church was simple, definite 
and rigid in its prohibitions, it was similarly naive and direct in 
its positive commandments. There were certain clear duties— 
actions to be done—by the Christian man, and subtleties of 
motive were of slight importance. He was to be charitable to the 
poor, and accordingly those who had wealth, when sufficiently 
moved, disbursed charity in lordly and reckless style, asking no 
questions about what would be done with the money, or whether 
it was immoral to give away money to the needy in order to pay 
one’s own way into heaven. If one had committed sins, one had 
simply to go and confess them to the priest, which, since they 
were definite external actions, was easy enough. Few indeed were 
the souls who asked complicated questions about the sincerity of 
their contrition, or tried to delve into the elusive ramifications of 
the spiritual pride which underlay the external transgression. 
Nothing could be more meritorious than to give or risk one’s very 
life for Christ and his Church, and, therefore, thousands of men 
(sometimes moved by other considerations than plunder) enlisted 
year after year in the Crusades, and never bothered their heads 
with the problems of righteous and unrighteous warfare or 
Christian pacifism. 

The entire attitude of mediaeval morality to sin and temptation 
knew nothing of the subtle difficulties raised by St. Paul, as a 
member of a very ancient culture, in his epistles to the Romans 
and Galatians. Sin and temptation were the operations of highly 
concrete devils or physical impulses, and the obvious way to deal 
with them was by sheer violence. Sin must be crushed and 
temptation resisted by simple force of will, vaguely assisted by 
divine grace. Even Luther, conscious as he was of the inwardness 
of sin, assaulted the devil with an inkpot. There was nothing like 
the degree of psychic awareness to discover the mechanism of 
repression and unconscious compensation for thwarted desires, 
which in our own day presents Christian moral thought with a 


question not to be side-stepped. Nor, as we have seen, was the 
mediaeval mind troubled by the other side of this psychoanalytic 
conundrum—the motivation of formally virtuous and religious 
actions by purely carnal appetites. 

From the standpoint of the increased self-awareness that comes 
with adolescence, the Prostestants saw the shallowness of this 
kind of morality, and under the stimulus of their criticism 
Catholic moral theology began to enter far more deeply into the 
mental background of overt misdeeds. On both sides there 
emerged a heightened sense of individual responsibility for sin 
and accordingly a sense of personal guilt perpetually haunting the 
soul in a degree rarely known in the mediaeval Church. 
Protestant thought went back to Augustinianism just because it 
felt so keenly that the origin of sin lay in the ego, and that man 
was therefore radically depraved. By his own works he could 
contribute nothing to his salvation; his sole hope lay in faith in 
Christ’s promise of redemption, as in Lutheranism, or in divine 
predestination to salvation by irresistible grace, as in Calvinism. 

Protestantism was a reaction not only against the superficial 
legalism of popular Catholic morality, but also against the more 
esoteric aspect of mediaeval Christianity—the quest of the great 
philosophers and mystics for the life of perfection and 
contemplation. Obviously the deeper minds of the Middle Ages 
did not disregard the problems of moral motivation; they realized 
clearly enough that a mere external fulfilment of the Church’s 
commandments was not to be compared with the pure love of 
God from the very depths of the soul. Now they held that such a 
love, such a degree of holiness, was possible. Man’s natural self- 
love could be purified and exalted to the degree where it desired 
God above all else. With the aid of divine grace, according to St. 
Thomas, or even ex puris naturalibus, according to Duns Scotus 
and Occam, man was capable of the pure and unalloyed love of 
God, and by means of it might ascend to the mystical 
contemplation of the divine essence, and hereafter to the Beatific 
Vision. A contrition for sin was possible, likewise, in which there 
was no admixture of fear or wounded self-pride, but which was 
based on nothing other than the love of God. 

This was where Luther in particular rebelled. Like St. Paul and 
St. Augustine, he had a high degree of self-awareness, and, 
looking deeply into his own heart, he found himself quite 


incapable of a wholly unselfish action, and that the more 
spiritually and inwardly the law of love was interpreted, the more 
impossible it was to fulfil. 


But this understanding of the law spiritually is far more deadly, since 
it makes the law impossible to fulfil and thereby brings man to despair 
of his own strength and abases him, for no one is without anger, no one 
without lust: such are we from birth. But what will a man do, when 
oppressed by such an impossible law?3 


To Luther’s mind the mediaeval concept of sanctity was an 
attempt to meet God on his own level of holiness, and he could 
see in this nothing other than a colossal spiritual pride since the 
whole essence of Christianity was that in Christ God had come 
down to man—not that man had ascended to God. 


Beware of ever aspiring to such great purity that thou refusest to 
appear to thyself, nay to be, a sinner. For Christ dwells only in sinners. 
For to this end he descended from heaven, where he dwelt in the 
righteous, that he might even dwell in sinners. 4 


It was therefore necessary to disconnect personal holiness entirely 
from salvation. We are saved simply and solely by faith in Christ, 
because in Christ we see that God loves us as we are now, as 
sinners, and as sinners we are justified by the pure generosity of 
the divine love. Salvation is a free gift, and personal holiness can 
have no other cause or motive than gratitude for it. 


Well now! my God has given to me, unworthy and lost man, without 
any merit, absolutely for nothing and out of pure mercy, through and in 
Christ, the full riches of all godliness and blessedness, so that I 
henceforth need nothing more than to believe it is so. Well then, for 
such a Father, who has so prodigally lavished upon me his blessings, I 
will in return freely, joyously and for nothing do what is well-pleasing to 
him, and also be a Christian towards my neighbour, as Christ has been 
to me.5 


Man’s love for God can only be pure when divorced from the 
motive of gaining heaven, and this can happen as soon as he 
understands that salvation is a free gift quite independent of his 
own holiness. He then becomes a channel for God’s own love, 
spontaneous, motiveless, seeking not its own. 

Luther’s unfortunate role as the great disrupter of the Church’s 
unity has perhaps led Christians in general to forget how right he 


was in this respect—as far as he went. For Luther grasped what 
the mediaeval Church failed to see all along—the essential 
principle of the Incarnation as God’s descent and gift of himself to 
man in the state of sin. But the subsequent history of 
Protestantism shows us wherein Luther’s answer was incomplete. 

The Calvinist view of man’s fallen nature was even more 
thoroughgoing than the Lutheran. Not only was man incapable of 
deserving salvation by works of holiness; his fallen soul was also 
incapable of faith, so that salvation had to depend on divine 
predestination alone. But since the New Testament made it clear 
that some were to be saved and some damned, this led to the 
terrible conclusion that while God saved some he damned others, 
so that human freedom disappeared absolutely. 

We see, then, that the two principal forms of Protestantism, 
stressing the fallen and helpless state of man, were the result of a 
higher degree of self-consciousness and introspection. The 
mediaeval assumption that man was, of course, capable of pure 
love was naive rather than proud, and it was with a similar 
childlike innocence that heaven was thought attainable by simple 
and literal obedience to a moral law. But Protestant self- 
awareness was adolescent rather than mature, because it was 
complicated by an acute sense of guilt. This feeling of guilt was 
caused not only by the perception of man’s natural depravity, but 
also by a vague uncertainty as to the new theories of salvation. 
Luther’s idea of salvation by faith alone always seemed too good 
and too easy to be true, and one could never be sure, in 
Calvinism, whether one was among the predestined elect. To 
suppress this sense of guilt Protestantism became violently and 
rigorously moralistic. The same sense of guilt obsessed souls of a 
high degree of self-consciousness who remained in the Catholic 
fold. Under the influence of an analytic and searching moral 
theology, the Sacrament of Penance became, for pious souls, far 
more than a perfunctory confession of formal misdeeds. It became 
a habitual act of self-analysis, a constant reminder that salvation 
was uncertain, and that God would be merciful only if one were 
sufficiently penitent. Instead of liberating man from the sense of 
guilt, the great sacrament of forgiveness was in practice used to 
foster the sense, because one knew that the more deeply the soul 
was explored, the more surely one would find that pride had 
eaten into its very core. Thus frequent confession became part of 


every devout Catholic’s rule of life, because he knew he would 
never be free of guilt; he saw that he could never be penitent 
enough to deserve God’s mercy. The easy gaiety associated with 
Catholicism is only possible for those still childlike Catholics (of 
whom there are immense numbers) who do not look into 
themselves too deeply. This accounts for the contrast between the 
happy, light-hearted Catholicism of peasants, and the dour, 
puritanical Catholicism of the more civilized (as distinct from 
cultured) and self-conscious religious and laymen.« 

In our own day, Calvinism has become simple moralism. The 
modern Calvinist cannot admit the full doctrine of predestination, 
and strives to buy his way into heaven by merit as much, and 
more, than any mediaeval Catholic. Lutheranism, too, has fallen 
to the general secularism of modern Protestantism, for the very 
reason that, in this day and age, it has been found hard—for 
purely intellectual reasons—to have faith in Christ as the 
redeeming Son of God. Modern man therefore leaves the 
Christian religion altogether, subscribes to the doctrine of the Fall 
as promulgated by Freud and Watson, and has no hope that 
human nature will remain anything but fallen. 

It is apparent, then, that none of these answers to the moral 
problem will work for modern man. He is too self-conscious to 
profit from the old Catholic answer; he cannot simply regress to 
the naive state, and self-conscious Catholicism is, without doubt, 
Catholicism at its worst—guilt-ridden, bigoted, puritanical and 
morbid. The Calvinist answer involves a conception of God so 
immoral that it inspires no more love and devotion than an 
impersonal Fate. The Lutheran answer involves a faith in Christ 
which modern man finds difficult for intellectual reasons, or, if 
the intellectual obstacles are surmounted, difficult for the reason 
that he would like to have faith but does not know how. And the 
answer of modern liberal Protestantism, the religion of “ethics 
tinged with emotion,” does not impress him as religion at all and 
supplies no spiritual power by means of which such ethics may be 
practised. 

All the Christian moralists—Catholic, Calvinist, Lutheran and 
liberal Protestant—seem, furthermore, to be agreed that sin must 
be fought and pride eradicated. But the modern psychoanalyst 
echoes the ancient Chinese proverb, “When the wrong man uses 
the right means, the right means work in the wrong way.” Your 


motive for fighting sin is itself sinful; the idea that you are, and 
must continue to be, a sinner hurts your pride. What is more, you 
may drive sinful desires out of your conscious mind, but they will 
merely assume some other form. Your suppressed lust will 
emerge as a cantankerous disposition; your suppressed bad 
temper will emerge as nervousness and anxiety. Why not accept 
yourself as you are? You can’t change yourself; you’re an animal, 
and it’s no good trying to be an angel. This sounds tremendously 
convincing to modern man, unless he happens to have met and 
known saints. Looking into himself, he sees that it will be harder 
for him to become a saint than for a camel to go through the eye 
of a needle. But there is still the ultimate answer of Christ: “With 
men it is not possible, but with God all things are possible.” 


II 


We have seen that Luther grasped the point of the Incarnation 
which the mediaeval Catholic mythos contained but did not 
realize—or at least part of the point. Salvation is the free gift of 
God to sinners; in Christ, man is given union with God even 
though he crucifies it. We are saved through faith in this gift, and 
through gratitude for it perform good works. But from our 
present standpoint, Luther’s answer involves two difficulties: 

(1) We are saved through faith in Christ: but we do not know 
Christ except through the pages of the Gospels, where he is 
remote in time and space, through the sacraments, which confuse 
us with their archaic symbolism and make little more than an 
aesthetic impression, and through his saints, whom we admire 
but do not understand because they are other people and we 
cannot sense their inner experience. We need immediate and 
mystical knowledge of Christ, but Luther firmly rejected 
mysticism because he only knew mysticism in the mediaeval 
Catholic form, which was, at least superficially, the soul’s effort 
to ascend to divine knowledge through renunciation of the flesh. 
Rightly, he saw that this was opposed to the idea of the 
Incarnation. But for Luther the Incarnation stopped with the 
historical Jesus; it was still bottled up in its historical symbol. 

(2) Having no sense, therefore, of an incarnational mysticism, 
Luther’s theology was at root world-despising. It had none of that 


“generosity towards all things real” which characterized naive 
Catholicism because of that thoroughgoing sacramentalism with 
which the mediaeval mystics were never quite happy. Luther 
regarded the creation as depraved, but redeemed in spite of its 
depravity. He did not see that the Incarnation, flowing out 
beyond the historical Jesus, had already in principle transfigured 
the creation. His theology stopped with the Crucifixion; it did not 
go on to the Resurrection and Ascension, and the coming of the 
Holy Spirit. That is to say, he saw God descending to earth with 
love, and that love ever being rejected and denied on Calvary, 
ever being spattered with the filth of the flesh, and yet never 
withdrawing himself. But he had no adequate vision of earth 
ascending with Christ into heaven and becoming the tabernacle 
of the Holy Spirit. For Christ not only died for man on Calvary; he 
ascended for man on Olivet. He has not only come down to the 
world; he has also taken the world up. For lack of this vision, 
both in Lutheranism and Calvinism, Protestantism eventually fell 
back into moral legalism, into the attempt to earn one’s way into 
heaven. 

Considered in itself, the world is indeed evil, fallen, depraved, 
for evil and the Fall consist precisely in considering the world as 
an end in itself apart from God. But this is a false, illusory and 
subjective view of the world. Considered objectively and in 
reality, the world is the creation of the God who is incarnate in it. 
God became incarnate historically in a local symbol to draw our 
attention to the truth about the world: that in reality the flesh is 
good enough to be his own garment, good enough to be loved 
into conformity with the divine will. Thus St. Paul could say that 
everything is good when received with thanksgiving, for 
thanksgiving is the acknowledgement, the realization, that 
everything has God as its source and its incarnate principle. 

Here, then, is the groundwork to a solution of the moral 
problem created by Western man’s adolescence and growth of 
self-consciousness. The Protestants, the Humanists, the modern 
psychoanalysts have turned their eyes upon man and considered 
him in and by himself. The Protestants saw nothing but inherent 
depravity. The Humanists saw at first the wonderful endowments 
of reason and power, but their vision ended at last in the 
disillusionment of psychoanalysis, and the disillusionment of the 
collapse of Humanist culture. For the psychoanalysts also 


considered man by himself, and saw only animal libido and 
mechanical process. In every instance the conclusion was simply 
the result of the method of observation. Look into yourself and 
you will become conscious of nothing but a vicious circle, for the 
very reason that the act of introspection is viciously circular: you 
cannot see what you are looking for, because what you are 
looking for is the thing that looks. Every self-conscious attempt to 
know oneself, to improve oneself, to save oneself, to unite oneself 
with God, must come to this exasperating and impossible 
conclusion. 

This bad self-consciousness is in fact the root of evil, and is 
nothing other than what we have formerly referred to as the 
attempt to possess one’s own life through fear and pride. 
Somehow, therefore, man must be persuaded to let go of himself, 
to stop running around in circles and making himself miserable. 
This is the intended effect of the great mystical and incarnational 
revelation that we have been given union with God, here and 
now, just as we are. The point is to give us an inner contentment, 
security and confidence so that, for the first time in our lives, we 
shall cease worrying about ourselves and whirring around in 
circles, walk straight ahead and achieve some creative result. In 
the naive child state man can get this confidence through 
symbols. He receives absolution from the priest and takes the 
Holy Communion, and somehow or other God is in him and with 
him, and all is well. He goes about his business and stops 
worrying about the fate of his soul. That is why the Zen master, 
when asked what the Tao is, answers, “Walk on!” But modern 
man, who cannot at once or in the same way as mediaeval man 
accept the Catholic symbols of union with God, has to find his 
confidence through mystical realization. 

Thus we direct him to look at the Eternal Now which lovingly 
carries him all the time, or, if this will not do, we speak to him in 
purely psychological language and tell him to accept himself as 
he is, now at this moment, completely and entirely, with all his 
faults, sins, bad moods, perplexities and ignorances. Translated 
into religious language, this is the same thing as telling him that 
he is loved and accepted by God, that he must love himself with 
God’s own love, or that he is saved as he is, a sinner, by simple 
faith in Jesus. Until this act of acceptance has occurred by one 
means or another, creative morality in any Christian sense is 


quite impossible. People who look upon the process from outside, 
who have never realized God’s love, never accepted themselves, 
never dared to receive union with God, naturally have 
misgivings. They say that those who presume so cocksurely that 
God accepts them and that they are united with him will abandon 
themselves without qualm to a life of vice. 

Their misgivings might be well-founded if those who so 
presumed were still in the child or adolescent stage, for whom 
this is indeed a dangerous doctrine. But for those who have been 
through the hell of acute self-consciousness the results are 
otherwise. Both St. Paul and St. Augustine were utterly certain of 
their union with God, and spoke of it with a confidence from 
which the guilt-ridden piety of our own day would shrink. And 
whatever the faults of these two saints, they certainly did 
anything but abandon themselves to a life of vice! Yet it must be 
remembered that both of them had been through the impasse of 
self-consciousness, and had realized thoroughly and profoundly 
the impossibility of self-improvement. But when a similar attitude 
was adopted by certain cults of the Middle Ages, such as the 
Brothers of the Free Spirit, the results were sometimes disastrous 
because of the lack of self-conscious experience.7 Speaking, from 
his standpoint as a psychologist, of the therapeutic value of 
accepting oneself as it is, C. G. Jung says: 


This attitude would be poison for a person who has already been 
overwhelmed by things that just happen (in the psyche), but it is of the 
highest value for one who, with an exclusively conscious critique, 
chooses from the things that happen only those appropriate to his 
consciousness, and thus gets gradually drawn away from the stream of 
life into a stagnant backwater.... Only on the basis of such an attitude, 
which renounces none of the values won in the course of Christian 
development, but which, on the contrary, tries with Christian charity 
and forbearance to accept the humblest things in oneself, will a higher 
level of consciousness and culture be possible.s 


As we have seen, man in the child state can readily be 
overwhelmed by “things that just happen” in himself, such as 
violent outbursts of anger or of the physical passion of sex, and 
this was why mediaeval man needed an authoritarian and 
legalistic morality. The adolescent and “Protestant” stage of acute 
self-consciousness was, however, absolutely necessary for his 
further development, but now that this is coming to an end our 


concept of Christian morality will change accordingly, realizing 
the full implications of the moral teaching of Jesus and St. Paul. 
This mature morality will be grounded on three principles: 

(1) The given union of the soul with God. Because God is love 
and forgiveness he has accepted man as he is and taken him into 
his heart with all his sins and imperfections. 

(2) Love instead of hatred and violence will be the principle of 
“combat” with evil, for the flesh and the devil will be brought 
into conformity with the divine will by love rather than force. 

(3) The motivating power of morality will be gratitude for the 
gift of union and the indwelling Spirit, rather than the sense of 
guilt and obedience to law and authority. The moral law will 
remain in a secondary function, as an elastic technique for 
expressing love. It will no longer be the dominant principle 
whereby moral actions are judged and directed. Thus we shall 
realize the fulness of St. Augustine’s saying that Christian 
morality is, “Love, and do what you like.” 

The first principle has already had sufficient discussion, and the 
third is so clearly set forward by St. Paul that it is, or should be, 
an accepted postulate of Christianity. But the second is contrary 
to the spirit of practical Christian morality as we have thus far 
known it—as a technique of war upon evil symbolized by the 
conflict of St. Michael and the Dragon. Without doubt this 
technique has its use as a temporary measure during the child 
and adolescent stages, but it will never do anything more than 
suppress or change the external symptoms of evil, and alleviate 
an urgent danger for a brief period. It is like taking aspirin for a 
toothache or bicarbonate of soda for stomach ulcers—and 
sometimes like curing a headache by cutting off the head. 

In practice this violent treatment of evil achieves only 
superficial results, even when applied with all the help of 
sacramental grace. The most devout Christians who apply this 
technique are rarely free from its “viciously circular” results, 
crushing down lust or anger only to promote such compensatory 
evils as sourness of disposition or subtle cruelty towards others. 
To a great extent they are unaware of these compensations, since 
attention is diverted from them either by the intensity of the 
struggle against other evils, or by unconscious mental 
mechanisms which conveniently hide them from observation. 
Such compensations, both individual and social, are familiar 


among all forms of Christian rigorism and puritanism. We see 
them in fanaticism, morbid and sensational psychic phenomena 
sometimes called “mystical,” meanness, or that peculiar 
gloominess of soul so_ characteristic of self-conscious 
Protestantism and Catholicism. Or again, we see them expressed 
socially in such manifestations as the Inquisition, Puritan witch- 
hunting, and the various forms of Satanism which appear 
regularly in communities with a highly ascetic religion. 

Traditionally, these compensations are explained on the 
principle that whenever the devil sees that he is about to be 
defeated, he increases his resistance and multiplies temptation to 
the utmost, as in the famous case of the visions of St. Anthony. 
But the extra temptation of which the soul is aware is a blind 
against the devil’s real victory in other directions, of which the 
soul is not aware. According to Catholic moral theology, sins of 
which we are unaware are not sins because they are not 
deliberate acts of the will. Nevertheless, they are evils harmful to 
oneself and to others, and in fact the will has created them 
indirectly by having devilish feelings towards the devil. 


Our attitude towards evil must be free from hatred, and has itself need 
to be enlightened in character.... Satan rejoices when he succeeds in 
inspiring us with diabolical feelings to himself. It is he who wins when 
his own methods are turned against himself.... A continual denunciation 
of evil and its agents merely encourages its growth in the world—a truth 
sufficiently revealed in the Gospels, but to which we remain persistently 
blind.s 


Fought sins only appear to be conquered; in fact they are simply 
pushed out of consciousness to assume other forms where they 
are the more dangerous for not being noticed, and moral theology 
cannot overcome them by the method of the ostrich. 

The natural world, expressing as it does the nature and 
methods of the divine mind, offers many analogies of the futility 
of this moral technique. Nothing, for example, makes a hedge 
grow so fast as clipping it back. The man who swims against a 
strong current will usually be drowned. To try to smooth troubled 
water with a flatiron is only to trouble it the more. An unpleasant 
noise is not mitigated by the vociferous singing of hymns; the 
result is only a louder and more discordant uproar. To attempt to 
get rid of wandering thoughts by efforts to destroy them only 


centers attention on their wanderings; conversely, to try to 
eliminate them by strenuous concentration on the task in hand 
centers attention not on the task but on oneself trying to perform 
it. For evil is overcome neither by direct opposition nor by 
concentration on its contrary virtue. Perfume is no antidote to a 
bad smell, especially when the smell is increased in response to 
the perfume. 

Thus far we have been afraid of applying the Gospel principle 
of “Resist not evil.” The most that our morality has grasped of the 
principle of overcoming evil by love is the idea of loving the 
sinner but hating the sin, whereby it was possible to justify the 
burning of heretics on the grounds that such torture would save 
them from eternal damnation. We have not had the courage to 
admit either that we have been given union with God or that one 
who is in union with God need neither fear evil nor hate it in any 
violent sense. God, as we have seen, is in principle greater than 
evil, and as it would be lése-majesté for him to fight it, it would 
likewise be so for the soul in union with God. If such an idea fills 
us with fear, it is only because we do not really believe in the gift 
of union with God. 

The love and acceptance of evil is not, however, the 
condonement of evil. We are not saying, “Peccate fortiter! Let us 
sin that grace may abound.” The point is that all evil actions 
come from pride and fear, which cannot be rooted out by 
violence but only by the conviction and the realization of 
inescapable union with God. The more vivid this truth becomes, 
the less point, the less satisfaction, the less interest there is in 
evil. But the more a hostile attitude to evil develops the sense of 
guilt and separation from God, the less vivid this truth will be; 
pride and fear will increase and plunge the soul into black 
despair. If the soul is afraid that evil conduct will separate it from 
God, it will cling to God through fear, and thus not realize union 
with God at all, because, as we have seen, realization cannot 
possibly come through fearful and possessive clinging. The soul 
must understand that while God does not condone evil, he does 
not cast out the evildoer or his deeds in any active sense. To try 
to affect God with evil is like trying to cut water with a knife. 

There is, of course, the risk that the soul will be moved to evil 
before it has realized union with God vividly enough to lose 
interest in evil. But we must take this risk, for the Christian 


religion is not a “safe and sure” way to heaven for moral 
cowards. Even if, having only a partial realization of union, a soul 
does commit evil without the deterrent of guilt and fear, this will 
do far less damage in the long run than a reversion to the guilt- 
ridden state. At this stage repentance will consist, not in guilty 
sorrow for the sin, but in turning again to the truth of union with 
God, which, during the act of sin, will almost invariably have 
been put out of mind. If the soul has a spiritual guide or 
confessor, he must stress neither the guilt nor the future 
avoidance of the sin; he must do everything possible to increase 
the conviction of union with a God who in himself is absolute 
love. There are risks and falls in the process, but they are 
temporary and must be taken if there is to be any real progress. 

It is questionable whether at the present time this can become 
part of the general and public teaching of the Church, for there 
are so many people still in the child and adolescent state who will 
attain a great holiness according to the rules of their state. They 
are to be provided for in every possible way, and on no account 
to be regarded as an inferior kind of Christians. To some extent 
they will be protected from the harmful possibilities of this truth 
by inability to understand it. On the whole, it would seem safer 
to make such teaching a part of that personal spiritual counsel 
which the Catholic priest may give in the confessional and the 
Protestant minister in his study. 

In this connection it is obvious that in many cases there is need 
for a revision of normal practice in the use of the Sacrament of 
Penance. All wise clergy and psychologists recognize, for a 
variety of reasons, the value of this sacrament. It is clear that for 
a soul in the child state the act of confession and the gift of 
forgiveness, pronounced authoritatively and sacramentally by the 
priest, involve an immediate and glorious relief from guilt. But in 
the awkward adolescent stage this does not happen, and nothing 
much can be done about it. Whatever counsel the priest may give, 
self-examination and confession will only increase the penitent’s 
self-consciousness and sense of guilt. The gift of absolution will 
be temporary indeed in its effect, because the penitent knows 
perfectly well that he is going to sin again, try as he may to avoid 
it. The child, in his naiveté, has no particular thoughts about the 
future, or imagines that he will not sin again. But Protestants 
refrain from confession because the practice aggravates their self- 


consciousness and leads them to despair. Catholics in the 
adolescent state who continue with it lose their spiritual joy, and 
go through an inner hell of guilt. All that the priest can do is to 
try to help them through this stage as quickly as may be, even 
intensifying the struggle and conflict, until he feels that they are 
ready to take the risk of maturity, of knowing that God accepts 
them absolutely and unconditionally. This naturally requires 
profound spiritual and psychological insight on the priest’s part, 
and although mistakes will, as in medicine, occur from time to 
time, we should have enough trust in the independent action and 
love of God not to shirk the task. Where we fail, he may heal, for 
we are not indispensable. In general, however, souls in this state 
should be entrusted to a wiser confessor by priests who do not 
really feel able to advise them. 

The soul which is in or entering the mature state is a new 
problem in this respect. It would seem probable that in their case 
we should revert to the practice of the early Church, and advise 
or require confession only when they feel in need of it or commit 
some sin of public scandal.io For in this stage the sacrament will 
have three main uses. It will assist the soul over relapses into the 
guilt-ridden state. It will give opportunity for counsel directed to 
increasing the realization of union with God. It will provide a 
useful voluntary discipline for those who are using law simply as a 
technique of love and are shaping their characters for no other 
motive than the glory of God. Under these circumstances the use 
of the sacrament must be governed in freedom, and shame or 
guilt must not be attached to its disuse, for it will cease to be free 
and loving. Emphasis must be laid upon repentance as returning 
to the thought of union with God, and not as promising to try not 
to sin again, which is a negative thought full of all the dangers of 
challenging the devil to a fight. God permits us to be tempted, 
and when we say the prayer, “Lead us not into temptation,” we 
are asking him not to let us descend to fighting evil on its own 
ground and in its own way. 

The point which modern Church religion seems so far from 
understanding is that a full and mature Christian morality can 
never be based on the sense of guilt; to far too great an extent 
organized Christianity thrives on the exploitation of this sense, 
appealing simply to man’s pride and fear. Of course the arousing 
of a sense of guilt is the easiest and quickest way of giving evil a 


temporary check, and creating a rudimentary kind of repentance. 
Real repentance, however, is not a self-regarding action; it is 
turning away from self and towards God, but it has been assumed 
that the horror of oneself experienced in guilt is the most 
effective way of getting a soul to turn from itself. For guilt in the 
sense of which we are speaking is not simply the consciousness 
that one has done wrong, but the self-recrimination and self- 
loathing which generally follow from it. Obviously it is essential 
to know that one has done wrong, but consequent self-loathing 
does not effectively turn attention upon God. The horror or 
hatred of a thing is a form of strong attachment to it, since an 
object of hatred fascinates and holds the attention despite all 
efforts to turn away. This accounts for the bad self-consciousness 
which so often mars Christian piety, particularly in its penitential 
mood. But it has been said that he prays best who does not know 
that he is praying, for prayer is self-forgetful absorption in God. 
The fascination of self-loathing therefore inhibits prayer, and 
because communion with God is the only possible means of 
overcoming evil, the sense of guilt will, in the long run, only 
increase the degree of sin. 

In short, therefore, self-loathing must give place to self- 
acceptance, which is permitting oneself to be loved by God. 


The acceptance of oneself is the essence of the moral problem and the 
epitome of a whole outlook upon life. That I feed the hungry, that I 
forgive an insult, that I love my enemy in the name of Christ—all these 
are undoubtedly great virtues. What I do unto the least of my brethren, 
that I do unto Christ. But what if I should discover that the least among 
them all, the poorest of all the beggars, the most impudent of all 
offenders, the very enemy himself—that these are within me, and that I 
myself stand in need of the alms of my own kindness—that I myself am 
the enemy who must be loved—what then?11 


The trouble is that many Christians do not perceive in God the 
very virtues which they expect in the saints. Jesus told us to 
forgive our brethren even if they sin against us “seventy times 
seven.” He said nothing about withholding forgiveness until we 
had extracted an apology and been assured that the offender 
would do his best not to let it happen again. But apparently such 
charity cannot be expected from God himself, “to whom it 
belongeth justly to punish sinners,” and who dangles the soul 
over hell until there has been contrition, confession and 


satisfaction. We forget that retribution is a dispensation of the 
divine love, wholly curative in its aim like the surgeon’s knife. 
God has no need to punish in the vengeful sense because he has 
no need to protect himself. He is not weak and vulnerable like 
human society, and the teaching of Jesus has to be separated 
from some of the Bronze Age elements in its Old Testament 
background.12 


Ill 


As the ever-deepening realization of union with God is the only 
way of final victory over evil, so it is the only source of creative 
virtue. Delivered from the vicious circle of bad self-consciousness, 
the infinite regression of chasing oneself around and around, it is 
possible for man to move forward. But in moving forward his 
principle of action will no more be a moral code; it will be the 
indwelling Holy Spirit, the ever-present fact of our union with 
God. The corporate nature of the Church as “the fellowship of the 
Holy Spirit” consists in this fact and not, as is so often assumed, 
in obedience to a common rule or external authority, whether the 
formal discipline of the Catholic Church or the “moral precepts” 
of the Sermon on the Mount. 

St. Paul made it clear that Christian morality is an art and not a 
science; it proceeds from a new Life and not from a new law. One 
may master all the rules of grammar but fail to be a good writer 
for lack of anything to say. One may master all the rules of 
conduct but fail to be a Christian for lack of love. Mere obedience 
to a law will never of itself produce love, because love is the very 
life of God and there is no system or set of rules whereby one can 
become its possessor. Thus the mission of Christ was not to teach 
a new moral law. There was nothing particularly original in his 
moral principles, all of which may be found in earlier Jewish 
literature or in the precepts of other and older religions. The 
mission of Christ was to bring into human consciousness a new 
life and a new power which will make it possible not only to 
carry out the old precepts but also to reform them. 

Bach did not write his music by looking up the rules of 
harmony and counterpoint and following them slavishly in 
sundry combinations. He studied the keyboard until he could 


identify the sounds which he heard interiorly, reproduced them 
in writing and gave us the rules of harmony. What we call rules 
are simply our analysis and classification of the forms of 
expression created by the great masters. We can teach others the 
forms, but we cannot teach them the genius because genius is life 
itself which ever evades capture. The astonishing thing about 
Christianity, however, is that we are invited not simply to 
emulate the Master, but to share his genius or Spirit. For the 
Spirit of God, unlike the spirit of music, is given to the whole 
world. This is where Christianity is different in principle from 
Judaism and other legalistic religions, and this is why “monkey 
religion” is of necessity sub-Christian. 

It is rare indeed, however, that a man of genius, whether artist 
or saint, breaks entirely with tradition. If his message is to have 
any value at all for his contemporaries, its forms of expression 
must grow out of existing traditions. A writer, to make himself 
understood, must use the language of the people, and must state 
new ideas in terms of old ideas. Thus the new life of Christianity 
expressed itself to the world in terms of existing Jewish, Greek 
and Roman traditions, giving them at the same time a fresh 
significance. In the same way, the new Christianity of maturity 
will express itself in terms of the old Christianity of childhood 
and adolescence both in doctrine and morals, for development 
through tradition is the modus operandi of the Spirit. 

Matter for whole volumes could be found in discussing the 
detailed application of these principles to specific moral problems 
in politics, economics and culture, and in family and sexual 
relations. Here we can do no more than suggest some of the 
general directions which a mature Christian morality will be 
likely to take, and of these three seem to be of special 
importance: 

(1) It will be an incarnational morality seeking to transform the 
world and the flesh rather than to deny it. But it will not seek to 
transform them beyond their proper limits. It will transform man 
into some approximation of perfect manhood—not into 
superman, angel or demigod. This trend is indicated in the 
concern of most Christian groups for the improvement of man’s 
material condition, and for the application of Christian principles 
in politics and economics. 

(2) It will lose, however, the adolescent’s itch to change the 


world over night, which has long characterized Western 
Christianity in its schemes for spiritual and material reform. We 
shall learn from the terrible chaos of modern civilization the folly 
of giving that which is holy unto dogs, and casting our pearls 
before swine. We shall also lose much of that spiritual conceit 
which blinds us to the work of the Holy Spirit in cultures and 
religions other than our own. Zealous interference with other 
people’s lives will be tempered by faith in God, and the 
knowledge that spiritual growth cannot be forced. 

(3) Our morality will again become conscious of its true end, 
and will thus be more intelligently applied. Since the Reformation 
we have largely regarded morality as an end in itself, and have 
clung to certain principles without understanding their object or 
asking whether, in this or that application, they really achieve the 
object. A morality which proceeds from the realization of union 
with God will see that its end is the perfection of this realization 
for all human beings. 

The function of the Incarnation is to unite man as man with 
God as God, without “confusion of natures.” Human nature does 
not become divine in the process, but perfectly human, for when 
Spirit is in union with created nature it does not overwhelm it but 
perfects it. The vast difference between the Four Gospels and the 
later Apocryphal Gospels is that in the former Jesus is always 
human; in the latter his humanity is lost in divinity. For Jesus 
was God in terms of man, not superman, and as man he had the 
finite limitations proper to humanity. He experienced fear and 
sorrow, hunger and thirst and pain; he had to eat and drink; 
when tired he had to sleep. His human knowledge was not divine 
omniscience, and thus while its quality was illumined its quantity 
and extent was limited.13 He did not marry because his blood was 
to flow through the whole human race, and no occasion could be 
given for a line of physical descendants to claim a special union 
with him. He taught in terms of the Hebrew tradition into which 
he was born (being the best for the purpose), and thus accepted 
some of the limitations of that tradition.14 Unlike St. John the 
Baptist and the Nazarites and Essenes, he was not an ascetic, for 
“the Son of Man cometh eating and drinking, and they say, 
Behold a gluttonous man and a wine-bibber.” 

For man, a perfect realization of union with God consists in a 
realization that extends to all his human functions, for no human 


function is incompatible with God. Man is a totality of body, 
mind and spirit. As body he eats and drinks, has sexual 
intercourse, feels tired after work, and is subject to pain, death 
and decay. As mind and emotion he reasons and speculates, and 
in response to certain stimuli feels fear, anger or love as rightly 
and naturally as the body feels heat when close to fire. As spirit 
he comes into conscious touch with the life of God, which, 
through spirit, flows down to his “lower” nature. But it does not 
deliver that “lower” nature from its proper limitations on the 
plane of time and space. It does not make the emotions incapable 
of fear and desire, or the body incapable of fatigue and decay. On 
the contrary, those who expect religion to effect a complete 
spiritualization of body, mind and emotion on the space-time 
level are indulging an absurd spiritual pride. True spirituality 
involves the acceptance of our limitations just as true poetry 
involves accepting the limitations of a metric or other prosodic 
form.15 

Union with God implies, therefore, the control and 
beautification of man’s natural functions, but thus far we have 
not clearly understood the meaning of control. We have confused 
control with partial or total abstinence. But a controlled dancer is 
not one who dances rather seldom; he is one who dances often 
and well. His control comes into play in the act of dancing. Of 
course, if he dances too much he will get tired and stale, and to 
this extent control does involve relative abstinence. The same is 
true of man’s natural functions and appetites, but the distinctive 
Christian and incarnational method of control is lost altogether if 
identified with simple moderation or abstinence. For example, a 
person is not sexually controlled in any real sense by mere 
limitation of the frequency of intercourse or the number of his 
partners. To realize union with God in terms of sexual life, he 
must exercise control within the act of sex, and as this will 
require practice the act cannot be too infrequent. It may well 
require limiting the act to one partner, for human beings are so 
complex and diverse that mutual adaptation in sex can take many 
years to perfect. As yet our moral theology has little conception 
of this kind of control. So far as these natural functions and 
appetites are concerned it is largely prohibitive, and has thus left 
the incarnational principle quite unapplied.i« 

As applied to eating and drinking, to sexual relations and all 


other natural functions and enjoyments, Christian morality 
involves much more than wise moderation and restraint in the 
frequency of use. It requires that the love and beauty of God be 
realized and expressed to the fullest possible degree in the actions 
themselves. To some extent we have already grasped this truth in 
relation to politics and social intercourse, but if we hesitate to 
apply it to our so-called lower functions we imply that in some 
way these are incompatible with God. But material things and 
processes become occasions of evil when not related to God. If, as 
is usually the case, the devout Christian puts God out of mind 
when engaged in sexual relations, he is simply inviting them to 
be a source of temptation. Failure to relate the world and the 
flesh to God accounts for much of the ugliness and sourness of 
traditional Christian morality. 

The adolescence of Western man has been marked by an 
attempt to dominate the world with his religion and his morals 
which has brought much more disaster than good. His extreme 
political and economic imperialism has been the shadow of 
spiritual and moral imperialism, for the trader, and then the 
soldier, have always followed the missionary. However superior 
the Christian religion and Christian morality may be, to try to 
force truth upon others is always a sign of immaturity. Although 
Christian principles must be applied in our political, economic 
and social life, this simply will not come to pass in a hurry. No 
amount of shouting, preaching, denunciation and propaganda 
will do anything but drive political and social abuses 
underground, for there is no such thing as an abiding public 
morality without a very general realization of union with God, 
and this, as we have seen, does not come in response to pressure 
or force of any kind. 

The primary work of the Church is to realize and share the gift 
of union with God, and if its attention is diverted to the imitation 
and sharing of the fruits of that union as its main object, and if, 
furthermore, such imitation is demanded of others, only disaster 
can follow. It is a fruit of union that men should desire to heal the 
sick and to prolong life and health. It is a fruit of union that they 
should study the secrets of nature and develop sciences and skills 
to this end. But when these goals are pursued for their own sake, 
when their original impulse and their final end are forgotten and 
untaught, the power of healing becomes a power of destruction. 


It is a fruit of union that men should study agriculture and 
engineering to feed the hungry and clothe the naked, but when 
the object of production becomes profit alone, and the object of 
food and clothing becomes “living for back and belly,” the moral 
impulse has failed in its object and become positively immoral. 
Worse still, when all this wholesale dispersion of wealth, gadgets 
and skills becomes identified with Christian civilization, when 
peoples who have not developed this kind of life are thought 
backward and heathenish, and are forced into conformity and 
compelled to ape our institutions, our morals, our dress, our 
beliefs, our sciences, our industries and our armies—so-called 
Christian culture becomes a curse upon the face of the earth. 
Thanks to our zealous and self-righteous interference, the 
ancient and splendid cultures of India, China and, more 
particularly, of Japan have been largely ruined. Although the 
peoples of India and China may not starve and die of plague in 
quite such vast numbers as heretofore, they are busy with 
excitement for our more fatuous political theories, with building 
armies on Western models, using our sciences to equip them with 
the necessary weapons, and with opening schools and universities 
to impart the scraps of information we call wisdom and to teach 
peasants to read so that they can understand and believe the 
propaganda and dope-literature in the newspapers. Perhaps no 
one can really be blamed for this, since it was done to a great 
degree with sincere intentions. But it should no longer be 
necessary to send missionaries to the peoples of Asia with vastly 
misunderstood versions of their religions and ours. As St. Francis 
Xavier and Robert de Nobili proved long ago, it is not impossible 
to teach Christianity to Orientals in the framework of their own 
cultural forms and traditions, without giving them the desire to 
ape our merely external and sensational accomplishments. 
Western man has an amazingly naive belief in the moral 
excellence of his high standard of living and information, which 
he confuses with culture and education, thinking that the mere 
dissemination of wealth, health, cleanliness and knowledge is a 
virtue of the highest order. But when all this is separated from 
the inner essence of the Christian religion it becomes an 
effrontery to people of real culture and a danger to people of 
none. It is not charitable to the poor to try all at once to abolish 
poverty, with the exception, indeed, of really abject poverty. As 


Christians we must feed the hungry and go hungry ourselves for 
their sake. But most of the wholesale and impersonal charity we 
practise today is mere patronization of the poor, motivated by 
pity and fear of their estate and not by respect and honour. We 
assume that poverty is an evil and in the name of Christian love 
try to give all a high standard of living, only to enslave millions 
of souls to cravings which they never had before. Instead of 
giving the poor love and dignity, we give them money in 
exchange for their souls. Christian poverty is honourable, and has 
been embraced by the saints, not because it delivers the soul from 
the chains of “evil” matter, but because in poverty material goods 
are more profoundly loved and appreciated, for the senses are 
cleansed from surfeit and excessive titillation and realize to their 
full capacity the beauty of the world. To the extent that the poor 
man is a real materialist he is a real Christian, because he 
reverences matter. 

Almost more evil than the thoughtless dissemination of wealth 
is the indiscriminate spreading of knowledge, which we mistake 
for wisdom and truth. Truth is knowledge in the service of God; 
anything else is mere fact, and the knowledge of facts is an 
amoral power which, of itself, gives no goodness at all to the 
recipient. Universal education, as we practise it, has no relation 
to the spreading of truth, and for the most part its effect is to put 
vast forces and skills at the disposal of stupidity and evil. This 
naive confusion of knowledge with truth reaches insanity itself 
when sincere men of science, for example, think it honest and 
moral to inform the general public or notoriously immoral 
governments about discoveries such as that of atomic energy, 
which, in the present state of public morality, is a menace pure 
and simple. The bacilli of virulent diseases are “truths” in the 
debased current sense of the word, but we do not spread them 
deliberately in the atmosphere. General knowledge of these 
discoveries may be inevitable, but it certainly is not good. 

So much of this absurdity has come to pass because Christians 
have been moral monkeys, confusing the externals of charitable 
behaviour with religion itself. Moral “monkey business” may be 
harmless enough in certain circumstances, but when the whole 
world is adjured in the name of God to join in with it, the 
externals of charity are hopelessly perverted through loss of the 
original motive. The function of the Church is not to be the 


world’s moral policeman, insisting on the observance of various 
modes of conduct by those who do not understand their inner 
meaning. The work of the Church is to share a sense of union 
with God by all the means at its disposal, symbolic or otherwise. 
The Christian morality of love, as distinct from the secular 
morality of justice, has meaning and value only in relation to this 
background. Apart from it, it disrupts the natural order of society, 
which, based as it is on fear and collective self-interest, is to be 
preferred to Christian and supernatural virtues running amok in 
separation from their source. To arrogate supernatural virtues to 
oneself apart from union with God is not only the sin of 
hypocrisy, but also the hubris, the supreme and damnable 
audacity, of thieving the powers of the only real Possessor of 
goodness and love. 

Christian morality becomes perverted and destructive not only 
when unmotivated by sacramental or mystical union with God as 
its initial impulse, but also when it is not seen clearly that God is 
its end. A Christian gives material benefits to those in need for 
the reason that, lacking things necessary for the body, they are 
distracted from their true aim as human persons, which is God 
himself. It is hard to love God in abject poverty, and hard to love 
him when mind and emotions are obsessed with sensations and 
passions. Thus the gift of material and intellectual goods is an act 
of Christian charity only when it is the outward form of the gift of 
God—that is, the gift of real love. 

This becomes obvious as soon as we ask what human life is for, 
but most modern world-reformers do not ask this question. The 
morality of giving material and intellectual goods to others 
consists for them solely in the fact that it makes possible what 
they term “fully developed personality” for the underprivileged. 
A fully developed personality is presumably one who passes the 
time and helps others to pass the time as painlessly as possible in 
gratifying biological urges and intellectual curiosities, which, in 
so far as it is a form of play, has a deceptive resemblance to the 
activity of heaven. But just because it has no conscious relation to 
the eternal play of God, it is meaningless play, for it takes place, 
not against the background of eternal Reality, but against that of 
eternal Nothingness, which will shortly swallow it up. This causes 
a sense of anxiety and futility which mars the character of human 
play with lust and greed, for fear that we shall “miss something” 


before all is dissolved in death.17 

The active life of morality has no significance unless directed to 
the contemplative life. Now, however, that it is possible to think 
in terms of an incarnational mysticism, it is no longer necessary 
for us to make such a sharp formal difference between the active 
and contemplative lives as was usual in the Middle Ages. The 
form of the contemplative life need not be so exclusively religious 
that it requires the cloister for its fulfilment, for in an 
incarnational mysticism contemplation and action are united as 
they were united in Christ’s own life. 

Contemplation and action are united not only in actions that 
are formally moral, such as deeds of kindness to others, but— 
ideally—in all actions whatsoever. It will therefore be recognized 
that the sphere of Christian action goes far beyond charity, social 
service and the like, and this will relieve the teaching of Christian 
action from that overemphasis on formal morality which has 
given it such a “preachy” atmosphere. This will help to free our 
idea of the Christian life from the false heroics of adolescence, 
that running around in search of great moral deeds to do, which 
is so often no more than hypocritical interference with the lives 
of others. In the realization of union with God it is no longer 
necessary for men to prove to themselves that they are saved, and 
thus it is easier for them to love one another genuinely and 
sincerely without self-consciousness. They will show mercy, love 
and consideration for others not because this is “good,” not 
because such conduct assures them that they are leading the 
Christian life, but because the contemplative life will make them 
aware of God in all human persons, and, knowing him in 
themselves, they will burn to let others know him also. For union 
with God demands absolutely to be shared. Not to share it is not 
to enjoy it; like the blood, it is a living thing and must be 
circulated. 

This sharing of union is not, however, to be done in a spirit of 
pride and condescension, for a person who has genuinely realized 
union with God is humble just because he sees no difference 
between himself and others. Before realization it seems that there 
is a difference between those who are awake to God and those 
who are not. A gateway stands on the spiritual highroad, with the 
sheep on one side and the goats on the other, and the gate 
puzzles us because it seems that God has foreordained some to 


salvation and some to damnation, or else that the sheep have 
been clever and good and wise enough to pay their way through. 
This is a theological conundrum which the best minds of 
Christendom have pondered for centuries without arriving at any 
logical explanation or solution. In logical and intellectual terms 
there is no solution. For to those who have passed through the 
gate there is no gate, and everyone is inside the kingdom of 
heaven. But to try to draw logical conclusions from this 
experience is fatal; lacking the experience itself, it leads to moral 
blindness and confusion of good and evil. Apart from the 
experience, the idea that all are in the kingdom of heaven 
suggests laziness and indiscrimination; but with the experience it 
suggests action and love.is The experience itself fills the soul with 
the inscrutable life of God so that the vision of his universal love 
is without evil consequence. The only difference between souls 
that seems to remain is between those that are greatest and those 
that are least in the kingdom. But all are within, and everywhere 
the will of God reigns supreme. 

~ 7 One cannot help detecting something of this attitude in the now widely 
popular writings of C. S. Lewis. Thoroughly excellent as they are from many 
standpoints, there is, especially in his Pilgrim’s Regress and Screw tape Letters, a 
certain ill-concealed glee in adopting an old-fashioned and unpopular position, 
and in making witty thrusts at characteristically modern positions which are 
held as not just partially but absolutely off the right track. Able as he is in 
pointing out the errors in modern paganism and in defending the rationality of 
the essential Christian doctrines, he has little or no conception of the part 
which modern criticisms of the Church play in developing a more profound 
and mature understanding of the Faith. A similar attitude is to be noted in 
many of the champions of Protestant neo-Orthodoxy, and it is significant that 
all steer clear of the whole subject of mysticism. 


2 St. Thomas, Contra Gentiles, III. xxxvii. 


3 Luther, WA i, p. 105, 14ff., quoted by Nygren in Agape and Eras, Part II, 
vol. ii. London, 1939, p. 476 n. 


4 Enders, Dr. Martin Luthers Briefwechsel, i, p. 29, in Nygren, op. cit., p 468. 
5 Luther, WA vii, p. 35, 25ff., in Nygren, op. cit., p. 509n. 


6 This is especially true of Catholicism in “Protestant” countries such as 
England and the United States, ie., in the great industrial and urban centres of 
modern civilization where people in general have a high degree of self- 
consciousness. Writing in Dieu Vivant, vol. i, no. 3, pp. 105-115, Rudolph 
Morris says that this kind of Catholicism lacks “the typically Catholic serenity 
towards all things human, that generosity towards all things real, that broad 
wisdom, that ravishing charm of the true mystics.... There is no smile, no 
superiority of heart, no inner freedom, but clenched teeth, and a pretense of 


purity resulting from a forced zeal of purism and a complete lack of artistic 
sense—which lack is to be considered a moral virtue.” 


7 Cf. D’Aygalliers, Ruysbroeck the Admirable. London, 1925, pp. 43-47. 
8 Secret of the Golden Flower, pp. 91-92 and 126. 
9 Berdyaev, Freedom and the Spirit, p. 182. 


10 During the first four centuries the Church required use of the sacrament 
only for murder, adultery and idolatry. 


11 Jung, Modern Man in Search of a Soul London and New York, 1933, pp. 
271-272. 


12 It has long been the custom of theologians to interpret certain of the 
Biblical attributes of God—his walking, sitting, sleeping, etc——in a symbolic 
sense, and, as we have seen, his “wrath,” considered as retribution for sin, is in 
reality a “surgical” measure prompted by his love. His withholding of 
forgiveness is to be understood in a similar way. Thus the saying, “If ye forgive 
not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses” 
would indicate that a person who does not forgive does not appreciate God’s 
forgiveness, and thus neither understands nor enjoys it. If you are one with 
God, you will share in his forgiving nature and manifest it to others. If you do 
not, you are not sufficiently awake to your union with God and need to realize 
it more vividly. 


13 It was thus impossible for him to know that Moses did not write the 
Pentateuch! 


14 Limitations of knowledge and understanding are not positive errors. If a 
man perceives the moon as a disk and not a sphere, his perception is not so 
much wrong as incomplete. It would be wrong if he perceived it as a square. 
Looked at from a distance, hills are blue. If, upon closer inspection, we find 
that the hills are covered with green grass we have not shown that the former 
perception was wrong. On the contrary, it was quite right from a distance. The 
artist who paints distant hills green because he knows they are covered with 
grass gives his picture a false colouring if “realistic” representation is intended. 


1s The ultimate resurrection and incorruption of the body would seem to 
occur in eternity rather than space-time, as indicated above, pp. 80-81. The 
Resurrection of Christ, being a special case, occurred also in time and space in 
order to be accessible to man’s space-time consciousness. 


16 Monastic chastity and celibacy is a separate question. There is no reason 
why certain people should not be free to renounce sexual life if this will enable 
them to serve God in a special and intensive way. But the monastic life is a 
specialized vocation, one of many varied ways of serving God, and is altogether 
legitimate so long as it does not lay claim to a greater perfection or nearness to 
God than any other way of life. To regard virginity as spiritually superior to the 
married state is certainly a Manichaean and un-Christian point of view. 


17 Evil is closely connected with the anticipation of death, when death is 
feared as the ultimate end of life. Apparently animals do not anticipate death 
to any great degree, taking, as Jesus said, no thought for the morrow. When 
the Genesis mythos states that death comes into the world as a consequence of 


sin, this may well refer to the anticipation of death rather than death itself, 
which is no more than one temporal boundary of a finite being, birth 
constituting the other. This is the more likely for the reason that saints return 
to that primitive innocence which lives in the Eternal Now. 


is Cf. William Temple in Nature, Man and God. London, 1940, p. 381. “The 
doctrine of the universal Sovereignty of the divine will is paralysing so long as 
it is doctrine only; but when it is matter of personal experience, it becomes 
impulse and energy and inspiration.” 


IV. THE LIFE OF CONTEMPLATION 


As vision, contemplation is the beginning of action; as enjoyment, 
it is its end. But the enjoyment of God and of union with him is 
not only something to which we may look forward when our 
work is done; it is the constant condition and accompaniment of 
meaningful work. It is obvious that the life of action will be 
shallow indeed if it does not go hand in hand with an interior 
spiritual life wherefrom the strength and vision needed for action 
are drawn. To be effective, this spiritual life must be the 
enjoyment of union with God, and Christian action is now so 
largely ineffective not only because there is no consciousness of 
union but also because Church religion almost completely ignores 
the interior life. It is rare indeed to find even the simplest 
teaching about prayer and meditation save in religious groups of 
the “cult” type. In general, Protestantism ignores it for action and 
Catholicism is still apt to relegate it to the cloister and retreat 
house. Furthermore, much of the teaching about the spiritual life 
which does manage to “trickle through” has two serious 
limitations: it savours too much of “monkey business,” of trying 
to get union with God by imitation, and it is so separated from 
ordinary everyday life that it tends to be artificial and self- 
conscious. 

We have seen that there is no method for getting union with 
God, because all such methods will, in the end, make us blind to 
its actual presence. Therefore the life of worship and meditation 
is not the getting but the enjoyment of union, and for that reason 
consists of praise, thanksgiving and adoration. Formally and 
sacramentally this is expressed in the liturgy, the corporate 
worship of the Church. Informally, yet still in a deeper sense 
sacramentally, it is expressed in the living of everyday life. By 
this means both liturgical (ie., formally religious) actions and 
everyday actions are turned into contemplation—into that 
enjoyment and perfection of union with God which is man’s true 
end. 


I 


Because, in the growth of man’s spiritual life, symbolic religion 
comes before mystical religion, worship through liturgy is the 
first kind of worship. Christian liturgy has three characteristics. 
Firstly, it is corporate because Christ, the gift of union, has not 
been given to one but to many, and the many have thereby been 
made one Body. Secondly, it employs formal words, that is, a 
ritual, both because they express formally religious thoughts and 
because liturgical worship is not something which we on the one 
hand do towards God on the other, but something which God 
does through us. Thus liturgy uses, not our own words, but the 
words of scripture understood as the words of God.1 Thirdly, it 
involves formal actions because worship is not something done 
with the mind alone but with the whole man; like the love 
between man and woman, it includes both mind and body. 

The Christian liturgy is therefore the formal and corporate 
celebration of union with God in mind and body. It is symbolic 
worship because both the spiritual reality of God and the physical 
reality of human life are present in it under symbolic form, which 
is, significantly enough, one and the same symbol—the bread and 
the wine, which is at once our own concrete life and the Body 
and Blood of Christ.2 Properly carried out, the liturgy is an act of 
symbolic contemplation, for its purpose is not to edify the people 
nor to unite them by mere presence in one place and performance 
of one action. Its purpose is to concentrate thought and action 
upon God so that the group realizes unity through corporate self- 
forgetfulness in God. Christian liturgy is essentially theocentric, 
for which reason forms of worship, or rather, of Church service, 
having as their main emphasis the edification of the people and 
the promotion of fellowship on the human plane are sub- 
Christian and fall short of true contemplation. In preaching 
services and meetings for informal vocal prayer the people are, as 
a rule, much too conscious of themselves (or of the preacher) to 
find unity in God. 

If the service of the Church is for edification, the motive for 
attending it is to “get something,” which is quite alien to the 
contemplative spirit and, indeed, to the whole genius of 
Christianity. For if it be true that the Christian is one who has 
accepted the gift of union with God, he has no other purpose in 


going to church than to celebrate the gift. Lacking consciousness 
of the gift, the ordinary modern Church service is an insufferably 
stodgy and joyless affair, where people go to acquire merit for the 
penance of boredom. It must be admitted, as more and more 
thoughtful Protestants are beginning to see, that Catholic liturgies 
embody the spirit of worship far more effectively than informal 
Protestant services of edification, and that their pattern must be 
followed if the Church’s corporate worship is to have any real 
value. Protestantism has lost the art of worship for the very 
reason that it is itself the symptom of Western man’s self- 
consciousness, and there can be no real worship or contemplation 
until self-consciousness is transcended. 

The problem of an appropriate way of the interior life for 
modern man will not, however, be solved merely by a return to 
liturgy. In so far as liturgy is symbolic worship it is not 
immediately comprehensible to modern man, and he cannot use 
it effectively unless it is thoroughly related to his ordinary life. 
One of the most encouraging trends in modern religion is the 
effort of Catholic liturgical reformers to do this very thing by 
explaining the history and meaning of the liturgy, by encouraging 
the people to take a full and intelligent part in its celebration, and 
by pointing out its implications for personal and social life, which 
begins to deal with the real problem. Yet it is one thing to know, 
intellectually, what symbols mean; it is quite another to realize 
that meaning in life. It is one thing to say and think, “Glory be to 
the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost”; it is quite 
another to live it. Until one has lived it, he does not really know 
what it means. The liturgy, as has always been obvious, must be 
carried over into life, and not merely into one’s personal moral 
life, but, as the foundation for this as well as for its fulfilment, 
into one’s personal spiritual life. The Church’s formal and 
corporate life of prayer and contemplation must be extended into 
the prayer life of the individual, or rather, interpreted in terms of 
his spiritual life as it goes on from day to day. But so far as 
modern man is concerned, this simply does not happen. Even if 
he is a practising Christian it happens but rarely, because, for the 
modern mind, the traditional ways of the personal spiritual life 
are for the most part unacceptable. 

It is easy to dismiss the problem by saying that this absence of 
the interior life is due either to laziness or lack of instruction; that 


the traditional ways of this life are tried and true, and that if the 
modern mind can’t accept them it’s too bad for the modern mind. 
But the situation here is the same as in other aspects of religion. 
The old ways of the spiritual life are right and marvellous for 
those who can use them; they have produced lives of the highest 
beauty and sanctity, and will continue to do so. At the same time, 
they do not satisfy the needs of the mature religious 
consciousness and should not be forced upon it. They fail to 
satisfy this type of mind because they are symbolic rather than 
mystical, and consist largely of mixing the liturgy into life instead 
of living the liturgy in terms of life. 

In the old type of spirituality mystical prayer was regarded as 
exceptional, and the personal prayer life consisted of certain 
formal religious actions performed in private. The Church’s 
corporate liturgy was simply personalized, usually to its 
detriment, and the “saying of one’s prayers” involved using scraps 
of the liturgy and other material for talking to God. In principle 
and in proper circumstances there is nothing wrong with this, 
provided that the splendour of the liturgy is kept as much intact 
as possible.3 But the method of formal religious acts in private, 
whether these be taken from the liturgy or made up out of one’s 
own head, is neither the only nor the necessary way of the 
spiritual life. On the contrary, for the mature type of 
consciousness it is usually more of a hindrance than a help, even 
when the individual is a mere beginner in the interior life. 

For one thing, modern man finds, as a general rule, that formal 
religious acts in private do nothing but make him absurdly self- 
conscious. This is not because he is not used to them or because 
his friends do not “say their prayers.” The reason is that his mind 
is ready to go beyond a certain type of symbolism, and that 
therefore devotions and gestures and other practices of a formally 
religious nature are a total distraction from God. He finds that 
talking to God in so many words, or deliberately sitting or 
kneeling down to think about God, only puts God at a distance. 
He thinks much more about himself trying to pray or to meditate 
than he thinks of God. That this is true even in the best Church 
circles is obvious from some of the current jargon of the spiritual 
life, for apparently one does not simply pray and meditate; one 
“says one’s prayers” and “makes a meditation.” Devout souls 
struggle along with this kind of thing for years and years; many 


of them never happen to discover mystical prayer, or, if they do, 
a myopic spiritual director discourages it; and although they 
become more and more deeply involved in the vicious circle of 
self-consciousness, they are persuaded that forging blindly ahead 
on this path is “holy patience.” By the same reasoning it is “holy 
patience” to polish a brick for the glory of God in the hope that 
some day it will shine.4 

When a man “communes with himself” he does not, unless he 
has a rather primitive mind, talk to himself in so many words. If 
God is nearer to us than we are to ourselves, there is no reason 
why we should have to talk to God when we commune with him. 
Talking suggests that God is not altogether here and now, within 
the very centre of the heart and mind. It is absurd to imagine that 
interiorly silent prayer requires a high degree of spirituality, or to 
say that formal religious acts will keep the mind from wandering. 
For many people they do nothing of the kind, but, on the 
contrary, divert attention from God to the words and actions and 
symbols used, or to the attempt to think thoughts about him. In 
some cases even the deliberate setting apart of a certain period of 
the day for spiritual exercises fails entirely in establishing 
conscious communion with God, and becomes nothing more than 
an exasperating interval in which one is_ self-consciously 
“spiritual” for ten or fifteen minutes. In other words, the same 
problem arises whether one is practising Christian prayer or 
Yoga, for both are forms of symbolic religion. 

There would be no serious difficulty in these spiritual exercises 
if, in every case, practice and persistence would make perfect and 
at last eliminate self-consciousness. But with the type of mind in 
question this does not happen for the reason that souls of this 
order are charged with a different task—the incarnational task of 
so uniting religion with ordinary life that ordinary life becomes 
religious in itself. This presents no insuperable difficulty once 
there is some realization of union with God, and a degree of this 
realization is in fact quite simple. The presence of God as the 
Eternal Now is a truth which, at least in part, should be able to 
penetrate our consciousness with ease. God has made it that way 
out of love. When this is understood it is obvious that walking, 
eating, sitting, washing and working are done in God, may 
therefore be done in a contemplative way, to the glory of God, 
and thus done constitute the real translation of liturgy into life. 


Nevertheless, it must be repeated that there is a definite need 
and place for formal religion even in the life of the most 
accomplished mystic. Our human weakness is ever confronted 
with the danger that when everything is religious, nothing is 
religious, that formless religion will degenerate into mere 
worldliness. That is the very reason why we have the liturgy, and, 
having it, there is no objection to confining formal religion to the 
liturgy, for in corporate worship, properly conducted, there is less 
danger of falling into the vicious circle of self-consciousness. If 
religious symbolism is kept pure and apart, and not muddled with 
daily life, it will be easier to relate it to life. To unite you must 
first divide; you must keep your thinking and your terms straight. 
Colours are not harmonized by mixing them, nor forms by 
blending them; harmony is the right juxtaposition of pure colours 
and pure forms. 

While there is less danger of self-consciousness in the liturgy 
for the reason that it is a group action, we have noted that in 
many cases the modern mind finds even corporate worship 
awkward and unreal, both with and without ceremonial 
refinements. On the whole, however, it is probably safe to say 
that it impresses him as less awkward when the form of worship 
is very frankly archaic and symbolic. It may still seem unreal and 
remote from life, but this will only be true so long as the Church 
fails to complement symbolic religion with mystical religion. 
Given an understanding of mystical religion, we shall not need or 
desire to mix formal religion with everyday life or make any 
compromise between secular forms and religious forms. On the 
contrary, we shall keep our forms separate and realize complete 
harmony of inner meaning. It is highly probable, therefore, that 
as the mystical understanding of Christianity increases, as union 
with God is realized more and more in everyday life, our forms of 
worship will become unashamedly archaic and symbolic.s We 
shall keep the ancient symbols of the Christian religion in all 
their original purity, for our spiritual progress will not consist in 
a development and adaptation of symbolism, but in an increased 
understanding of its meaning. 

By and large, a prayer meeting in a modern living-room leaves 
one with nothing but a bad taste in the mouth. The characteristic 
mentality of our time finds this kind of thing totally awkward and 
absurd, not because it “brings religion home” or too close for 


comfort, but because it smacks of exhibitionism.s Yet at 
Christmas intelligent pagans go by thousands to Midnight Mass in 
the local Roman or Anglican church and enjoy themselves 
immensely. That they do not go more often is chiefly due to the 
fact that they have no real understanding of the relation of the 
Mass to life, or because they are afraid of becoming involved in 
the trivial and obscurantist aspects of modern Church religion. Of 
course, they go in part to “see the show” and to hear fine music, 
but there is also the attraction of the numinous, the infectious 
fascination of the holy which delivers the soul from its own 
futility. 

The danger of returning to archaic forms of worship is the 
temptation to religious aestheticism. It will be observed, however, 
that the true religious aesthete has no particular interest in 
mystical religion, and that he mixes liturgy and life abominably, 
cluttering his home and his person and his spiritual life with 
every variety of liturgical contraption. He is wholly under the 
domination of the symbol and does not actually understand its 
meaning at all. 

The last hundred years have seen a very considerable 
recrudescence of archaic forms in churches of all kinds and 
denominations, and the process is likely to continue. It will, 
however, be of little value unless, as already suggested, the 
Church gives a great deal of strictly informal teaching on the 
mystical life in terms of digging potatoes, washing dishes and 
working in an office. For very many people, this inner aspect of 
religion is and will be the only one of interest; symbolic and 
liturgical religion leaves them absolutely cold. The catholicity, 
the completeness, of the Church, however, necessarily includes 
sacramental worship, and another century or more will see it 
widely adopted by Protestants, who have already been building 
themselves great Gothic churches with altars and stained glass 
windows.7 

Liturgy at its best is contemplative in spirit—a corporate 
forgetting of human personalities in the adoration of God. Its 
mood is therefore impersonal, quiet and simple; it is completely 
ruined by self-conscious dramatics and by the intrusion of 
ministerial individualisms. Liturgy is thus the concrete witness 
and symbol of everyday life lived as the contemplation of God, 
and of union with God given to us in the midst of everyday life. 


As the mystical life must be free from self-consciousness, so must 
the liturgy. The liturgy is corporate because everyday life is 
corporate; we do not live, we cannot exist, as separate and 
isolated individuals, and the liturgy symbolizes the truth that 
union with God is given to man both as individual and as society, 
and has consequences both for personal and for communal life. 
The liturgy is the concrete bond of union between Christians of 
every stage of psychological growth—the naive, the adolescent 
and the mature, for when this principle of growth is understood 
there is no reason why Christians at different stages of growth 
should separate themselves from the common Body. All can find 
common ground at the symbolic level, provided that the mature 
are not expected to understand it in the same way as the naive, 
and, on their part, do not give themselves airs of superiority over 
the naive. 

The mature, however, will be able to distinguish a clear 
difference of function between contemplation in its liturgical 
form and contemplation in its secular form, and will not attempt 
to sanctify their daily lives by cluttering them with truncated 
odds and ends of liturgical practice.s Quite naturally a mature 
soul, genuinely religious, will seek periods of quiet and 
retirement from the buzz of life, and then make his sitting still, 
his silence of mind, his quiet walking to and fro, an act of 
contemplation. But he cannot wisely be expected to do this kind 
of thing self-consciously and by rule. The Spirit of God will drive 
him to it as naturally as the body is compelled to sleep when 
tired. He will simply retreat; he will not “make a retreat” armed 
with a small library of devotional manuals and “spiritual” 
literature.o He will have discovered the secret, discussed 
somewhat darkly by mystics of the past, of union with God 
“without means”—that is, without formal contrivances of mind 
and feeling. 


II 


Because the contemplative life has, in the past, been so largely 
liturgical in form, it has generally required some degree of 
separation from the world. It could not be maintained at all fully 
without the cloister. The reason for this was not only that it was 


aided by the opus Dei, the Divine Office, but that contemplation 
itself was to a considerable degree identified with prolonged 
periods of gazing into the “divine darkness.” That is to say, the 
contemplative spent long hours in the chapel or in his cell 
practising a sort of Yoga and acquiring a state of mind which he 
tried to preserve while working in the kitchen or the fields. The 
state of mind consisted in a prolonged act of loving attention to 
the invisibility of God. Ordinary thoughts were banished; by the 
gentle rhythm of vocal prayers the mind was set at peace, until 
leaving aside all particular considerations it was confronted by a 
seeming blank. To this voidness the will reached out in love, 
knowing by faith that God himself dwelt invisibly in the void. 
This practice was continued for years until it became a natural 
habit and could be carried on without effort, and such habitual 
and effortless contemplation was termed union with God 
“without means.” Such a spiritual exercise necessarily required 
the highest degree of external quiet and freedom from distraction. 
The cloister was its ideal place. 

It is clear, however, that a mysticism of this kind is not fully 
incarnational. The realization of union is still something attained 
by effort, and as a mental state is only able to exist together with 
other mental states by sheer force of habit. Until perfection in the 
exercise is attained, which requires years of practice, the mystical 
life is largely incompatible with life in the world. Modem 
devotees of mystical religion, such as Aldous Huxley and Gerald 
Heard, are trying to restore this kind of life and commend it to 
non-Christians as the true essence of religion.io But for the 
religion of the Incarnation there can be no such gulf between the 
active and the contemplative lives. There is little evidence that 
Jesus practised such a mysticism, and none that he taught it or 
considered it important. But we are not to conclude from this that 
his religion was not mystical. On the contrary, Christ was the 
mystical truth himself, and imparted that truth not by spiritual 
exercises but by free grace. Nor are we to conclude that cloistered 
contemplation was in any sense erroneous. In an epoch of 
symbolic religion it was the sole means of keeping the mystical 
element of Christianity alive until the time was ripe for a full 
integration of contemplation and action. 

The monastic type of contemplation has, however, a definite 
value so long as it is not confused with a means for acquiring 


union with God, or even of realizing union. Huxley, Heard and 
many others have made this confusion. Monastic contemplation is 
a way of loving God, and is one of several ways of deepening the 
realization of union. We have seen throughout that union with 
God does not depend on our love for him, but on his love for us. 
There is nothing in it to be attained; it is here and now in all its 
fulness. Therefore contemplation is for the appreciation and not 
the acquisition of union with God. The initial realization does not 
come through contemplation or any other method; it comes 
through the abandonment of methods and through faith in the 
given truth. Contemplation is a work resulting from faith. But for 
all its simplicity of form, monastic contemplation, the spiritual 
exercise of gazing into the “divine darkness,” still belongs to the 
liturgical or formally religious type of spirituality. It is the love of 
God and the enjoyment of union in the form of a specifically 
religious action. 

It is possible and, indeed, necessary to love God and enjoy 
union with him in the forms of secular actions, and this type of 
contemplation is obviously the more incarnational. In this type of 
contemplation the focal point of adoration is not the “divine 
darkness” perceived by the emptying of the mind; it is the Eternal 
Now in which all the events and experiences of daily life occur. 
The two are really the same thing approached from different 
points of view. Furthermore, the method of adoration is not to be 
still and gaze into the Eternal Now with love; it is to give oneself 
wholeheartedly to the work which the present moment brings; it 
is to go straight ahead with the Eternal Now, accepting its 
changing forms with one’s entire being but not grasping hold of 
them. This contemplation does not need to involve any formally 
religious thought of God because he presents himself to the soul 
beyond religious forms, in and as the Eternal Now.11 

This contemplation differs from mere living in the present in 
two respects. The awareness of given union with God as the 
Eternal Now is its constant undertone, and the forms, experiences 
and events of the moment are not just passively received but 
actively willed. In the former respect it would seem to differ from 
the other type of contemplation which is still strongly 
characterized by eros, the longing of the soul for God, the striving 
after him as if he were not present. According to Dom John 
Chapman, “the principal stage consists of this: ‘O God, I want 


Thee, and I do not want anything else.’—This is the essence of pure 
contemplative prayer, until the presence of God becomes vivid.”12 
It would appear, however, that this prayer does not sufficiently 
grasp the truth of the Incarnation, which has already fulfilled the 
yearning of the Psalmist—“Lake as the hart desireth the water 
brook, so longeth my soul after thee, O God.” 


O Love! will men never see that thou meetest them at every step, 
while they seek thee hither and thither, where thou art not? When in the 
open country, what folly not to breathe its pure air; to pause and study 
my steps when the path is smooth before me; to thirst when the flood 
encompasses me; to hunger for God when I may find him, relish him, 
and receive his will through all things!13 


Or as Dom John himself says elsewhere: 


We are living in touch with God. Everything we come in contact with, 
the whole of our daily circumstances, and all our interior responses, 
whether pleasure or pains, are God’s working. We are living in God—in 
God’s action, as a fish in the water. There is no question of trying to feel 
that God is here, or to complain of God being far, once he has taught us 
that we are bathed in him, in his action, in his will.14 


In the latter respect we see that this way of contemplation is 
quite different from quietism, since the events of the moment, 
expressing as they do the will of God, are not passively received 
but actively willed. To quote De Caussade again: 


If we knew how to greet each moment as the manifestation of the 
divine will, we would find in it all the heart could desire.... The present 
moment is always filled with infinite treasures: it contains more than 
you are capable of receiving.... The divine will is an abyss, of which the 
present moment is the entrance; plunge fearlessly therein and you will 
find it more boundless than your desire.15 


Perceiving, then, that the circumstances of this moment are the 
adorable will of God, and that to desire God’s will is a higher 
thing than to desire even the Beatific Vision, the soul says “Yes!” 
with all its might to the whole of experience. This is the full 
realization, in concrete action, of the liturgy’s praise of God, for 
praise as participation in the divine joy is the essence of 
contemplation. This is the meaning of doing all things for the 
glory of God. Tout ce qui arrive est adorable. 

Especially is this true in regard to suffering, for suffering is 


transformed and its meaning realized only when the sufferer 
affirms it as the divine will. To struggle against inevitable pain is 
only to intensify grief, and when the moment brings pain the 
praise of God consists in entering into its very heart, cooperating 
with it, and telling it to be as painful as it likes. At first thought 
this seems madness itself to the sufferer, but the total acceptance 
and affirmation of pain is the essence of the way of the Cross 
whereby suffering is overcome and its purpose understood. No 
words can convey the understanding which comes through this 
acceptance of pain because it belongs to the innermost mystery of 
God. But the universal testimony of the saints is that suffering 
affirmed as the will of God was suffering which they would not 
have missed for the world, and such understanding enables them 
to reconcile the agonies of human life with the existence of an 
omnipotent God of love. 

Such acceptance is naturally most difficult, for there are times 
when our whole physical and moral being revolts and shrinks 
uncontrollably from pain, when we are quite certain that we 
cannot face it. In these circumstances what we are to accept is not 
so much the pain itself as our own reaction to it, our own fear 
and horror, our own desire to protest, to fight and to flee. When 
this is done we discover invariably that God permits us to suffer 
in order to “debunk” our egoism, and that this is mercy itself 
because it opens our eyes to his splendour and love, giving us an 
infinite joy in return for a finite pain. There is no proof of this 
truth but experiment. 

We should, however, note in passing that it illumines one of 
the greatest problems of Christian theology—the reconciliation of 
the divine love with the possibility of eternal damnation. It is 
almost impossible to weed the doctrine of damnation out of 
Christianity without discarding whole sections of the New 
Testament and the clear words of Christ himself. Leaving other 
considerations aside, there is a higher point of view which 
renders this unnecessary if not unwise and erroneous. It is 
actually possible to reconcile the doctrine of eternal damnation 
with the idea of universal restoration or apocatastasis taught by 
Origen and St. Gregory of Nyssa in an incomplete form which the 
Church found unacceptable. The mind of the Church has always 
taken the view that in eternal life souls will their own state and 
cannot do otherwise. Thus it is conceivable that if a soul were to 


will its own damnation, to affirm it utterly as the adorable justice 
of God, which is simply an aspect of his love, the inner character 
of hell would be changed and its eternal fire transformed into the 
vision of God. This would render the suffering of hell an act of 
praise, so that hell itself would join in the chorus of the holy 
saints and angels. Eternal suffering would therefore be 
apprehended as identical in essence with eternal joy. To will 
one’s own damnation in this sense is, of course, different in 
principle from willing sin. It is an affirmation of God’s justice 
made possible by a grace analogous to the lumen gloriae, whereby 
the blessed are enabled to see the divine essence in heaven. For 
souls are unable by their own power either to see God directly or 
to admit and affirm the justice of their own damnation. It would 
seem probable, however, that God will make himself “all in all” 
by giving these powers to the redeemed and the damned 
respectively.16 

It is worthwhile looking at the doctrine of hell in this way 
because, even if it is nothing more than a theological nightmare, 
it is the extreme instance of the problem of reconciling suffering 
with the love of God. Taken literally as a doctrine of everlasting 
torture without any kind of mitigation or solution, it amounts to 
blasphemy itself, for if it were in the power of human freedom to 
produce a consequence of this kind there must be something 
radically diabolical in the order created by God, and in God 
himself. Such an interpretation of the doctrine may vindicate 
human freedom, but at the cost of demonizing God. Furthermore, 
when understood in this way the doctrine does not even 
guarantee the freedom of the human will to resist God eternally, 
because if the damned continue inevitably to resist God they do 
not do so freely; if they did, they would be able to repent. But if 
eternal suffering may be transmuted by the same principle as 
temporal suffering, and brought to that mysterious point where 
pain turns into joy, it is possible to believe that hell is consistent 
with the divine love. For it would seem that the transmutation of 
suffering into a joy purer than could ever be known apart from 
suffering is the central action of the divine economy.17 

The affirmation of one’s own suffering is the supreme act of 
worship because it is the most intimate participation in the 
Crucifixion. But it is vitiated by self-consciousness, as when one 
deliberately seeks out suffering to accept for the glory of God. 


This is an act of presumption analogous, though by no means the 
same in degree, to incurring deliberately the pains of hell. For we 
have no other concern than to affirm the will of God as it is 
presented to us in this moment and to offer him the suffering 
which he sends in this moment. It will certainly be sent when 
needed. To seek out suffering is to give the lie to the prayer, 
“Lead us not into temptation,” and to indulge oneself in those 
false moral heroics which have so disfigured the Christian life. 
Naturally, it is another matter when it is known that suffering 
will be the consequence of an act of mercy, but to be merciful in 
order to suffer is a perversion of charity. 

Thus a contemplative life fully in accord with the principle of 
the Incarnation consists in adoring the will of God as it comes to 
us in the given union of the Eternal Now. 


The present moment is like an ambassador which declares the will of 
God. The heart must ever answer fiat, and the soul will go steadily on by 
means of all things to her centre and her term—never pausing in her 
course, spreading her sails to all winds; all ways, all methods equally 
further her progress towards the great, the infinite. All things afford her 
equal means of sanctification. The one only essential the soul finds in 
the present moment. It is no longer either prayer or silence, retirement 
or conversation, reading or writing, reflections or cessation of thought, 
avoidance or seeking of spiritualities, abundance or privation, illness or 
health, life or death, but simply what comes to her each moment by the 
order of God.is 


This is the true union with God “without means,” for on the one 
hand union is the gift of God and not the product of one’s own 
action, and on the other the contemplation of the union involves 
no special technique other than that which the divine will 
supplies here and now. Retirement from the world and adoring 
God in the “divine darkness” of a mind emptied of particular 
thoughts are special, “liturgical” means to the contemplative life 
which are necessary in certain periods and for certain people. 
There will always be the special vocation of the monastic life 
because there will always be a need for specialists in formal 
religion, for liturgists in the widest sense of that word. There will 
always, too, be the need for places of retreat from the nervous 
irritation of the world for all spiritually minded people. But in 
mature Christianity the grand way of contemplation will be 
identical with the life of action, for this ordinary everyday life 


will be understood as participation in the divine playing of God 
and in the worship of heaven, for in the Eternal Now we shall 
find that strait and narrow gate, that needle’s eye, through which 
we are taken into the infinite life of God. 


Ill 


By this full union of contemplation with the actions of everyday 
life we shall overcome the strange and unhappy paradox that in 
practice the religion of the Incarnation has not realized its own 
essential meaning—the wedding of the flesh to the spirit. Instead 
of effecting the union of God and the world, which is its central 
purpose, Christian sacramentalism has kept the two apart. God 
became man and imparted his life to us in forms and sacraments 
with the very object of indicating that the union of his Spirit with 
all flesh is his supreme will for the world. But in practice 
Christians have frustrated the divine will by confining the life of 
the spirit to the forms from which it was intended to spread and 
flow for the sanctification of all created things. The process of the 
Incarnation has been made to stop with the historic Jesus, the 
process of transubstantiation with the bread and wine of the 
altar, the life of contemplation with the walls of the cloister, and 
the life of holiness and Christian action with formal morality. We 
have never actually allowed God to enter into our entire life. He 
came down to earth and entered our earthly forms, but we swiftly 
got rid of him by raising the first, indicative forms which he 
touched to heaven. Whether as Catholic sacramentalism or 
Protestant moralism, Christianity is the most formal of religions, 
and thus leaves the greater part of human life untouched. 

For in ordinary everyday life the average human being is 
necessarily occupied for the greater part of his time with actions 
where there is opportunity neither for great moral deeds nor 
formal prayers, and Christianity, as generally explained to him, 
has no particular relation to this side of his life. At best he may 
have been informed that the relation of religion to, say, being a 
banker’s clerk, consists in being an honest and hard-working 
banker’s clerk, in doing the job well. But this only relates his 
work to religion’s by-product morality, not to religion itself, to 
the union of our most trivial actions with God. Because the only 


aspect of Christianity which seems to touch everyday life is its 
moralism, it is degraded from a religion of “is” to a religion of 
“ought.” That is to say, attention is diverted from the 
contemplation of the present reality of God to ourselves and what 
we ought to do and be, which is never a particularly inspiring 
consideration. 

This failure to realize the implications of the Incarnation, to 
accept the gift of union with God to the flesh in all its aspects, 
and the substitution of self-conscious moralism for the 
contemplation of God in the here and now, are the basic reasons 
for the present weakness of the Christian religion. Almost all 
current attempts to revive the Church are so much whipping of a 
dead horse, instead of taking it to him who is the Resurrection 
and the Life. In general Christians are so_ self-consciously 
preoccupied with the things they ought and ought not to have 
done, and thus with what they ought now to do by way of 
Christian action in a world gone mad, that they are absorbed in 
themselves instead of in God. At this time, therefore, the renewal 
of Christianity depends solely on accepting the Incarnation in all 
its fulness. For without the realization of God’s love for the world, 
we can love neither the world nor God. 

The vision opened to us by a fuller understanding of the 
Incarnation affords material for the writing of a new Sum of 
Theology, applying it to every aspect of Christian doctrine and 
life in a manner appropriate to the maturing mind of Western 
man. Here no more has been possible than the barest outline of 
this vision and its application, for Christian tradition is so rich 
and modern thought so varied and complex that the fuller task 
could only be the work of many minds. Such a Sum of Theology 
may or may not be necessary. It is, however, absolutely necessary 
for our world that the Church and the Christian religion become 
the greatest of powers in its life and culture. But there is no true 
spiritual power apart from union with God, and the Church is not 
a creative power in the modern world because Christians have, in 
general, no consciousness of this union. 

Therefore it must be said again that the mystical life is 
necessary, not as a special vocation for the few, not as a life 
practicable only for those who can in some degree detach 
themselves exteriorly from the world, but as the general and 
central life of the entire Church. For without the consciousness of 


God in the soul and of the soul in God, Christianity in this age 
and for modern man can be no more than a superficial mimicry 
of spirituality and of the virtues and achievements of the past. 
Properly understood, the Incarnation shows us that this 
consciousness is not reserved to the specially holy or the specially 
favoured; neither does its realization demand a long course of 
spiritual gymnastics possible only for those who have time and 
opportunity. In its deepest meaning, the good news of the Gospel 
is that union with God is a free and universal gift and that the 
consciousness of it is presented to us in the Eternal Now—in 
short, that the love of God is generous beyond comprehension. To 
refuse that love is proud and ungracious in the extreme, even 
when concealed under such seemingly excellent motives as the 
fear of presumption. 

When we become aware that God’s love for the world is 
literally infinite, the matters with which modern Church religion 
occupies itself in place of the contemplation and the teaching of 
this love seem exceedingly small and trivial. It is not surprising 
that more and more they have become the preoccupation of a 
relatively small group, consisting for the most part of persons 
whose vision is both narrow and superficial. Of these, some are 
sincerely puzzled at their lack of power and are working eagerly 
but blindly to commend the Christian religion to the modern 
mind. Others, however, are content to congratulate themselves 
that they possess a truth which the world must accept or be 
damned. This kind of religion appeals not at all to the better 
minds of our age, who believe in all sincerity that institutional 
Christianity is a dead backwater, and the multitudes simply 
follow their opinion. 

A mature understanding of Christianity may not be 
immediately possible for immense numbers, but it is by no means 
beyond the reach of the intellectual and spiritual leaders of the 
modern world. If it is commended to them, the multitudes will 
take courage and in due time grasp some of its rudiments. But if 
the Church wastes all her energy in “going to the masses” with 
rehashed versions of the religion of our infancy and adolescence, 
the world’s increasingly large number of finer minds will remain 
unconvinced and therefore the masses too. The Church did not 
conquer the Roman Empire until, in the terms of those days, she 
had shown herself intellectually respectable and spiritually 


mature, and because, underlying and informing that intellectual 
and spiritual splendour, there was a conviction of union with God 
that made death and torture seem unimportant.19 

The problems, the needs and the mentality of the modern 
world are in some ways similar to but in many ways quite 
different from those of the Roman Empire in its final phases. We 
cannot, therefore, contemplate a return in toto to the methods and 
emphases of early Christianity, not only because we are different, 
but also because Christianity itself, like a living tree, has changed 
and grown. In the light of a fuller appreciation of the Incarnation 
we can see, for example, that the early Church’s concept of union 
with God was actually Monophysite in attempting to divinize the 
flesh beyond its proper limits. But in many respects the principles 
are the same: there must be the conviction of union, and 
civilization must be approached at its highest level with an 
appeal suited to the intellectual and spiritual maturity of its best 
minds. 

But whether the modern world is to be convinced or to remain 
unconvinced, it is the solemn obligation of the Church not to hide 
her light under a bushel, not to conceal the depth and the riches 
of the divine love under terms and symbols which have become 
incomprehensible, whose force and meaning have been lost. The 
central truth of the Gospel and the Incarnation, the gift of divine 
union, must be stated clearly and without fear. Its implications 
for theology, for morals and for worship must be thought out, felt 
out, and made plain. To fail in this is to cloud the splendour of 
God, which is that without let to his absolute holiness and self- 
sufficiency he has made himself one in love and one in life with 
every finite and errant member of his universe—here and now. 
~ 1 While this is obviously true of the Divine Office it is perhaps less obviously 
true of the Mass. However, where the Ordinary of the Mass is not a 
compilation of scriptural phrases, it is none the less the official and traditional 
prayer of the Church. But because the Church is the fellowship of the Holy 
Spirit, its official prayer is regarded as the voice of the Spirit just as much as 
scripture. The Mass, however, is primarily an action—that is, the action of 
Christ hallowing, breaking and distributing the Bread of Life. The principle, 


therefore, is the same: it is not an action which we do towards God, but an 
action which God does through us. 


2 It must be repeated that the word “symbol” is here used in its strict sense, 
as a sign conveying what it signifies. 


3 “Just as the hymns in the hymn-book seem keyed for high sopranos, so the 


prayers in the usual prayer-books are apparently composed for schoolgirls of 
the giggly age or for the more gushy sort of women. For this reason, if for no 
other, the use of the missal and the breviary should be urged upon the people. 
Those prayers are simple, austere, restrained, dignified, virile, quite in contrast 
with the prettified, sissified ‘Oh’ and ‘Ah’ stuff that turns the stomach or softens 
the brain.” J. M. Gillis, quoted by Gerald Ellard, S.J., in Men at Work at 
Worship. New York, 1940, p. 264. 


4 The principles of Catholic spirituality emerge for the most part from 
monasteries, where the situation is very different. There the so-called personal 
life of devotion is actually corporate, and thus wonderfully protected from 
excessive self-consciousness. But very many religious live their real interior 
lives in an entirely mystical way, for when not engaged in corporate devotions 
and meditations they simply “practise the presence of God” in their ordinary 
work, without formally religious thoughts about him. 


5 In this connection it is significant that the Catholic liturgical movement is 
revolting against the late symbolic developments of the Counter-Reformation 
and adopting the simpler forms of earlier times. 


6 The following Zen story may illustrate the point. A monk had been 
pestering his master for some comment on his spiritual progress. At last the 
master turned to him and said, “You are all right, but you have a trivial fault.” 
“What is that?” “You have altogether too much religion.” “Well,” protested the 
monk, “if one is studying religion, don’t you think it the most natural thing to 
be talking about it?” “When it is like an ordinary everyday conversation, it is 
somewhat better.” “But why do you so specially hate talking about religion?” 
“Because it turns one’s stomach!” 


7 The use of archaic forms of worship need not and, it is to be hoped, will 
not mean the slavish imitation of antique art styles. The purity of symbolic 
forms is fully preserved in much of the liturgical art of modern schools, some 
of which is of the highest excellence. 


s This must be distinguished clearly, of course, from the daily attendance of 
genuine liturgical worship, whether it be the Mass in the local church, or the 
formal recitation of the Divine Office en famille, as well as from the definite 
rites of the Church for the sick, for the blessing of homes and crops, etc. All 
this belongs in the realm of corporate and formal rather than personal and 
informal spirituality. Personal prayer, it must be repeated, is at this stage the 
translation of the liturgy into one’s everyday, secular actions, rather than the 
simple addition of liturgy to life and the use of bits and pieces thereof for 
private devotions. 


9 In dealing with souls of this type, spiritual counsellors and directors must 
be most judicious in regard to their advice about “aids to devotion.” The 
normal and popular manuals currently used in Church circles have “cured” 
plenty of people of the Christian religion, especially the little books of private 
prayers and much of the excessively self-conscious spiritual literature produced 
in the seventeenth century, with the outstanding exception of De Caussade’s 
Abandonment and Spiritual Letters. The fact that a large number of Christians 
use this kind of literature today is no necessary guarantee of its current value. 
Many use it because they think they “ought” to, and know of nothing else, with 


the result that they are leading very artificial spiritual lives. 


10 See especially Huxley’s Perennial Philosophy (New York, 1945) and Heard’s 
Preface to Prayer (New York, 1944). Despite certain excellent features of these 
works their basic attitude is Gnostic rather than Christian, for which reason the 
sense that union with God is a gift as distinct from an attainment is altogether 
dim. Significantly, Huxley confuses the creation with the Fall. 


11 The contemplation of the “divine darkness” also dispenses with the formal 
thought of God, but it remains a formally religious way of contemplation 
because of its setting. It is a specific act of prayer distinct from other actions. 


12 Spiritual Letters. London, 1944, p. 289. 
13 De Caussade, Abandonment, xi, p. 110. 
14 Ibid., p. 143. 

15 Ibid., ii. 3, pp. 79-81. 


16 It is interesting to note that in the Divina Commedia Dante and Virgil seem 
to find their way out of hell through its very centre. Cf. Inferno, xxxiv. 


17 We should note again that some of the sublimest passages in music involve 
the resolution of dissonances. 


1s De Caussade, Abandonment, ii. 10, pp. 101-102. 


19 Cf. Harnack’s Mission and Expansion of Christianity. London and New York, 
1908, vol. i, pp. 238-239. “The supreme message of Christianity was its 
promise of this divine state to every believer. We know how, in that age of the 
twilight of the gods, all human hopes concentrated upon this aim, and 
consequently a religion which not only taught but realized this apotheosis of 
human nature (especially in a form so complete that it did not exclude even the 
flesh) was bound to have an enormous success.... Even after the great epoch 
when ‘gnosticism’ was opposed and assimilated, the church went forward in 
the full assurance that she understood and preached apotheosis as the 
distinctive product of the Christian religion.” Harnack, as a liberal Protestant 
regarding the Johannine literature alien to the actual teaching of Christ, was 
naturally unable to recognize this as the original essence of the Gospel. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Anonymous. Orthodox Spirituality. By A Monk of the Eastern Church. London, 
1945. 


Aruanastus, St. The Incarnation of the Word of God. With an Introduction by C. 
S. Lewis. London, 1946. 


Baker, Aucustine. Holy Wisdom. London, 1876. 

Berpyaev, Nicotas. The Destiny of Man. London and New York, 1937. 

— The End of Our Time. London, 1933. 

— Freedom and the Spirit. Trans. O. F. Clarke. London, 1935. 

— The Meaning of History. Trans. George Reavey. London and New York, 1936. 
— Spirit and Reality. London and New York, 1939. 


Bercson, Henri. Two Sources of Morality and Religion. Paris, 1932 and New York, 
1935. 


Bett, Henry. Joachim of Flora. London, 1931. 

— Nicholas of Cusa. London, 1932. 

Binyon, Laurence. The Spirit of Man in Asian Art. Cambridge, Mass., 1936. 
BLaknEy, RaymMonb. Meister Eckhart. New York, 1941. 


Bremonp, Henri. Histoire Littéraire du Sentiment Religieux en France. 8 vols. Paris, 
1916-1928. 


Butcaxov, Sercius. The Wisdom of God. London and New York, 1937. 
ButTLer, Dom CuTHBert. Western Mysticism. New ed. London, 1946. 


Cuapman, Dom Joun. “Roman Catholic Mysticism.” Art. in Hastings’ 
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics. 


— Spiritual Letters. London, 1944. 
Cuavasse, Ciaupg. The Bride of Christ. London, 1939. 
Cu Ta-xao. Tao Te Ching. A Translation. London, 1937. 


Ciutton-Brock, A. “Spiritual Experience.” Art. in The Spirit, ed. B. H. Streeter. 
London and New York, 1919. 


Cusanus, Nicuotas. The Vision of God. Trans. E. G. Salter. London, 1928. 
Dawson, CHRISTOPHER. Progress and Religion. London, 1932. 
D’Aycatiers, Wautier. Ruysbroeck the Admirable. London, 1925. 


De Caussape, J. P. Abandonment to the Divine Providence. Trans. Ella McMahon. 
New York, 1887. 


De Roucemont, Denis. Love in the Western World. New York, 1940. 
— Passion and Society (English edition of the above). London, 1940. 


Dix, Dom Grecory. The Shape of the Liturgy. London, 1945. 

ELLARD, GERALD. Men at Work at Worship. New York, 1940. 

Fazer, F. W. Creator and Creature. London, 1928. 

FarRELL, WALTER. A Companion to the Summa. 4 vols. New York, 1941. 
Fretp, CLaup. Meister Eckhart’s Sermons. London, n.d. 

Frost, Bepg. Priesthood and Prayer. London, 1943. 


Garricou-LacrRancE, R. Christian Perfection and Contemplation. London and St. 
Louis, 1937. 


Guson, Erienne. The Philosophy of St. Bonaventure. London and New York, 1940. 
— The Philosophy of St. Thomas Aquinas. Cambridge and St. Louis, 1941. 

— The Spirit of Mediaeval Philosophy. London, 1936. 

GroppeEck, Grorc. The World of Man. London, 1935. 

Harnack, Avot. History of Dogma. 7 vols. Boston, 1896-1900. 


—. The Mission and Expansion of Christianity. 2 vols. London and New York, 
1908. 


Hearp, GERALD. Preface to Prayer. New York, 1944. 

Hepert, A. G. Liturgy and Society. London, 1944. 

Hucuson, SHIRLEY. Contemplative Prayer. London, 1935. 
Huxtey, Atpous. Ends and Means. London, 1937. 

— Grey Eminence. New York, 1941. 

— The Perennial Philosophy. New York, 1945. 

IncE, W. R. Christian Mysticism. London and New York, 1933. 


James, WitiaM. The Varieties of Religious Experience. London and New York, 
1929. 


JOHN OF THE Cross, St. The Ascent of Mount Carmel. Trans. David Lewis. London, 
1889. 


— The Dark Night of the Soul. Trans. G. C. Graham. London, 1922. 


Joun oF Damascus, St. “The Orthodox Faith” in Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, 
vol. 1x. Ed. Schaff and Wace. London and New York, 1899. 


June, C. G. The Integration of Personality. New York, 1939. 

— Modern Man in Search of a Soul. London and New York, 1933. 

— Psychology and Religion. New Haven, 1938. 

— The Symbolic Life. Printed for private circulation only. London, 1939. 


June, C. G., and WILHELM, Ricuarp. The Secret of the Golden Flower. London and 
New York, 1931. 


KeyseRLING, H. South American Meditations. London, 1932. 
— The World in the Making. London, 1927. 
Kirk, KENNETH E. The Vision of God. London, 1932. 


KrisHNAMuRTI, J. Verbatim Reports of Talks (issued periodically). Hollywood, 
1933-1940. 


Lanpau, Rom. God is My Adventure. London and New York, 1936. 
Lewis, C. S. Pilgrim’s Regress. London, 1943 and New York, 1945. 

— The Screwtape Letters. London and New York, 1943. 

Linpworksy, JOHANNES. The Psychology of Asceticism. London, 1936. 
Maritain, Jacques. Art and Scholasticism. London and New York, 1942. 
— Education at the Crossroads. New York, 1943. 

— The Degrees of Knowledge. London, 1937. 

— Ransoming the Time. New York, 1941. 


Maritain, JAcQuEs, and Maritain, Raissa. Prayer and Intelligence. London and New 
York, 1928. 


MascalL, E. L. He Who Is. London, 1944. 


McCann, Dom Justin. The Cloud of Unknowing and Other Treatises. By an English 
Mystic of the Fourteenth Century. With 


a Commentary on the Cloud by Augustine Baker. London, 1943. 
Meap, G. R. S. Fragments of a Faith Forgotten. London, 1931. 


NieBuurR, REINHOLD. The Nature and Destiny of Man. 2 vols. New York, 1941 and 
1944. 


Nycren, Anpers. Agape and Eros. 3 vols. London, 1932, 1938 and 1939. 
Ouspensky, P. D. Tertium Organum. New York, 1923. 

Patmore, Coventry. The Rod, the Root, and the Flower. London, 1907. 

Peers, C. ALLIson. Studies in the Spanish Mystics. 2 vols. London, 1927 and 1928. 


PreirFer, Frantz. Meister Eckhart. Trans. C. de B. Evans. 2 vols. London, 1924 
and 1931. 


Poutain, A. The Graces of Interior Prayer. London, 1910. 


Rott, C. E. Dionysius the Areopagite. A translation of the Divine Names and the 
Mystical Theology. London, 1940. 


Saupreau, Aucuste. The Mystical State. London and New York, 1924. 

SENzAKI, NyocEn, and Reps, Satapin. The Gateless Gate. Los Angeles, 1934. 
Sorokin, Pimirim. The Crisis of Our Age. New York, 1942. 

SPENGLER, OswaLp. The Decline of the West. 2 vols. New York, 1926 and 1928. 
SPIEGELBERG, F. The Religion of Non-Religion. London, 1938. 


STEERE, Douctas. On Beginning from Within. New York, 1943. 

Steuart, R. H. J. In Divers Manners. London, 1938. 

— The Inward Vision. London, 1937. 

— Temples of Eternity. London, 1935. 

— World Intangible. London, 1934. 

SrreeTeR, B. H. Moral Adventure. London, 1934. 

Suzuki, D. T. Essays in Zen Buddhism. 3 vols. London, 1927, 1933 and 1934. 
— Manual of Zen Buddhism. Kyoto, 1935. 

TEMPLE, WILLIAM. Nature, Man and God. London, 1940. 


TERESA OF AviLa, St. The Way of Perfection. With an introduction by F. Benedict 
Zimmerman. London, 1935. 


Tuomas Aquinas, St. The Basic Writings of St. Thomas Aquinas. Ed. Anton C. 
Pegis. 2 vols. New York, 1945. 


— Selected Writings. Ed. M. C. d’Arcy. London, 1939. 


— Summa Theologica. Translated by the Fathers of the English Dominican 
Province. 12 vols. London, 1912-1917. 


ToynBEE, ARNOLD J. A Study of History. 6 vols. London, 1934-1939. 
TRAHERNE, THomas. Centuries of Meditation. London, 1908. 
UNDERHILL, Eve.yn. Collected Papers. London and New York, 1946. 


— The Letters of Evelyn Underhill. Ed. Charles Williams. London and New York. 
1944. 


— Mysticism. London, 1930. 

— Practical Mysticism. London, 1931. 

— Worship. New York, 1937. 

Von Hue, F. Eternal Life. Edinburgh, 1913. 

— Letters to a Niece. London, 1928. 

— The Mystical Element of Religion. 2 vols. London, 1927. 

Wart, A. E. The Holy Kabbalah. London and New York, 1929. 
Watkin, E. I. Catholic Art and Culture. London and New York, 1944. 


Watts, Atan. The Legacy of Asia and Western Man. London, 1937, Chicago, 
1938. 


— The Meaning of Happiness. New York, 1940. 

— The Spirit of Zen. London and New York, 1936. 

— The Theologia Mystica of St. Dionysius. West Park, N.Y., 1944. 

WHEELER, R. H. The Laws of Human Nature. New York and Cambridge, 1932. 
WynscHENK, Dom P. John of Ruysbroeck. London, 1916. 

ZuNDEL, Maurice. The Splendour of the Liturgy. New York, 1944. 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


ALAN watts, who held both a master’s degree in theology and a 
doctorate of divinity, is best known as an interpreter of Zen 
Buddhism in particular, and of Indian and Chinese philosophy in 
general. Standing apart, however, from sectarian membership, he 
has earned the reputation of being one of the most original and 
“unrutted” philosophers of the century. He was the author of 
some twenty books on the philosophy and psychology of religion. 
He died in 1973. 


Penguin 
Random 
House 


What's next on 
your reading list? 


Discover your next 
great read! 


Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author. 


Sign up now. 


