INDEPENDENT VOICES 


Tao: The Watercourse Way 


“A remarkable book because of 

Alan Watts’s talent for communicating 
Eastern ways of thought ... This book is 
a ‘must’” — Shambhala Review 


ALAN WATT S$ 


with the collaboration of Al Chung-liang Huang 


TAO: 
The Watercourse Way 


BY 
ALAN WATTS 


WITH THE COLLABORATION OF 
AL CHUNG-LIANG HUANG 


Additional calligraphy by Lee Chih-chang 


Souvenir Press 


Contents 


Title Page 
Foreword, by Al Chung-liang Huang 
Preface 
Prolegomena 
The Pronunciation of Chinese Words 
1. The Chinese Written Language 
2. The Yin-Yang Polarity 
3. Tao 
CHINESE CALLIGRAPHY 
4, Wu-wei 
CHINESE CALLIGRAPHY 
5. Te—Virtuality 
Once Again: A New Beginning, by Al Chung-liang Huang 
Note on My Calligraphy 
Bibliography 
ALSO BY ALAN WATTS 
Copyright 


Foreword 


Al Chung-liang Huang 


THE LAST MORNING I was with Alan Watts was spent in his mountain 
library overlooking Muir Woods, drinking tea, playing a bamboo 
flute, and plucking koto strings among the eucalyptus. We had 
just taught for a week together at Esalen Institute, Big Sur, and 
on the ferryboat of the Society for Comparative Philosophy in 
Sausalito. I was helping him with research on his book, and he 
had just finished reading the manuscript of my book, Embrace 
Tiger, Return to Mountain. We were sitting on the library floor, 
comparing notes, nodding, smiling. Suddenly Alan jumped to his 
feet and joyously danced a t’ai chi improvisation, shouting, “Ah- 
ha, t’ai chi is the Tao, wu-wei, tzu-jan, like water, like wind, 
sailing, surfing, dancing with your hands, your head, your spine, 
your hips, your knees ... with your brush, your voice ... Ha Ha ha 
Ha ... La La Lala ah ah Ah ...” Gracefully he glided into the desk 
seat, rolled a sheet of paper into the typewriter, and began 
dancing with his fingers, still singing away. He was writing a 
foreword for my book, composing a beautiful introduction to the 
essence of t’ai chi. It was probably one of his last actual writings 
before a strenuous European lecture tour took him away from his 
desk and from his new ways of spontaneous, joyous writing. 

Alan was going to allow his book on Taoism to write itself. He 
knew, as a scholar, that he was turning out another of his famous 
themes-and-variations on the meeting of East and West. But as a 
man of Tao, he also realized that he must give up controlling it 
intellectually. For as the subject itself clearly maintains, “The Tao 
that can be Tao-ed is not the Tao.” 

After so many years of writing beautifully the unwritable, Alan 
Watts was finally stepping aside, letting his writing happen. He 
turned to me for reflections. He wished to tune in body and mind 
totally with the movement of the Tao, in t’ai chi. Alan was 
enjoying his newfound energy. He wrote the first five chapters 
with a great sense of discovery, lucidity, and creative insight. All 
of us who shared in the progress of this book felt confident that it 
would be his best, surely the most alive and useful. We could not 
wait for him to finish it. 


From the beginning I had felt honored and happy to be of help 
to him. Alan was especially interested in the ways I read the 
original Chinese texts. We both found excitement in deciphering 
the difficult passages, loaded with ambiguity and multiple 
interpretative possibilities. We would look at all the existing 
translations, debate, digest, and dismiss them, and then start 
afresh, attempting a new, on-the-spot translation to satisfy us. 

Alan helped me to feel at ease with my lack of fluency in the 
English language. He said to me often that my broken Chinese- 
English rendered the Chinese philosophy more explicitly, and that 
I must not try so hard to improve it. As a teaching team we 
complemented each other. We were an ideal combination to help 
people experience what they think they know—taking them out of 
their heads into their bodies, then back again into their body- 
mind entity. Finally, Alan asked me to illustrate the book entirely 
with brush calligraphy. We agreed that the free-flowing brush 
strokes of the cursive (grass style) would most vividly bring out 
the watercourse way of the Tao. 

After he had finished the chapter “Te—Virtuality,” Alan said to 
me with a special glint in his eyes, “I have now satisfied myself 
and my readers in scholarship and intellect. The rest of this book 
will be all fun and surprises!” Alan had hoped to bring the Tao to 
his readers the way he practiced and experienced it in everyday 
living. Many new vistas had opened in Alan’s life. He was like a 
child again, willing and able to set forth upon new courses and 
follow the inevitable turning of energies. 

During our last seminar at Esalen together, at the finish of an 
afternoon session when the high-flying spirit had set everyone 
smiling, dancing, and rolling up and down the grassy slopes, Alan 
and I started to walk back to the lodge, feeling exuberant, arms 
around each other, hands sliding along one another’s spine. Alan 
turned to me and started to speak, ready to impress me with his 
usual eloquence about our successful week together. I noticed a 
sudden breakthrough in his expression; a look of lightness and 
glow appeared all around him. Alan had discovered a different 
way to tell me of his feelings: “Yah ... Ha ... Ho ... Ha! Ho... La 
Cha Om Ha ... Deg deg te te ... Ta De De Ta Te Ta ... Ha Te Te Ha 
Hom ... Te Te Te ...” We gibbered and danced all the way up the 
hill. Everyone around understood what we were saying. Alan 
knew too that he had never—not in all his books—said it any 
better than that. 

At the Alan Watts memorial celebration in the Palace of Fine 
Arts in San Francisco, someone in the audience shouted to Jano 
Watts: “What was it like to live with Alan?” Her answer: “Never 


dull. He was a man full of fun and surprises. And the biggest 
surprise of all was on November sixteenth last year.” During that 
last evening of his life Alan Watts played with balloons. He 
described the weightless, floating sensation as being “like my 
spirit leaving my body.” In the night he went on to a new journey 
of the spirit, riding the wind, laughing joyously. 

He left behind, us, the living, missing him terribly for his 
bravura human aliveness. He left also empty pages, a proposed 
two more chapters of “fun and surprises” of the book he had 
begun on the Tao. Many of us with whom he discussed this work, 
or who met with him during the summer-long seminars on Taoism 
while The Watercourse Way was happening, knew that in the final 
two chapters of the intended seven Alan hoped to let it be seen 
how the ancient, timeless Chinese wisdom was medicine for the 
ills of the West. Yet, paradoxically, it must not be taken as 
medicine, an intellectually swallowed “pill,” but allowed joyously 
to infuse our total being and so transform our individual lives and 
through them our society. 

Elsa Gidlow, Alan’s longtime friend and neighbor, discussed this 
with me often. She confirmed our talks by writing the following: 


It was his vision that modern technological man, in attempting 
absolute control over nature (from which he tended to see himself 
divided) and over all the uses of human society, was caught in a 
trap, himself becoming enslaved. Every control requires further 
control until the “controller” himself is enmeshed. Alan was fond of 
pointing to Lao-tzu’s counsel to the emperors: “Govern a large 
country as you would cook a small fish: lightly.” But it should be 
understood that Alan never saw “the watercourse way” in human 
affairs as a flabby, irresponsible, lackadaisical manner of living. The 
stream does not merely move downhill. The water, all moisture, 
transpires from the earth, streams, rivers, the ocean, to the upper 
air, a “breathing out,” and then there is the “breathing in” when the 
moisture is returned downward as dew, as rain—a marvelous cycle, 
a living interaction: nothing controlling anything, no “boss,” yet all 
happening as it should, tse jen. 

Just how Alan would have communicated in his final chapters his 
insights into the need of the West for a realization and a living of the 
Way of the Tao, we can only guess. What we do know is that it 
transformed him as he allowed it to permeate his being, so that the 
reserved, somewhat uptight young Englishman, living overmuch in 
his head, in his mature years became an outgoing, spontaneously 
playful, joyous world sage. He believed that a widespread 
absorption of the profound wisdom of Taoism could similarly 
transform the West. This book was to be his contribution to the 
process. 


So, when all fingers pointed toward me to undertake 
completion of this book, I realized that I must not try to imitate 
Alan or get into his mind, but attempt to show, from my knowing 
him, where he had arrived. My initial thoughts were sentimental 
and tributary. I began to relive my memories of Alan Watts. I 
wanted to share with the readers the total man Alan, not just his 
brains and words. I wrote about our first meeting dancing on the 
beach at Santa Barbara, our first Oriental meal together when 
Alan spoke more Japanese than I. I wrote about exciting events 
and moments in our many joint seminars which clearly 
demonstrated Alan’s natural Tao as teacher-man. 

I remembered one New Year’s Eve celebration when we 
inspired a blind drummer to beat out the rhythm of our cursive, 
calligraphic dialogue. How everyone picked up the splash-splatter 
motions of our ink brushes and began dancing spontaneously 
their own individual body-brush strokes. Another time when Alan 
and I guided a blind girl into our mind-body by touching and 
moving with her so she could gradually see and feel through her 
inner visions. I recalled rituals and games we played: weddings 
conducted out of rigid procedures into a true spirit of love and 
union; impromptu chanoyu or tea ceremonies with unauthentic 
equipment, yet performed and observed in reverent essence. 

Alan Watts was a philosophical entertainer. He knew himself to 
be so. His foremost concern was enjoyment for himself and for his 
audience. He easily lifted the usual academic seriousness, along 
with dutiful learning, to new and higher planes of joyous 
playfulness in natural growth. 

And yet, all this remembrance is only thoughts of the past. 
What is happening to Alan now? What are his current, ongoing 
“fun and surprises”? 

On New Year’s Eve 1973-4, during Alan’s forty-nine-days’ 
Bardo Journey (the Tibetan and Chinese concept of the 
intermediate stages between death and rebirth) and only a few 
days before his fifty-eighth birthday, I had an unusual dream 
about juxtaposed time-space-people. It was in China, I thought, 
during a chanting session with the monks for my father’s Bardo. 
Then the place became Alan’s circular library where Alan himself 
was conducting the service, speaking in my father’s voice in 
Chinese. I was playing the flute, but the sound I made was that of 
a gong, mixed with beats of the woodblock. Then Alan changed 
into my father, speaking an unrecognizable yet perfectly 
intelligible language. The booming, resonating voice gradually 
became the sound of the bamboo flute I was playing, reading his 
lips. My vision zoomed close to the dark moving void between the 


lips, entering into a sound chamber swirling with colors and 
lights, deeper and deeper into the stillness of the continuing 
sound of the bamboo. I woke up not knowing who, when, or 
where I was. Next thing, I was flying in the sky (was it by plane?) 
to arrive at Alan’s library by midday New Year’s. 

For the first time since his passing in November I felt I was 
truly close to him. Sitting on the deck outside the picture window 
before which Alan’s ashes rested on the altar, I let the sound of 
my bamboo flute echo over the valley and hills. 

It was a clear and beautiful day. Later, I put on Jano’s climbing 
shoes, threw a blanket wrap over my neck, took Alan’s Tibetan 
walking staff, and walked down the small path into the depth of 
the woods. The sound of the bamboo carried everything inside me 
to Alan, to everything that is the eternal spirit-body. On my return 
by the same path, just before I reached the top, an orchidlike 
flower burst into full bloom aoe my feet. I asked the orchid, 

al 


“What is everyday_ Tao f¥. The orchid, Lan—the second 
syllable in Alan’s Chinese name—answered, “Nothing special, 


really.” 

We do not hear nature boasting about being nature, nor water 
holding a conference on the technique of flowing. So much 
rhetoric would be wasted on those who have no use for it. The 
man of Tao lives in the Tao, like a fish in water. If we try to teach 
the fish that water is physically compounded of two parts 
hydrogen and one part oxygen, the fish will laugh its head off. 

In the past months, after I had struggled to fill in the empty 
pages of this book and ended up throwing all my attempts in the 
wastebasket, I suddenly remembered one morning at a Chicago 
seminar. Alan was unusually tired and feeling slightly inebriated 
when one super-intellectual-bigger-than-life question was put to 
him. Several moments elapsed. During that time, a couple of us 
who had been with Alan the night before and earlier that day 
knew for certain that Alan had simply decided to take a short 
catnap, while everyone else expected, and therefore saw, that he 
was deep in meditation, thinking that one over. When he finally 
came to and realized he had totally forgotten the question, he 
managed with great finesse and eloquence to come up with an 
even-more-super-intellectual-bigger-than-the-biggest-life answer 
to dazzle us all. 

I can hear Alan laughing now. Every time I find myself stuck in 
my thinking, I turn to him. And in all our spiritual dialogues, 
Alan’s answers have been consistently and simply, “Ha Ha Ha Ha 
Ha Ho Ho Ho Ho Ho Hahahahahahahahahahah ha ...” Let us 


laugh together then, wholeheartedly, all human beings of the Tao, 
for, in the words of Lao-tzu, “If there were no laughter, the Tao 
would not be what it is.” 


Preface 


CERTAIN CHINESE PHILOSOPHERS writing in, perhaps, the —5th and — 
Ath centuries explained ideas and a way of life that have come to 


+ 
= 


be known as Taoism ao BR _ the way of man’s cooperation 
with the course or trend of the natural world, whose principles 


we discover in the flow patterns of water, gas, and fire, which are 
subsequently memorialized or sculptured in those of stone and 
wood, and, later, in many forms of human art. What they had to 
say is of immense importance for our own times when, in the 
+20th century, we are realizing that our efforts to rule nature by 
technical force and “straighten it out” may have the most 
disastrous results.1 

I doubt that we can give a scientifically exact and objective 
account of what was in the minds of those philosophers because 
they are too far away in time, and history fades away like the 
reverberations of sounds and of traces in water. The precise 
meanings of the Chinese language of those days are hard to 
establish, and although I appreciate and try to follow the methods 
of exact scholarship, my real interest is in what these far-off 
echoes of philosophy mean to me and to our own historical 
situation. In other words, there is a value in the effort to find out 
what did, in fact, happen in remote times and to master the 
details of philology. But what then? Having done as well as we 
can to record the past we must go on to make use of it in our 
present context, and this is my main interest in writing this book. 
I want to interpret and clarify the principles of such writings as 


+ a = 

the Lao-tzu #5- Chuang-tzu, ar J and Lieh-tzu | + books in 
the terms and ideas of our own day, while giving the original texts 
as accurately translated as possible—that is, without undue 
paraphrase or poetic elaboration, following the principles of that 
master translator Arthur Waley, though with some minor 
reservations. 

It will be obvious that I am heavily indebted to the work and 
the methods of Joseph Needham and his collaborators at 
Cambridge University in the production of the many-volumed 


Science and Civilization in China, and though I am not regarding 
this work as if it were the voice of God, it is, for me, the most 
marvelous historical enterprise of this century. Needham has the 
knack of putting out fully documented scholarship as readable as 
a novel, and, both through reading his work and through personal 
conversation, my understanding of the Tao has been greatly 
clarified. He also understands that writing history and philosophy 
is, like research in science, a social undertaking, so that his work 
is somewhat more of a conducted chorus than a solo. I think it 
unfortunate that, especially in America, Sinologists tend to be 
cantankerous, and hypercritical of each other’s work. Needham, 
on the other hand, is invariably generous without surrender of his 
own integrity, and I shall try, in what follows, to show how the 
principle of the Tao reconciles sociability with individuality, order 
with spontaneity, and unity with diversity. 

In sum, I am not attempting to conduct a popular and 
statistically accurate poll of what Chinese people did, or now do, 
suppose the Taoist way of life to be. Such meticulous explorations 
of cultural anthropology have their virtue, but I am much more 
interested in how these ancient writings reverberate on the harp 
of my own brain, which has, of course, been tuned to the scales of 
Western culture. Although I will by no means despise precise and 
descriptive information—the Letter, I am obviously more 
interested in the Spirit—the actual experiencing and feeling of 
that attitude to life which is the following of the Tao. 

A.W. 


1 Note that I am following Joseph Needham’s simplification of dates by 
substituting the symbols - and + for B.c. and AD., which are inelegantly 
inconsistent and not internationally comprehensible, since the first stands for the 
English “Before Christ” and the second for the Latin Anno Domini, “In the year of 
our Lord.” Curiously, neither B.c nor A.D. is listed in the index of Abbreviations and 
Signs in the Oxford University Dictionary (1955). 


Prolegomena 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


TO AVOID TIRESOME FOOTNOTATION, bibliographical references to 
Western sources are simply indicated as, e.g., “H. A. Giles (1)” or 
“Legge (2),” so that by name and number a detailed identification 
of works consulted may be found in the Bibliography. There is a 
separate bibliography for original Chinese sources, and the 
references to these are italicized, as Chuang-tzu 12. The Chinese 
ideograms for brief words and phrases are printed in the margin 
alongside their romanized forms. On pages 56-73 and 99-104, 
many of the quotations from Chinese sources are given in 
Chinese calligraphy. The special importance of including Chinese 
ideograms is explained in the first chapter in such a way, I trust, 
that even the nonscholar will find it helpful. 


TRANSLATION 


I must admit right here that Iam by no means such a scholar and 
interpreter of the Chinese language as Giles, Waley, Demiéville, 
Hurwitz, Bodde, Watson, or Needham—not to mention such 
Chinese masters of English as Hu Shih and Lin Yutang. But I have 
the nerve to believe that I understand the basic principles of 
Taoism more thoroughly than some scholars whose interest is 
narrowly philological. Thus when a translation is by someone else 
it is identified as, e.g., “tr. Lin Yutang (1).” When I have compared 
several translations of a passage and made up my own mind as to 
how it should go it is identified as, e.g., “tr. Watson (1), mod. 
auct.” When it is simply my own it is identified as “tr. auct.” I 
must confess to a sentimental liking for such Latinisms, along 
with such others as ibid., [sic], q.v., et seq., and e.g., which 
conveniently abbreviate their drawn-out equivalents: “from the 
same work,” or “that, believe it or not, is just what it says,” or 
“refer to the source mentioned,” or “and what follows,” or “for 
example.” Furthermore, they may be identified in any adequate 


dictionary of English. 


ROMANIZATION 


There is no fully satisfactory way of romanizing either Chinese or 
weil 


Japanese. The word Tao - will be pronounced approximately 
as “dow” in Peking, as “toe” in Canton, and as “daw” in Tokyo. 


But if I were to substitute any one of these three for Tao (which, 
hereafter, will be adopted into the English language and 
unitalicized), I would simply be behaving freakishly and 
confusingly in the context of British, American, and much 
European literature about China. There is also a word romanized 
as T’ao (pronounced in Peking as “tow-” in “towel”) which, 
according to the tone used in uttering the vowel and the context 
in which it is used, can mean to desire, recklessness, insolence, to 
doubt, to pull or clean out, to overflow, a sheath or quiver, a sash 
or cord, gluttony, a peach, profligacy, marriage, to escape, a 
special type of hand-drum, to weep, to scour, to bind or braid, a 
kiln for pottery, to be pleased, to beg, to punish or exterminate, a 
block of wood (as well as a blockhead), great waves, and 
packaging. Before you condemn this as irrational, consider the 
number of meanings for the sound “jack” in English—with no 
tonal alteration to differentiate them. And for almost all the 
varied meanings of the sound T’ao there are distinctly different 
ideograms. 

Throughout the English-speaking world the most usual form of 
romanizing Chinese is known as the Wade-Giles system, which is 
explained in a table at the end of this section (p. xxi) because, in 
spite of its defects, I am going to use it. No uninitiated English- 
speaking person could guess how to pronounce it, and I have 
even thought, in a jocularly malicious state of mind, that 
Professors Wade and Giles invented it so as to erect a barrier 
between profane and illiterate people and true scholars. As 
alternatives there are such awkwardnesses as invented by the 


Reverend Professor James Legge—e Kwang-3ze for 


Chuang-tzu—which require a bizarre font of type, and if one is 
going to resort to weird letters at all, one may just as well use 
Chinese itself. I have seriously considered using Needham’s 
revision of the Wade-Giles system, which would, for example, 
substitute Thao for T’ao and Chhang for Ch’ang, but I can’t help 
feeling that the apostrophe is less obnoxious, aesthetically, than 
the double h which, furthermore, does not really suggest the 


difference: that Chang is pronounced “jang” and that Ch’ang is 
pronounced “chang,” with an “a” sound close to the “u” in the 
English “jug.” Department of utter confusion! In San Francisco’s 
Chinatown they will spell out the Wade-Giles Feng as Fung (same 
“a” as in “jug”) and Wang as Wong, so as not to be read as 
“whang.” On the other hand, a restaurant labeled Wooey Looey 
Gooey is called (to rhyme with “boy”) “Woy Loy Goy.” 

The problem of romanizing ideograms came to an even higher 
level of comedy when, shortly before World War II, the Japanese 
government tried to authorize a new romaiji in which Fuji became 
Huzi, and Prince Chichibu became Prince Titibu, on the principle 
that the romanization of Japanese should not have been designed 
solely for English-speaking people. Therefore Germans would 
certainly have referred to that noble volcano as “Ootzee,” while 
the British and Americans would have sniggered about Prince 
Titty-boo. Fortunately, the Japanese have dropped this reform, 
though many Americans go on calling the cities of Kyoto and 
Hakone “Kigh-oat-oh” and “Hack-own.” You should see the 
complications which come to pass when attempting to romanize 
even such alphabetic languages as Tibetan or Sanskrit, which 
seem, from our point of view, languages specifically designed to 
be difficult. The scholarly establishment has worked it out so that 
to tell you about the Lord Krishna I must have a typographer who 
can make it Krsna, and to whom does this tell anything, other 
than those already in the know?1 

As in some economies the rich keep getting richer and the poor 
poorer, so in the _ overspecialized disciplines of modern 
scholarship the learned get more learned and the ignorant more 
ignorant—until the two classes can hardly talk to each other. I 
have dedicated my work to an attempt to bridge this gap, and so 
now will reveal to the uninitiated the Wade-Giles system of 


Lr 


7 
romanizing the Mandarin B dialect of Chinese wt. 


THE PRONUNCIATION OF CHINESE WORDS 


HISTORICAL NOTES 


Until relatively recent times it was generally believed that Lao-tzu 
was an individual (otherwise known as Lao Tan or Li Erh) who 


| 
lived at the time of Confucius (K’ung Fu-tzu) duu A+ , that is to 
say in the —6th and —5Sth centuries, the assumed dates of 


Confucius himself being —552 to —479. The name Lao-tzu means 
the Old Boy, deriving from the legend that he was born with white 
hair. This date is based on a disputed passage from the historian 
Ssu-ma Ch’ien (—145 to —79), who relates that Lao-tzu was 
curator of the royal library at the capital of Lo-yang, where 


Consonants 


Vowels 


Diphthongs 


Combinations 


Aspirated: Read p’, ?’, k’, ch’, and ts’ as in 
pin, tip, kilt, chin, and bits. 

Unaspirated: Read p, t, k, ch, and ts (or tz) 
asin bin, dip, gilt, gin, and bids. 

hs or sh, as in shoe. 

j is nearly like an “unrolled” r, so that jen is 
nearly the English wren. 


Usually Italian values, 
@as in father 

eas in eight 

ehas in brother 

i as in machine and pin 
ih as in shirt 

oas in soap 

was in goose 

i as in German iiber 


ai as in light 

ao as in loud 

ei as in weight 
ia as in William 
ieh as in Korea 
ou as in group 
ua as in swan 
ueh as in doer 
ui as in sway 
uo as in whoah! 


an and ang as in bun and bung 

en and eng as in wooden and among 
in and ing as in sin and sing 

un and ung with the u as in look. 


Confucius visited him in —517. 


Li [Lao-tzu] said to K’ung [Confucius]: The men about whom you talk 
are dead, and their bones are mouldered to dust; only their words 
are left. Moreover, when the superior man gets his opportunity, he 
mounts aloft; but when the time is against him, he is carried along 
by the force of circumstances. I have heard that a good merchant, 
though he have rich treasures safely stored, appears as if he were 
poor; and that the superior man, though his virtue be complete, is 
yet to outward seeming stupid. Put away your proud air and many 
desires, your insinuating habit and wild will. They are of no 
advantage to you;—this is all I have to tell you. 


After the interview, Confucius is supposed to have said: 


I know how birds can fly, fishes swim, and animals run. But the 
runner may be snared, the swimmer hooked, and the flyer shot by 
the arrow. But there is the dragon:—I cannot tell how he mounts on 
the wind through the clouds, and rises to heaven. Today I have seen 
Lao-tzu, and can only compare him to the dragon. 


To this Ssu-ma Ch’ien adds: 


Lao-tzu cultivated the Tao and its attributes, the chief aim of his 
studies being how to keep himself concealed and remain unknown. 
He continued to reside at the capital of Chou, but after a long time, 
seeing the decay of the dynasty, he left it and went away to the 
barrier-gate, leading out of the kingdom on the north-west. Yin Hsi, 
the warden of the gate, said to him, “You are about to withdraw 
yourself out of sight. Let me insist on your (first) composing for me a 
book.” On this, Lao-tzu wrote a book in two parts, setting forth his 
views on the Tao and its attributes, in more than 5000 characters. 
He then went away, and it is not known where he died. He was a 
superior man, who liked to keep himself unknown. 2 


In the last fifty years, Chinese, Japanese, and European 
scholars have, by minute textual criticism, come more or less to 


at 


? 
the consensus that the Lao-tzu pus book, the Tao Te Ching 


=, 5 eas : ; 
iy SME, is a compilation of Taoist sayings by several hands 
originating in the —4th century, during, and even after, the time 


of Chuang-tzu, who, according to Fung Yu-lan, must have 
flourished somewhere between —369 and —286.3 When I 
consider the confused opinions arising from textual criticism of 
the New Testament, I am in some doubt as to how seriously this 
debunking of the Lao-tzu legend should be taken. Since the latter 
years of the +19th century, scholars of the Western tradition, 
including many Chinese and Japanese, seem to have established a 
trend for casting doubt on the historicity of “legendary” figures of 
the past—especially if they are of the religious or spiritual type. It 
will take many years to ascertain whether this is a style or fad of 
modern scholarship, or honest research. To please their 
professors, many successful graduate students affect peppery 
skepticism and an aura of scientific objectivity as a matter of 
protocol in submitting acceptable dissertations. Because of this 
way of looking at texts with a big magnifying glass, one 
sometimes wonders whether pedants miss features which are 
obvious to the naked eye. 

To me, the Tao Te Ching, the “Book of the Way and Its Power,” 
could very obviously be the work of one hand, allowing for minor 
interpolations and for such inconsistencies, real or apparent, as 


may be found in the work of almost any philosopher. Its laconic, 
aphoristic, and enigmatic style is consistent throughout the book, 
as is also the very rhythm of its argument: “The Tao is thus and 
so, and therefore the sage should conduct himself this way and 
that.” By contrast, the style of the Chuang-tzu book is entirely 
different—discursive, argumentative, narrational, and humorous 
to the point of provoking belly-laughs, so that to one’s aesthetic 
judgment the two books evoke two very different but consistent 
personalities. As things now stand I do not believe that we know 
enough about ancient Chinese history and literature to make a 
firm judgment, and perhaps it will never be possible to do so. 

However, the dating of Chuang-tzu (or Chuang-chou) has never 
been in much dispute, traditionalists and modern scholars both 
agreeing, in the main, upon the —4th century. He has been 
related to Lao-tzu as Saint Paul to Jesus, though there is the 
difference that whereas Saint Paul never quotes the actual words 
of Jesus, Chuang-tzu quotes Lao-tzu. Lin Yutang’s translation of 
the Lao-tzu intersperses its chapters with substantial portions of 
the Chuang-tzu as commentary, and the device works admirably, 
so that one tends to see in Chuang-tzu a development and 
elaboration of the pithy thoughts of Lao-tzu. 

H. G. Creel says, “The Chuang-tzu is in my estimation the finest 
philosophical work known to me, in any language.”4 The opinion 
of such a scholar commands respect. Chinese literati likewise feel 
that its literary style is of superb quality, and there must be many, 
like myself, who rejoice in Chuang-tzu as one of the very few 
philosophers, in all times, who does not take himself painfully 
seriously, and whose writings are graced with humor of a peculiar 
character. That is to say, he can laugh about the most profound 
matters without deriding them, but, on the contrary, making them 
seem all the more true and profound just because they are comic. 
Laughter and mysticism, or religion, go together all too rarely. 
This same attitude may be found, owing, perhaps, to its 
connections with Taoism, in the literature of Ch’an (Zen) 
Buddhism, as well as in the personal style of many of its present 
followers. 

There is less assurance as to the dating of the Lieh-tzu book. 
Though assigned by tradition to the —3rd century, it shows the 
influence of Buddhist ideas, which would suggest a date early in 
the Christian era, the +1st or +2nd century. Lieh-tzu is also 


Aus 


highly critical of what Creel has called “Heien Taoism ———=,,” 
as distinct from “Contemplative Taoism,” the former being a 


quest for immortality and supernormal powers through the 


gymnosophic and “yogic” practices which seem to have arisen 
among Taoists in the —2nd and —1st centuries. A hsien is an 
immortal—one who has purified his flesh from decay by special 
forms of breathing, diet, drugs, and exercises for preserving the 
semen comparable to those of Tantric Yoga. When his skin grows 
old and crinkly, he sloughs it like a snake to reveal a youthful 
body beneath.5 
2 gt 

The Huai Nan Tzu 4 #] + book, which also takes issue with 
Hsien Taoism, was written under the sponsorship of the Prince of 
Huai Nan, a relative and vassal of the Emperor Wu named Liu An, 
and may fairly safely be placed at c. —120. Of this Creel says: 


A book written under his patronage by various scholars, called the 
Huai Nan Tzu, is eclectic but predominantly Taoist in tone. It 
contains a good deal of mention of techniques for seeking 
immortality but never, I believe, recommends them. On the contrary, 
it insists repeatedly that death and life are just the same, and 
neither should be sought or feared. It ridicules breath control and 
gymnastics, which are designed to perpetuate the body but in fact 
confuse the mind.6 


The focus of this book is upon Contemplative Taoism rather 
than Hsien Taoism. I do not know enough of the latter to explain 
it coherently or judge it fairly. My interest, however, lies in what 
Buddhists call the Way of Wisdom (prajna) rather than the Way of 
Powers (siddhi), because the indefinite enlargement of our 
powers and techniques seems in the end to be the pursuit of a 
mirage. One who is immortal and who has control of everything 
that happens to him strikes me as self-condemned to eternal 
boredom, since he lives in a world without mystery or surprise. 


1 I might also have used the somewhat grotesque alphabet of the International 
Phonetic Symbols, as employed for representing Chinese words in Forrest (1), but 
then no ordinary reader could make the least sense of it. The problem is really 
insoluble. I remember that as a small boy I set out to write down everything I 
knew in such a way as would be intelligible to people living thousands of years 
hence. But I realized that I must first devise a key-table to the pronunciation of 
the letters of the alphabet, for which purpose I had to use that same alphabet! 

2 Shih Chi, tr. Legge (1), pp. 80-81. 

3 Fung Yu-lan (2), p. 104. For much fuller details on research concerning these 
dates, see Creel (1), chs. 1 and 4. 

4 Creel (1), p. 55. 

5 See Needham (1), vol. 2, p. 422 and illus. Though the idea is here connected 


with the Buddhist principle of transformation (nirmana 4 or hua), I do not 
find the image of skin-shedding in Indian or Tibetan iconography, and it therefore 


seems derivative from Hsien Taoism. 


6 Creel (1), p. 19. 


TAO: The Watercourse Way 


1. The Chinese Written Language 


AN OFTEN QUOTED ChinéQ¢¥iffrerb is that one picture is worth a 
thousand words, becaus Ra S so often much easier to show than 
to say. As is well kno maeese writing is unique in that it does 
not employ an alphabe saree 
were originally pictures Oh ventional signs. In the course of 
centuries, pictograms scrat¢ 

figures made with a brus}/ on sj per, few of which bear 


e forms or to what they 


are used_to indicategé I n immensely in number 
and ind : 

Most VW aced most~alphabetic people—and even 
some Chinese ha Ession that this form of writing is 


impossibly compl@™ind inefficient. In recent years there has 
been much talk o lonalizing” Chinese by introducing an 
alphabet similar, pé 5, to the Japanese hiragana and 
katakana.1 But this, I believe, would be a disaster. 

We may not be aware of the extent to which alphabetic people 
are now using ideograms. International airports and highways 
abound with them because their meaning is at once obvious 
whatever one’s native tongue may be. Table 1 is a partial list of 
such symbols, and Table 2 suggests how they might be employed 
in constructing sentences. Give rein to the imagination, and it 
becomes obvious that a rich visual language could be developed 
from these images which, with little difficulty, would be 
understandable to almost everyone without the necessity of 
learning a new spoken tongue. One would pronounce it in one’s 
own. But it would take a long time for this language to develop a 
literature, and grow to the point where it could express subtle 
nuances of thought and feeling. However, computers would 
master it easily, and, as demonstrated in Table 2, such ideograms 


could convey complex relationships or configurations (Gestalten) 
much more rapidly than long, strung-out alphabetic sentences. 
For the ideogram gives one more information at a single glance, 
and in less space, than is given by the linear, alphabetic form of 
writing, which must also be pronounced to be understandable. 
Might there not be some connection between the length of time 
which it now takes to “complete” an education and the sheer 
mileage of print which one’s eyes must scan? 


stronomical, astrological, and meteorological: 


o 


c 
DM SM 7 V4 oe Ht 
: 


fz=>K0nrEeEv TA. 


yt 


(Chemical (archaic) 


KO 2 &M CPE SHA 
te ee 


batt GQ@@t ous 


Miscellaneous (though obvious in meaning 


ce 0hirovooter s= 


Table 1. A SELECTION OF WESTERN IDEOGRAMS 


This simple tale hardly needs translation: 

SOE AITOPYOSSSSr+PE 
SA+LOALESI IER: 1 Dek: 
SE OLASOMMB mL O 


Sample compounds: 


g" Patriarchy 

5 Joy in life 

Se ® Peaceful 4 Mixed up 
people 


ae Clear day, southwest wind 


Table 2. WESTERN IDEOGRAMS USED AS LANGUAGE 


OS" sex equality Unisex 


} ao Fertile oe Air pilot 


+r? Heavy rain, west wind, 


oo flood danger 


For the natural universe is not a linear system. It involves an 
infinitude of variables interacting simultaneously, so that it would 
take incalculable aeons to translate even one moment of its 
operation into linear, alphabetic language. Let alone the universe! 
Take the planet Earth alone, or even what goes on in a small pond 
or, for that matter, in the structure of the atom. This is where 
problems of language relate to Taoist philosophy, for the Lao-tzu 
book begins by saying that the Tao which can be spoken is not the 
eternal (or regular) Tao. Yet it goes on to show that there is some 
other way of understanding and getting along with the process of 
nature than by translating it into words. After all, the brain, the 
very organ of intelligence, defies linguistic description by even 
the greatest neurologists. It is thus that an ideographic language 
is a little closer to nature than one which is strictly linear and 
alphabetic. At any moment, nature is a simultaneity of patterns. 
An ideographic language is a series of patterns and, to that 
extent, still linear—but not so laboriously linear as an alphabetic 
language. 

This critical point—that our organisms have ways of intelligent 


understanding beyond words and conscious attention, ways that 
can handle an unknown number of variables at the same time— 
will be discussed later. Suffice it to say now that the organization 
and regulation of thousands of bodily processes through the 
nervous system would be utterly beyond the capacity of 
deliberate thinking and planning—not to mention the 
relationships of those processes to the “external” world. 

Now, as I have said, it would take years and years for a new 
and artificial ideographic language to develop a literature. But 
why go to the trouble when we already have Chinese? It is read 
by 800,000,000 people who pronounce it in at least seven 
different ways, or dialects, not including Japanese, which differ 
from each other far more radically than the King’s English from 
Cockney or from the jazz argot of New Orleans. Furthermore, it 
has retained substantially the same form for at least 2,500 years, 
so that anyone speaking English today has far more difficulty in 
understanding Chaucer than a modern Chinese in making sense 
of Confucius. To some extent English—an incredibly complex and 
idiomatic language—has become the main international tongue, 
although Spanish would have been simpler. Isn’t it possible that a 
second world language, in the written form, might be Chinese? 

This is by no means so preposterous as most people would 
imagine, for our customary bafflement by Chinese ideograms is 
really a matter of uninformed prejudice. They are supposed to be 
outlandish, weird, devious, and as tricky as “the mysterious East.” 
Although the K’ang-hsi dictionary of +1716 lists about 40,000 
ideograms, a reasonably literate person needs about 5,000, anda 
comparably literate Westerner would know quite that many words 
of his own language. The difficulty of recognizing and identifying 
ideograms is surely no greater than with such other complex 
patterns as the various kinds of flowers, plants, butterflies, trees, 
and wild animals. 

In other words, Chinese is simpler than it looks, and may, in 
general, be both written and read more rapidly than English. The 
English MAN requires ten strokes of the pen, whereas the 


Chinese jen “ “= requires but two. TREE needs a mu 


is only four. WATER is sixteen, but shui is five. 

MOUNTAIN is eighteen, but shan } is three. Even when we get 

really complicated, CONTEMPLATION is twenty-eight, whereas 
tod 


xuan Ro is_ twenty-five. Roman capitals are the proper 
equivalents of these ideograms as shown, and though our 


longhand speeds things up it is nothing to its Chinese equivalent. 


Nae 
Compare J with wu ¢ “To contrast our writing 


with Chinese as to relative complexity, simply turn this page 
through a ninety-degree angle—and then look at English! 


FIRST COLUMN: Archaic Script, SECOND: Small Seal style. 
THIRD: Classical and Modern, based on use of the brush. 


Sun 
Moon 

Man, human being 
Sheep 

Mountain 

Enter (arrowhead) 


Middle (ship's mast, with pennants above 
and below the bushel) 


Arrive at (arrow hitting target) 


Spring (wobbly plants still needing support of 
acane) 


| Ekawr > BQ> SO 


Rain 


Move (crossroads) 


3k 
7 


Change (chameleon or lizard) 


Origin, first (human profile with emphasis 
‘on head) 


HH at wo 


Birth, coming to be (growing plant) 


Small (four grains) 


Male (plow and field) 


POS He A 99S BI Ok 1S -E > EK [YO 


Earth (phallic totem) 


HAG & KE SoS Bi ot A > Ee om 


e- 


Virtue, power, mana (abbreviation of the 
crossroad sign, “to move,” plus the eye and 
heart, or “seeing” and “thinking-feeling”) 


Bi 


ar He 


PS 


Table 3. THE EVOLUTION OF CHINESE WRITING 


To simplify matters further, Chinese makes no rigid distinctions 
between parts of speech. Nouns and verbs are _ often 
interchangeable, and may also do duty as adjectives and adverbs. 
When serving as nouns they do not require the ritual nuisance of 
gender, wherewith adjectives must agree, nor are they declined, 
and when used as verbs they are not conjugated. When necessary, 
certain single ideograms are used to show whether the situation 
is past, present, or future. There is no pother over is, was, were, 
and will be, much less over suis, es, est, sommes, étes, sont, fus, 
fumes, serais, and sois as forms of the verb @tre, “to be.” When 
translated very literally into English, Chinese reads much like a 
telegram: 


supeide Mirhos ndt Shite is its being virtue. 


This we must elaborate as, “Superior virtue is not intentionally 
virtuous, and this is just why it is virtue,” but the Chinese is more 
shocking and “gives one to think.” 

From this it might seem that it is hard to be precise in Chinese, 
or to make those clear distinctions which are necessary for 
scientific analysis. On the one hand, however, Chinese has the 
peculiar advantage of being able to say many things at once and 
to mean all of them, which is why there have been at least 
seventy English translations of Lao-tzu. On the other, Chinese 


? 


uses compound words for precision. Thus sheng = which 
means, among other things, “to be born,” can be specified as 


EA session 2b (BORE 
FR parturition, a ( ) to be born from the world, 


/, 


th 


~ 
sos + begotten, the latter nae 23 the sense of 


bringing up: and then one distinguishes qa birth from a 


vik? Ak 
womb, = birth from an egg, and birth by 


transformation, as with the butterfly. 

An important part of Chinese grammar is the order of words. 
Although this is in many ways close to English, and does not, for 
example, remove verbs to the end of the sentence as in Latin and 


-k 
German, one :” t take care to distinguish +¥ the back of the 


hand (s) from j hand (s) behind the back, and whereas 
g g 

V 
2. = is the Emperor, - is his father. or Li late Emperor. 


This is not so different mM principle from ———— ' turn right and 


then go up, and go up and turn right. : : 
I have long been advocating the teaching of Chinese in 


secondary schools, not only because we must inevitably learn how 
to communicate with the Chinese themselves, but because, of all 
the high cultures, theirs is most different from ours in its ways of 
thinking. Every culture is based on assumptions so taken for 
granted that they are barely conscious, and it is only when we 
study highly different cultures and languages that we become 
aware of them. Standard average European (SAE) languages, for 
example, have sentences so structured that the verb (event) must 


be set in motion by the noun (thing)—thereby posing a 
metaphysical problem as tricky, and probably as meaningless, as 
that of the relation of mind to body. We cannot talk of “knowing” 
without assuming that there is some “who” or “what” that knows, 
not realizing that this is nothing more than a grammatical 
convention. The supposition that knowing requires a knower is 
based on a linguistic and not an existential rule, as becomes 
obvious when we consider that raining needs no rainer and 
clouding no clouder. Thus when a Chinese receives a formal 


Th 

invitation, he may reply simply with the word “Know re e 
indicating that he is aware of the event and may or may not 
come.2 

Consider, further, the astonishing experiment of Rozin, Poritsky, 
and Sotsky of the University of Pennsylvania, who discovered that 
second-grade children who were backward in reading could easily 
be taught to read Chinese, and could construct simple sentences 
within four weeks.3 I do not know if anyone has yet studied this 
method with deaf children, but it seems obvious that an 
ideographic language would be their ideal means of written 
communication. One notices often that both Chinese and 
Japanese people in conversation will draw ideograms in the air or 
on the table with their fingers to clarify ambiguity or vagueness 
in the spoken word. (It is quite a trick to draw them backwards or 
upside down for the benefit of the person facing you!) 

It is sometimes said that Chinese writing (as well as painting) 
comprises an “alphabet” in the sense that it has a finite number 
of standard components.4 It is said, not quite correctly, that the 


ideogram yung aR “eternal,” contains all the basic strokes 
used in Chinese writing, though I cannot see that it includes the 


fundamental “bone stroke” ==mi® or such formations as 


Nu Gq fs. As soon as one is familiar with the elemental strokes 
and component forms of the ideograms, they are more easily 


recognized and remembered, even before one knows their 
English meaning. Reading Chinese is fundamentally what 
communications technicians call “pattern recognition”—a 
function of the mind which is, as yet, only rudimentarily mastered 
by the computer, because it is a nonlinear function. The mind 


recognizes instantly that Aa Aa Aaas cA AAA well as 
are all the same letter, but as of today (1973) the computer has 


trouble with this. But it does not seem at all inconceivable that a 


b= 
computer could absorb the k’ai-shu ti  , which is the formal 
and rigid style of Chinese printing, and so begin to approach a 


nonlinear method of thinking. 

The idea of nonlinearity is unfamiliar to many people, so I 
should perhaps explain it in more detail. A good organist, using 
ten fingers and two feet, could—by playing chords—keep twelve 
melodies going at once, though, unless he was very dexterous 
with his feet, they would have to be of the same rhythm. But he 
could certainly render a six-part fugue—four with the hands and 
two with the feet—and in mathematical and scientific language 
each of these parts would be called a variable. The performance 
of each organ of the body is also a variable—as is also, in this 
context, the temperature, the constitution of the atmosphere, the 
bacterial environment, the wavelength of various forms of 
radiation, and the gravitational field. But we have no idea of how 
many variables could be distinguished in any given natural 
situation. A variable is a process (e.g., melody, pulse, vibration) 
which can be isolated, identified, and measured by conscious 
attention. 

The problem of coping with variables is twofold. First: how do 
we recognize and identify a variable, or a process? For example, 
can we think of the heart as separate from the veins, or the 
branches from the tree? Just what exact delineations distinguish 
the bee process from the flower process? These distinctions are 
always somewhat arbitrary and conventional, even when 
described with very exact language, for the distinctions reside 
more in the language than in what it describes. Second: there is 
no known limit to the number of variables that may be involved in 
any natural, or physical, event—such as the hatching of an egg. 
The boundary of the shell is hard and clear, but when we begin to 
think about it, it washes into considerations of molecular biology, 
climate, nuclear physics, techniques of poultry farming, 
ornithological sexology, and so on and so on until we realize that 
this “single event” should—if we could manage it—be considered 
in relation to the whole universe. But conscious attention, relying 
on the instruments of spelled-out words in lines, or numbers in 
lines, cannot keep simultaneous track of more than a few of the 
variables which are isolated and described by these instruments. 
From the standpoint of linear description, there is just much too 
much going on at each moment. We persuade ourselves, then, 
that we are attending to some really important or significant 
things, much as a newspaper editor will select “the news” out of 
an infinitude of happenings. 


The ear cannot detect as many variables at the same time as 
the eye, for sound is a slower vibration than light. Alphabetic 
writing is a representation of sound, whereas the ideogram 
represents vision and, furthermore, represents the world directly 
—not being a sign for a sound which is the name of a thing. As for 
names, the sound “bird” has nothing in it that reminds one of a 
bird, and for some reason it would strike us as childish to 
substitute more direct names, such as tweetie, powee, or quark. 

Aside from all these utilitarian advantages of the ideogram, 
there is also its formal beauty. This is not simply because, to our 
eyes, it is exotic and unintelligible. No one appreciates the beauty 
of this writing more than the Chinese and Japanese themselves, 
though one might suppose that their familiarity with it would 
have made them indifferent to anything but its meaning. On the 
contrary: the practice of calligraphy is considered in the Far East 
as a fine art, along with painting and sculpture. A written scroll, 
hanging in one’s alcove, is by no means to be compared to some 
biblical admonition, printed in Gothic letters, framed, and hung 
on the wall. The importance of the latter is its message, whereas 
the importance of the former is its visual beauty and its 
expression of the character of the writer. 

I have practiced Chinese calligraphy for many years, and am 
not yet a master of the art, which could be described as dancing 
with brush and ink on absorbent paper. Because ink is mostly 
water, Chinese calligraphy—controlling the flow of water with the 
soft brush as distinct from the hard pen—requires that you go 
with the flow. If you hesitate, hold the brush too long in one place, 
or hurry, or try to correct what you have written, the blemishes 
are all too obvious. But if you write well there is at the same time 
the sensation that the work is happening on its own, that the 
brush is writing all by itself—as a river, by following the line of 
least resistance, makes elegant curves. The beauty of Chinese 
calligraphy is thus the same beauty which we recognize in moving 
water, in foam, spray, eddies, and waves, as well as in clouds, 
flames, and weavings of smoke in sunlight. The Chinese call this 


kind of beauty the following of li *"=t, an ideogram which 
referred originally to the grain in jade and wood, and which 


Needham translates as “organic pattern,” although it is more 
generally understood as the “reason” or “principle” of things. Li 
is the pattern of behavior which comes about when one is in 
accord with the Tao, the watercourse of nature. The patterns of 
moving air are of the same character, and so the Chinese idea of 


elegance is expressed as feng-liu Eee the flowing of wind. 
ow this going with the wind or the current, plus the 


intelligence pattern of the human organism, is the whole art of 
sailing—of keeping wind in your sails while tacking in a contrary 
direction. Buckminster Fuller has suggested that sailors were the 
first great technologists, studying the stars for navigation, 
realizing that Earth is a globe, inventing block-and-tackle devices 
for hoisting sails (and thus cranes), and understanding the 
rudiments of meteorology. Likewise Thor Heyerdahl (1) in his 
Kon-Tiki expedition reconstructed the most primitive sailing raft 
to see where the winds and currents of the Pacific would take him 
from Peru, and was amazed to discover how his act of faith was 
honored by nature’s cooperation. Along the same line of thought: 
just as it is more intelligent to sail than to row, our technology is 
surely better advised to use the tides, the rivers, and the sun for 
energy rather than fossil fuels and the capricious power of 
nuclear fission. 

Just as Chinese writing is at least one step closer to nature 
than ours, so the ancient philosophy of the Tao is of a skillful and 
intelligent following of the course, current, and grain of natural 
phenomena—seeing human life as an integral feature of the world 
process, and not as something alien and opposed to it. Looking at 
this philosophy with the needs and problems of modern 
civilization in mind, it suggests an attitude to the world which 
must underlie all our efforts towards an ecological technology. 
For the development of such a technology is not just a matter of 
the techniques themselves, but of the psychological attitude of 
the technician. 

Hitherto, Western science has stressed the attitude of 
objectivity—a cold, calculating, and detached attitude through 
which it appears that natural phenomena, including the human 
organism, are nothing but mechanisms. But, as the word itself 
implies, a universe of mere objects is objectionable. We feel 
justified in exploiting it ruthlessly, but now we are belatedly 
realizing that the ill-treatment of the environment is damage to 
ourselves—for the simple reason that subject and object cannot 
be separated, and that we and our surroundings are the process 
of a unified field, which is what the Chinese call Tao. In the long 
run, we simply have no other alternative than to work along with 
this process by attitudes and methods which could be as effective 


technically as judo , the “gentle Tao,” is effective 
athletically. As human beings have to make the gamble of trusting 


one another in order to have any kind of workable community, we 


must also take the risk of trimming our sails to the winds of 
nature. For our “selves” are inseparable from this kind of 
universe, and there is nowhere else to be. 


1 These are highly simplified characters, the first cursive and the second 
scriptlike, used to designate the syllables of spoken Japanese. Written Japanese 
combines these alphabets with Chinese ideograms (kanji) so that, among other 
things, verbs may be conjugated and nouns declined. But I think it would be 
agreed that most Westerners find it far more difficult to read Japanese than 
Chinese. You must speak Japanese before you can read it. 

2 Lin Yutang (), p. 164. 

3 Rozin, Poritsky, and Sotsky (1), pp. 1264-67. 

4 Aside from the basic strokes (of the brush), there are slightly more complex 
components, roughly equivalent to the simpler forms of the 214 “radicals” 
whereby the ideograms are classified in dictionaries. It seems to me that by far 
the most convenient and sensibly arranged beginner’s dictionary is Arthur Rose- 
Innes (1), even though the pronunciations given are Japanese. As to the use of a 
similar principle in painting, see Mai-mai Sze (1), vol. 2, the section entitled “The 
Mustard-Seed Garden.” Also Chiang Yee (1), Chinese Calligraphy. 


2. The Yin-Yang Polarity 


to be confused with the ideas of 
itaphors of other cultures, light is 
4 death, good with evil, and the 

é hus an idealism to cultivate the 
former and be rid weourishes throughout much of the 
world. To the traW@i f™ of Chinese thinking, this is as 
incomprehensible as rent without both positive and 
negative poles Z | e principle that + and —, north 
and south, are ® yaspects of one and the same system, and 
that the disappearance of either one of them would be the 
disappearance of the system. 

People who have been brought up in the aura of Christian and 
Hebrew aspirations find this frustrating, because it seems to deny 
any possibility of progress, an ideal which flows from their linear 
(as distinct from cyclic) view of time and history. Indeed, the 
whole enterprise of Western technology is “to make the world a 
better place”’—to have pleasure without pain, wealth without 
poverty, and health without sickness. But, as is now becoming 
obvious, our violent efforts to achieve this ideal with such 
weapons as DDT, penicillin, nuclear energy, automotive 
transportation, computers, industrial farming, damming, and 
compelling everyone, by law, to be superficially “good and 
healthy” are creating more problems than they solve. We have 
been interfering with a complex system of relationships which we 
do not understand, and the more we study its details, the more it 
eludes us by revealing still more details to study. As we try to 
comprehend and control the world it runs away from us. Instead 
of chafing at this situation, a Taoist would ask what it means. 
What is that which always retreats when pursued? Answer: 


principle of polarity, 
opposition or confligf 


yourself. Idealists (in the moral sense of the word) regard the 
universe as different and separate from themselves—that is, as a 
system of external objects which needs to be subjugated. Taoists 
view the universe as the same as, or inseparable from, themselves 
—so that Lao-tzu could say, “Without leaving my house, I know 
the whole universe.” [104a]i This implies that the art of life is 
more like navigation than warfare, for what is important is to 
understand the winds, the tides, the currents, the seasons, and 
the principles of growth and decay, so that one’s actions may use 
them and not fight them. In this sense, the Taoist attitude is not 
opposed to technology per se. Indeed, the Chuang-tzu writings 
are full of references to crafts and skills perfected by this very 
principle of “going with the grain.” The point is therefore that 
technology is destructive only in the hands of people who do not 
realize that they are one and the same process as the universe. 
Our overspecialization in conscious attention and linear thinking 
has led to neglect, or ignore-ance, of the basic principles and 
rhythms of this process, of which the foremost is polarity. 


In Chinese the sp poles of cosmic energy are yang iy 


(positive) and_yin negative), and their conventional signs 
are respectively —— and — —. The ideograms indicate the sunny 


1 
and shady sides of.a hill, fou + f and they are associated with 
the masculine and the feminine, the firm and the yielding, the 


strong and the weak, the light and the dark, the rising and the 
falling, heaven and earth, and they are even recognized in such 
everyday matters as cooking as the spicy and the bland. Thus the 
art of life is not seen as holding to yang and banishing yin, but as 
keeping the two in balance, because there cannot be one without 
the other. When regarding them as the masculine and the 
feminine, the reference is not so much to male and female 
individuals as to characteristics which are dominant in, but not 
confined to, each of the two sexes. Obviously, the male has the 
convex penis and the female the concave vagina; and though 
people have regarded the former as a possession and the latter as 
a deprivation (Freud’s “penis envy”), any fool should be able to 
recognize that one cannot have the outstanding without the 
instanding, and that a rampant membrum virile is no good 
without somewhere to put it, and vice versa.* But the male 
individual must not neglect his female component, nor the female 
her male. Thus Lao-tzu says: 


Knowing the male but keeping the female, one becomes a universal 
stream. Becoming a universal stream, one is not separated from 
eternal virtue.2 [104b] 


The yang and the yin are principles, not men and women, so that 
there can be no true relationship between the affectedly tough 
male and the affectedly flimsy female. 

The key to the relationship between yang and yin is called 


A 
peng sheng #4 3 mutual arising or inseparability. As Lao-tzu 
puts it: 


When everyone knows beauty as beautiful, there is already ugliness; 
When everyone knows good as goodness, there is already evil. 

“To be” and “not to be” arise mutually; 

Difficult and easy are mutually realized; 

Long and short are mutually contrasted; 

High and low are mutually posited; ... 

Before and after are in mutual sequence.3 [104c] 


They are thus like the different, but inseparable, sides of a coin, 
the poles of a magnet, or pulse and interval in any vibration. 
There is never the ultimate possibility that either one will win 
over the other, for they are more like lovers wrestling than 
enemies fighting.4 But it is difficult in our logic to see that being 
and nonbeing are mutually generative and mutually supportive, 
for it is the great and imaginary terror of Western man that 
nothingness will be the permanent end of the universe. We do not 
easily grasp the point that the void is creative, and that being 
comes from nonbeing as sound from silence and light from space. 


Thirty spokes unite at the wheel’s hub; 

It is the center hole [literally, “from their not being”] that makes it 
useful. 

Shape clay into a vessel; 

It is the space within that makes it useful. 

Cut out doors and windows for a room; 

It is the holes which make it useful. 

Therefore profit comes from what is there; 

Usefulness from what is not there.5 [104d] 


I do not know if this point can really be argued in our logic, but I 
find it impossible to conceive any form whatsoever without the 
component of relatively empty space. We ignore space just 
because it is uniform, as water to fish and air to birds. It is almost 
impossible to give intelligible descriptions of elements or 
dimensions which are constant in all experiences—such as 


consciousness, time, motion, or electricity. Yet electricity is very 
much here, having measurable and controllable properties. But 
Professor Harold A. Wilson, writing on “Electricity” in the 1947 
Encyclopaedia Britannica, says: 


The study of electricity to-day comprehends a vast range of 
phenomena, in all of which we are brought back ultimately to the 
fundamental conceptions of electric charge and of electric and 
magnetic fields. These conceptions are at present ultimates, not 
explained in terms of others. In the past there have been various 
attempts to explain them in terms of electric fluids and aethers 
having the properties of material bodies known to us by the study of 
mechanics. To-day, however, we find that the phenomena of 
electricity cannot be so explained, and the tendency is to explain all 
other phenomena in terms of electricity, taken as a fundamental 
thing. The question, “What is electricity?” is therefore essentially 
unanswerable, if by it is sought an explanation of the nature of 
electricity in terms of material bodies.6 


That, from a scientist, is pure metaphysics. Change a few words, 
and it would be Saint Thomas Aquinas writing about God. . 
ria 

Yet, as I feel it intuitively, “space” and “void” (k’ung -#) are 
very much here, and every child teases itself out of thought by 
trying to imagine space expanding out and out with no limit. This 
space is not “just nothing” as we commonly use that expression, 
for I cannot get away from the sense that space and my 
awareness of the universe are the same, and call to mind the 
words of the Ch’an (Zen) Patriarch Hui-neng, writing eleven 
centuries after Lao-tzu: 


The capacity of mind is broad and huge, like the vast sky. Do not sit 
with a mind fixed on emptiness. If you do you will fall into a neutral 
kind of emptiness. Emptiness includes the sun, moon, stars, and 
planets, the great earth, mountains and rivers, all trees and grasses, 
bad men and good men, bad things and good things, heaven and 
hell; they are all in the midst of emptiness. The emptiness of human 
nature is also like this.7 


Thus the yin-yang principle is that the somethings and the 
nothings, the ons and the offs, the solids and the spaces, as well 
as the wakings and the sleepings and the alternations of existing 
and not existing, are mutually necessary. How, one might ask, 
would you know that you are alive unless you had once been 
dead? How can one speak of reality or is-ness except in the 
context of the polar apprehension of void? 

Yang and yin are in some ways parallel to the (later) Buddhist 


oe 
view of form, se, ©) 2, and emptiness, k’ung—of which the 
Hridaya Sutra Cj 3. says, “That which is form is just that which is 
emptiness, and that which is emptiness is just that which is 


form.” This seeming paradox is at once intelligible in terms of the 
bo 


+ = 
idea of clarity, ch’in é A for we think of clarity at once as 
translucent and unobstructed space, and as form articulate in 


every detail—as what photographers, using finely polished lenses, 
call “high resolution”—and this takes us back to what Lao-tzu said 
of the usefulness of doors and windows. Through perfect nothing 
we see perfect something. In much the same way, philosophers of 
the Yin-Yang School (—3rd century) saw the positive —— and 


negative — — as aspects of t’ai chi a =, the Great Ultimate, 


initially represented as an ey circle, as wu chi “=s"* | os 
although chi seems to have had the original meaning of a 


ridgepole upon which, of course, the two sides of a roof, yang and 
yin, would lean. 

The yin-yang principle is not, therefore, what we would 
ordinarily call a dualism, but rather an explicit duality expressing 
an implicit unity. The two principles are, as I have suggested, not 
opposed like the Zoroastrian Ahura Mazda and Ahriman, but in 
love, and it is curious that their traditional emblem is that double 
helix which is at once the pattern of sexual communication and of 
the spiral galaxies. 


One yin and one yang is called the Tao. The passionate union of yin 
and yang and the copulation of husband and wife is the eternal 
pattern of the universe. If heaven and earth did not mingle, whence 
would everything receive life?s 


The practical problem of life was not to let their wrestling match 
get out of hand. Only recently have the Chinese set their hearts 
upon some kind of utopia, but this must be understood as the 
necessary reaction to years and years of foreign exploitation, 
anarchy, and extreme poverty.* But in the —4th century Chuang- 
tzu wrote: 


Thus, those who say that they would have right without its correlate, 
wrong, or good government without its correlate, misrule, do not 
apprehend the great principles of the universe, nor the nature of all 
creation. One might as well talk of the existence of Heaven without 
that of Earth, or of the negative principle without the positive, which 
is clearly impossible. Yet people keep on discussing it without stop; 


such people must be either fools or knaves.9 [58a] 


Both Lao-tzu (once, in ch. 42) and Chuang-tzu (many times) 
mention the yin-yang polarity, but there is no reference to the I 


Ching i) vie or Book of Changes, in which the permutations 
a 


and_ combinations of the two forces (liang yi ) are 
worked out in detail, in terms of the sixty-four hexagrams of yin 


and yang lines. Yet the I Ching is supposed to have been the most 
ancient of all the Chinese classics, dating from as far back as the 
—2nd or even —3rd millennium, and thus to exhibit the basic 
patterns of Chinese thought and culture. But in that neither Lao- 
tzu. nor Chuang-tzu mentions it, quotes it, nor uses _ its 
characteristic terminology, the hoary antiquity and authority of 
this text must be called in question.i0 On the other hand, since at 
least the —3rd century Chinese savants have commented on this 
work in such a way as to perfume it with their thoughts and thus 
to give it a philosophical profundity. Readers of the great Wilhelm 
translation, and especially those who use it for divination, should 
be aware that he has interspersed the earliest forms of the text 
with passages from the “Wings,” or Appendices, most of which 
are certainly later than—250. In other words, the Wilhelm 
translation gives us a true picture of the I Ching as used and 
understood in China in relatively modern times. But my guess is 
that in the —5th and —4th centuries it was circulating as an 
orally transmitted folk wisdom, of indeterminable antiquity, 
comparable to the art of reading tea-leaves or the lines on the 
palm of the hand. There might have been written versions of it, 
but they would have been of the status of the Farmer’s Almanac 
or popular guides to the meaning of dreams. 

Thus the I Ching, as a specific text, does not appear to have 
influenced Taoism until after the days of Lao-tzu and Chuangtzu. 
Nevertheless, there is a common element in the rationale of the I 
Ching and early Taoist philosophy. Briefly, this element is the 
recognition that opposites are polar, or interdependent, and that 
there is something in us—which Groddeck, Freud, and Jung called 
“the Unconscious”—which may be called upon for a higher 
wisdom than can be figured out by logic. In more up-to-date 
terms one might say that the labyrinth of the nervous system can 
integrate more variables than the scanning process of conscious 
attention, though this way of putting it is still a concession to the 
mechanistic assumptions of +19th-century science. But one uses 


such language mainly to stay in communication with colleagues 
who have not outgrown it. 

The I Ching involves a method for the random sorting of milfoil 
twigs or coins. The twigs or the coins are thus sorted or thrown 
six times, with a question seriously held in mind. Each casting 
results in a yin — — or yang —— line, so that one builds up, from 
the bottom, a hexagram such as: 


eT 


Thus the superior man is careful 
In the differentiation of things, 


PP a ee he eras 


The comment is invariably oracular, vague, and ambivalent, but a 
person taking it seriously will use it. like a Rorschach blot and 
project into it, from his “unconscious,” whatever there is in him to 
find in it. This is surely a way of allowing oneself to think without 
keeping a tight guard on one’s thoughts, whether logical or 
moral. The same sort of process is at work in the psychoanalytic 
interpretation of dreams and in eidetic vision, whereby we descry 
faces, forms, and pictures in the grain of wood or marble, or in 
the shapes of clouds. In this connection I must quote some 
anecdotes about Ch’an (Zen) painters of the +13th century. 


ate 
Le 


About the year 1215, a Zen priest called Mu Ch’i 1 came to 
Hangchow, where he rebuilt a ruined monastery. By rapid swirls of 


ink he attempted, with undeniable success, to capture the moments 
of exaltation and set down the fleeting visions which he obtained 
from the frenzy of wine, the stupor of tea, or the vacancy of 
inanition. Ch’en Jung, about the same time, was noted for the 


simplicity of his life and the competence with which he fulfilled his 
duties as a magistrate.... Finally, he was admired for his habits of a 
confirmed drunkard. “He made clouds by splashing ink on his 
pictures. For mists he spat out water. When wrought up by wine he 
uttered a great shout and, seizing his hat, used it as a brush, 
roughly smearing his drawing; after which he finished his work with 
a proper brush.” One of the first painters of the sect, Wang Hsia, 
who lived in the early ninth century, would perform when he was 
drunk real tours de force, going so far as to plunge his head into a 
bucket of ink and flop it over a piece of silk on which there 
appeared, as if by magic, lakes, trees, enchanted mountains. But 
none seems to have carried emancipation further, among these 
priests, than Ying Yu-chien, secretary of the famous temple Ching- 
tzu ssii, who would take a cat-like pleasure in spattering and 
lacerating the sheet.12 


The remarks about Ch’en Jung, in particular, suggest that these 
gentlemen, having spattered the silk with ink, would contemplate 
the mess until they could project the shapes and outlines of 
landscape. Thereafter they would take “the proper brush” and 
with a few touches bring it out for all to see. 

Cases of this use of the creative un-, sub-, or superconscious 
are SO numerous among painters (including Leonardo), physicists, 
mathematicians, writers, and musicians that we need not go into 
further examples. I am sure that the I Ching oracles are used in 
the same way as these painters used splashes of ink—as forms to 
be contemplated empty-mindedly until the hidden meaning 
reveals itself, in accordance with one’s own unconscious 
tendencies.13 As with astrology, the rituals and calculations of 
consulting the I Ching are a kind of doodling which quiets the 
repressive anxieties of consciousness and, with luck, allows useful 
insights to emerge from one’s deeper centers.* 

The book, therefore, is not entirely superstitious. Consider that 
when we are about to make decisions we usually collect as much 
information as we can; but often it is so ambivalent that we are 
reduced to tossing a coin which can say either “Yes” or “No,” 
“Do” or “Don’t.” Would there be some advantage to having, as it 
were, a coin with sixty-four sides? The hexagram drawn above 
might be saying, “No, yes, no; yes, no, yes.” Also it should be 
noted as a curious characteristic of the I Ching that there are no 
absolutely good or bad hexagrams in its cyclic series.* 

This may be illustrated by the Taoist story of a farmer whose 
horse ran away. That evening the neighbors gathered to 
commiserate with him since this was such bad luck. He said, 
“May be.” The next day the horse returned, but brought with it 
six wild horses, and the neighbors came exclaiming at his good 


fortune. He said, “May be.” And then, the following day, his son 
tried to saddle and ride one of the wild horses, was thrown, and 
broke his leg. Again the neighbors came to offer their sympathy 
for the misfortune. He said, “May be.” The day after that, 
conscription officers came to the village to seize young men for 
the army, but because of the broken leg the farmer’s son was 
rejected. When the neighbors came in to say how fortunately 
everything had turned out, he said, “May be.” 14 

The yin-yang view of the world is serenely cyclic. Fortune and 
misfortune, life and death, whether on small scale or vast, come 
and go everlastingly without beginning or end, and the whole 
system is protected from monotony by the fact that, in just the 
same way, remembering alternates with forgetting. This is the 
Good of good-and-bad. Hasegawa Saburo, the Japanese artist, 
told me that when he was in Peking with the Japanese invaders in 
1936 he would watch the eyes of the Chinese crowds—the 
resigned, cynical, and faintly amused expression which seemed to 
say, “We’ve seen the likes of you many times before, and you too 
will go away.” And he imitated the expression with his own face. 

If there is anything basic to Chinese culture, it is an attitude of 
respectful trust towards nature and human nature—despite wars, 
revolutions, mass executions, starvation, floods, droughts, and all 
manner of horrors. There is nothing in their philosophy like the 
notion of original sin or the Theravada Buddhist feeling that 
existence itself is a disaster.15 Chinese philosophy, whether Taoist 
or Confucian or, one hopes, even Maoist, takes it as a basic 
premise that if you cannot trust nature and other people, you 
cannot trust yourself. If you cannot trust yourself, you cannot 
even trust your mistrust of yourself—so that without this 
underlying trust in the whole system of nature you are simply 
paralyzed. So Lao-tzu makes the sage, as ruler, say: 


I take no action and people are reformed. 

I enjoy peace and people become honest. 

I use no force and people become rich. 

I have no ambitions and people return to the good and simple 
life.i6[103a] 


Ultimately, of course, it is not really a matter of oneself, on the 
one hand, trusting nature, on the other. It is a matter of realizing 
that oneself and nature are one and the same process, which is 
the Tao. True, this is an oversimplification, for one knows very 
well that some people cannot be trusted and that the 
unpredictable ways of nature are not always one’s own 
preconceived way, so that basic faith in the system involves 


taking risks. But when no risk is taken there is no freedom. It is 
thus that, in an industrial society, the plethora of laws made for 
our personal safety convert the land into a nursery, and 
policemen hired to protect us become self-serving busybodies. 
Early Taoism presupposes the yin-yang principle but seems, in 
the main, to have rejected another view which went along with it, 


the theory of the five elements or energies (wu neiad } 
whose first celebrated exponent was Tsou Yen (c. —350 to —270), 


master of the Yin-Yang Chia, who came from the state of Ch’i in 
the northeast of China. He was, by all accounts, a man of 
immense erudition and imagination, consulted and honored by 
rulers, and one of the first serious geographers of China who 
pointed out, among other things, that China, so far from being the 
Middle Kingdom, occupied but one part in eighty-one of the 
earth’s surface. The five energies were identified, or better, 
symbolized, as (1) wood, which as fuel gives rise to (2) fire, which 
creates ash and gives rise to (3) earth, which in its mines contains 
(4) metal, which (as on the surface of a metal mirror) attracts dew 
and so gives rise to (5) water, and this in turn nourishes (1) wood. 


} 
This is called the hsiang sheng 4A 7 or “mutually arising” 
order of the forces, and utterly fanciful as it may seem to us, it 


has the special interest of describing a cycle in which cause and 
effect are not sequential but simultaneous. The forces are so 
interdependent that no one can exist without all the others, just 
as there can be no yang without yin. 

The forces were also arranged in the order of “mutual 
conquest” (hsiang sheng, but sheng is a different ideogram 


48 ) in which (1) wood, in the form of a plow, overcomes (2) 
earth which, by damming and constraint, conquers (3) water 


which, by quenching, overcomes (4) fire which, by melting, 
liquifies (5) metal which, in turn, cuts (1) wood. This reminds one 
of the children’s game of paper, scissors, and stone, in which two 
players hold up their right hands at precisely the same moment. 
Held as fist, the hand represents stone; fingers in a V represent 
scissors; and the open palm represents paper. Stone blunts 
scissors, scissors cut paper, and paper wraps stone; so that if fist 
and palm are held up at the same time, palm is the winner, and so 
on. 

In later times other such cycles were elaborated as, for 
example, the sequence (1) receiving breath, (2) being in the 
womb, (3) being nourished, (4) birth, (5) being bathed, (6) 
assuming cap and girdle, or puberty, (7) becoming an official, (8) 


flourishing, (9) weakening, (10) sickness, (11) death, and (12) 
burial.17 This is curiously similar to the Buddhist Chain of 
Dependent Origination (pratitya samutpada) and may have been 
influenced by it, though in the latter the stages are (1) ignore- 
ance, (2) activity generating karma, (3) consciousness, (4) name- 
and-form, (5) sense organs, (6) contact, (7) feeling, (8) craving, 
(9) clinging, (10) becoming, (11) birth, (12) old age and death— 
which is again (1). Samutpada (much as some philologists may 
disapprove) can roughly be broken down as sam- (all together) ut- 
(out) pada (stepping), which is the same principle as the Chinese 
“mutually arising.” Conscious attention scans the _ cycle 
sequentially, but existentially the whole clock is present while the 
hand moves. This is the sense of Lao-tzu’s (ch. 2) “Before and 
after are in mutual sequence.” There cannot be any “before” 
unless there is an “after,” and vice versa, and six o’clock has no 
meaning without the whole series of hours from one through 
twelve. 


(From) Tao arises One; from One arises Two; from Two arises Three; 
and from Three arise the ten thousand things.is [103b] 


In other words, no number has any significance except in relation 
to those which precede and those which follow. Thus if we were 
to omit 13 from the series of integers (as they do in some 
apartment buildings), 1,000 would have to be understood 
ridiculously and inconveniently as 999, since that would be the 
actual value of the figure. The point is simply that you cannot 
omit one integer without upsetting the entire system. What we 
are beginning to get at here is a view of the universe which is 
organic and relational—not a mechanism, artifact, or creation, 
and by no means analogous to a political or military hierarchy in 
which there is a Supreme Commander. 

In the yin-yang and wu hsing theories this organic view of the 
world is implicit, but it becomes explicit in Lao-tzu, and far more 
so in Chuang-tzu and Lieh-tzu, though one does not find it 
stressed in Confucian thought (absorbed as that was with political 
and social matters) until the Neo-Confucianism of Chu Hsi 
(+1131 to +1200), in which all the compatible threads of 
Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism are woven together. 
Perhaps the greatest exponent of this organic view was the 
Buddhist Fa-tsang (+643 to +712) of the Mahayanist Hua-yen 
School, whose image of the universe was a multidimensional 
network of jewels, each one containing the reflections of all the 
others ad infinitum. Each jewel was a shih, or “thing-event,” and 


a reo 
his principle of shih shih wu ai $55 dk (“between one thing- 
event and another is no obstruction”) expounded the mutual 


interpenetration and interdependence of everything happening in 
the universe. Pick up a blade of grass and all the worlds come 
with it. In other words, the whole cosmos is implicit in every 
member of it, and every point in it may be regarded as its center. 
This is the bare and basic principle of the organic view, to which 
we Shall return in our discussion of the meaning of Tao. 


In the meantime—and before we go any further—it should be 
said that to a true Taoist even such a mildly academic discussion 
of the Tao as this would seem pretentious and unnecessary. I am, 
of course, puttering about in Chinese literature and philosophy as 
one who takes care of a kitchen garden as distinct from a big 
farm, and have the same sort of affection for the literary 
atmosphere of the Tao—the texts, the calligraphy, the paintings, 
and even the Chinese dictionaries—that one might have for a 
small row of tomatoes or runner beans, a plum tree, and a modest 
stand of corn. 

However, a one-sidedly literary and academic approach to the 
Tao gives nothing of its essence, so that to understand what 
follows the reader must now, and at each subsequent reading, 
allow himself to be in a proper state of mind. You are asked— 
temporarily, of course—to lay aside all your philosophical, 
religious, and political opinions, and to become almost like an 
infant, knowing nothing. Nothing, that is, except what you 
actually hear, see, feel, and smell. Take it that you are not going 
anywhere but here, and that there never was, is, or will be any 
other time than now. Simply be aware of what actually is without 
giving it names and without judging it, for you are now feeling 
out reality itself instead of ideas and opinions about it. There is no 
point in trying to suppress the babble of words and ideas that 
goes on in most adult brains, so if it won’t stop, let it go on as it 
will, and listen to it as if it were the sound of traffic or the 
clucking of hens. 

Let your ears hear whatever they want to hear; let your eyes 
see whatever they want to see; let your mind think whatever it 
wants to think; let your lungs breathe in their own rhythm. Do not 
expect any special result, for in this wordless and idealess state, 
where can there be past or future, and where any notion of 
purpose? Stop, look, and listen ... and stay there awhile before 
you go on reading. 


1 Lao-tzu 47, tr. auct. The number in brackets refers to the page on which this 


quotation is reproduced in Chinese calligraphy. The letter a identifies this 
quotation on that page. A note on p. 105 below explains the arrangement of the 
calligraphy, which appears on pp. 56-73 and 99-104. 

* Besides, the female also has a convex sexual part—the clitoris—smaller but 
possibly more potent in pleasure than that of the male (more, and more sustained, 
orgasms). She also has a convex breast, compared with the male’s flat chest. She 
is endowed, above all, with the equipment to bear children—envied by many men 
nowadays—and her beauty is more subtle than the peacocklike opulence 
outstanding in the male of the species. Chinese men have always known this 
“balance in imbalance.” Perhaps this is one of the reasons for the universal 
suppression of the woman by her man. 

The asterisk indicates additional notes made by Al Chung-liang Huang, who 
believes these changes and extensions would have been made by Alan Watts 
himself had he lived and continued to improve upon the existing manuscript. All 
comments are based on discussions between Al Huang and Alan Watts during the 
course of their collaboration in writing this book. Some are adapted or taken 
directly from the words of friends who read Alan’s first draft and were kind 
enough to return comments. 

2 Lao-tzu 28, tr. auct. 

3 Lao-tzu 2, tr. auct. 


4 It is thus of interest that a common Chinese expression for sexual intercourse 


ae 
F 


is hua ehen Ma 7 the flowery combat, in which, of course, there is no wish in 
either partner to annihilate the other. 


5 Lao-tzu 11, tr. Gia-fu Feng (1), n.p., mod. auct. 

6 EB (1947), vol. 8, p. 182. Italics mine. This is reminiscent of Lao-tzu 
beginning, “The Tao which can be explained is not the eternal Tao,” and then 
going on to write a whole book about it; for the article which follows this 
paragraph is a vastly learned discussion of the properties and behavior of this 
unknown “ultimate.” 

7 Tan-ching 24, tr. Yampolsky (1), p. 146. 

8 Ch’eng-tzu, tr. Forke (1), p. 68, mod. auct. See also the works of Ch’eng Ming- 
tao and Ch’eng Yi-ch’uan in Graham (1). 

* And looking back into Chinese history, there has been one revolution after 
another, each swinging with equal urgency to the opposite extreme from the 
previous government. Cyclically, after an equilibrium has been attained, a new 
imbalance begins to rise to its height, then a new revolution becomes necessary. 
Most Chinese view the present Chinese government as one phase of the moon. 
The name of the king or ruler may change from time to time, but the Chinese 
people, the human being and his nature, will remain constant. 

9 Chuang-tzu 17, tr. Lin Yutang (3), p. 51. 

10 The reference to Confucius’ reverence for the book in the Lun Yu is of very 
doubtful veracity, for there is no reference to it in the Lu version of the Analects. 
See Waley (1), p. 124 n. 

11 Wilhelm (J), p. 249. 

12 Duthuit (1),pp. 33-34. 

13 Some accounts say that the I Ching hexagrams were derived from 
contemplating the cracks which appeared when the shell of a tortoise was heated, 
and this would certainly support the idea that its method was based on something 
like eidetic vision. 

* Hokusai (1760-1829), one of the great Ukiyoye masters of Japan, was once 
summoned by the Emperor to paint at court. He first dipped the feet of a chicken 
in blue ink and gently dragged them over a long scroll of rice paper. Then he 
dipped another chicken’s feet in vermilion ink and simply let the chicken walk 
freely upon the scroll. After this was done, he bowed deeply to his royal patron 
and showed him the painting “Autumn Leaves Falling on the Yangtze River.” 


* For other useful observations on the I Ching, as a departure from the basic 
texts, read R. G. H. Siu, The Man of Many Qualities, and Khigh Alx Dhiegh, The 
Eleventh Wing. 

14 Popular folktale, Huai Nan Tzu 18, p. 6a. A version of this story, as told by 
Lieh-tzu, appears in Lin Yutang (1), p. 160. 

15 A feeling which is, however, more theoretical than actual. The peoples of 
Lanka, Burma, and Thailand, where Theravada Buddhism prevails, are an 
unaccountably joyous and sociable folk. 

16 Lao-tzu 57, tr. Gia-fu Feng (1), n.p., mod. auct. 

17 Cf. Needham (1), vol. 2, p. 250. And for a full discussion of the yin-yang 


2. AT and wu hsing theories see ibid., sec. 13c, pp. 232 et seq. 
18 Lao-tzu 42, tr. auct. 


3. Tao 


Chung Yung, or “ j ” suggests that there is no 


analogy between Tao ay iy the Western ‘ideas of God and of divine 
or natural law, |r sd or disobeyed. The saying is a 
hard one, bec d Chuang-tzu speak of forced 
actions whic f with the Tao. The paradox is 
resolved in a urred centuries later between 


The master [Najim ifplied, “Your ordinary consciousness is 
the Tao.” SS 

“How can one retuB@™nto accord with it?” 

“By intending to accord you immediately deviate.” 

“But without intention, how can one know the Tao?” 

“The Tao,” said the master, “belongs neither to knowing nor to not 
knowing. Knowing is false understanding; not knowing is blind 
ignorance. If you really understand the Tao beyond doubt, it’s like 
the empty sky. Why drag in right and wrong?” 2 [56b] 


In other words, people try to force issues only when not realizing 
that it can’t be done—that there is no way of deviating from the 
watercourse of nature. You may imagine that you are outside, or 
separate from, the Tao and thus able to follow it or not follow; but 
this very imagination is itself within the stream, for there is no 
way other than the Way. Willy-nilly, we are it and go with it. From 
a strictly logical point of view, this means nothing and gives us no 
information. Tao is just a name for whatever happens, or, as Lao- 
tzu put it, “The Tao principle is what happens of itself [tzu-jan 
*. a 
1 

It is thus that the Tao Te Ching opens with the enigmatic words 
which are usually translated, “The Tao which can be spoken of is 
not the eternal Tao.” [103c] This translation conceals the fact that 


the ideogram rendered as “be spoken of” is also Tao, because the 
word is also used with the meaning of “to speak” or “to say,” 
though it may not have had this use in the —3rd century. Literally, 
the passage says, “Tao can be Tao not eternal [or regular] Tao.” 
Many translations are therefore possible: 


The Tao that can be told of is not the Absolute Tao (Lin Yutang). 

The Way that can be told of is not an Unvarying Way (Waley). 

The Tao that is the subject of discussion is not the true Tao (Old). 

The Way that may truly be regarded as the Way is other than a 
permanent way (Duyvendak).3 

The Flow that can be followed is not the eternal Flow (auct.). 

The course that can be discoursed is not the eternal Course (auct.). 

The Force that is forced isn’t true Force (auct.). 

The Tao that can be tao-ed is not the invariable Tao (Fung Yu-lan 
[Bodde]). 


4 = 
In an early form, the ideogram for tao y shows the moving 
sign (the crossroads) enclosing a head, though the radical in later 


Bs 
Ymes became cho a moving step by step, rather than hsing 


ine to walk or march.4 We_ should probably think of cho as 
“going and pausing” (Wieger [1], p. 789), and thus as “rhythmic 


movement,” where going is yang and pausing is yin. Thus in the 


ct 


ideogram for Tao cho is combined with shou , the head, and 
thus Wieger (p. 326) gives Tao the basic meaning of “to go 


ahead.”5* One could also think of it as intelligent rhythm. Various 
translators have called it the Way, Reason, Providence, the Logos, 
and even God, as in Ware (1), although he is careful to say in his 
introduction that God = Life and that the word is to be 
understood in its widest sense. 

However, it must be clear from the start that Tao cannot be 
understood as “God” in the sense of the ruler, monarch, 
commander, architect, and maker of the universe. The image of 
the military and political overlord, or of a creator external to 
nature, has no place in the idea of Tao. 


The great Tao flows [fan iy also “floats” and “drifts”] everywhere, 
to the left and to the right, 

All things depend upon it to exist, 

and it does not abandon them. 

To its accomplishments it lays no claim. 

It loves and nourishes all things, 


but does not lord it over them.6 [103d] 


Yet the Tao is most certainly the ultimate reality and energy of the 
universe, the Ground of being and nonbeing. 


The Tao has reality and evidence, but no action and no form. It may 
be transmitted but cannot be received. It may be attained but 
cannot be seen. It exists by and through itself. It existed before 
heaven and earth, and indeed for all eternity. It causes the gods to 
be divine and the world to be produced. It is above the zenith, but is 
not high. It is beneath the nadir, but is not low. Though prior to 
heaven and earth, it is not ancient. Though older than the most 
ancient, it is not old.7 [70a] 


The imagery associated with the Tao is maternal, not paternal. 


There is something obscure which is complete 
before heaven and earth arose; 

tranquil, quiet, 

standing alone without change, 

moving around without peril. 

It could be the mother of everything. 

I don’t know its name, 

and call it Tao.s [103e] 


Far from being the active agent, the subject of the verb, the doer 


and maker of things, “the Tao does [wei *"“4, also “makes’ 4 
nothing, but nothing is left undone.” [102a] It has the power o 


passivity for which women have always been celebrated, and one 
might say that its gravity is its energy. 


Know the male, but keep the female, 
so becoming a universal river-valley. 
Being the universal river-valley, 


ha 

one has the eternal virtue [te ifcte undivided 
and becomes again as a child.9 

The heavy is the origin of the light; 

(or, Gravity is the root of lightness;) 

the quiet is master of the hasty.10 [102b] 


Thus the Tao is the course, the flow, the drift, or the process of 
nature, and I call it the Watercourse Way because both Lao-tzu 
and Chuang-tzu use the flow of water as its principal metaphor. 
But it is of the essence of their philosophy that the Tao cannot be 
defined in words and is not an idea or concept. As Chuang-tzu 


says, “It may be attained but not seen,” or, in other words, felt but 
not conceived, intuited but not categorized, divined but not 
explained. In a similar way, air and water cannot be cut or 
clutched, and their flow ceases when they are enclosed. There is 
no way of putting a stream in a bucket or the wind in a bag. 
Verbal description and definition may be compared to the 
latitudinal and longitudinal nets which we visualize upon the 
earth and the heavens to define and enclose the positions of 
mountains and lakes, planets and stars. But earth and heaven are 
not cut by these imaginary strings. As Wittgenstein said, “Laws, 
like the law of causation, etc., treat of the network and not of 
what the network describes.”11 For the game of Western 
philosophy and science is to trap the universe in the networks of 
words and numbers, so that there is always the temptation to 
confuse the rules, or laws, of grammar and mathematics with the 
actual operations of nature. We must not, however, overlook the 
fact that human calculation is also an operation of nature, but just 
as trees do not represent or symbolize rocks, our thoughts—even 
if intended to do so—do not necessarily represent trees and 
rocks. Thoughts grow in brains as grass grows in fields. Any 
correspondence between them is abstract, as between ten roses 
and ten stones, which does not take into account the smell and 
color of the roses or the shapes and structures of the stones. 
Although thought is in nature, we must not confuse the game- 
rules of thought with the patterns of nature. 

Now the Chinese, and Taoist, term which we translate as 


- a 
“nature” is tzu-jan a «“# meaning the spontaneous, that which is 
so of itself. We might call it the automatic or automotive were it 


not that these words are associated with mechanisms and 
artifacts which are not truly “so” of themselves. Nature as tzu-jan 
might be taken to mean that everything grows and operates 
independently, on its own, and to be the meaning of the verse: 


(As I) sit quietly, doing nothing, 
Spring comes and grass grows of itself.12 


But it is basic to the Taoist view of the world that every thing- 


i 

”) 
event (shih or wu 47, ) is what it is only in relation to all 
others. The earth, and every tiniest thing upon it, inevitably 


“goes-with” the sun, moon, and stars. It needs them just as much 
as it needs, and consists of, its own elements. Conversely, the sun 
would not be light without eyes, nor would the universe “exist” 


without consciousness—and vice versa. This is the principle of 


r A 
“mutual arising” (hsiang shen A 2, which is explained in the 
second chapter of the Tao Te Ching.13 


The principle is that if everything is allowed to go its own way 
the harmony of the universe will be established, since every 
process in the world can “do its own thing” only in relation to all 
others. The political analogy is Kropotkin’s anarchism—the theory 
that if people are left alone to do as they please, to follow their 
nature and discover what truly pleases them, a social order will 
emerge of itself. Individuality is inseparable from community. In 
other words, the order of nature is not a forced order; it is not the 
result of laws and commandments which beings are compelled to 
obey by external violence, for in the Taoist view there really is no 
obdurately external world. My inside arises mutually with my 
outside, and though the two may differ they cannot be separated. 

Thus everything’s “own way” is the “own way” of the universe, 
of the Tao. Because of the mutual interdependence of all beings, 
they will harmonize if left alone and not forced into conformity 
with some arbitrary, artificial, and abstract notion of order, and 


this harmony will emerge tzu-jan I -=**, of itself, without external 
compulsion. No organization, in the political and commercial 


sense of the word, is organic. Organizations, in this sense, are 
based on the following of linear rules and laws imposed from 
above—that is, of  strung-out, serial, one-thing-at-a-time 
sequences of words and signs which can never grasp the 
complexity of nature, although nature is only “complex” in 
relation to the impossible task of translating it into these linear 
signs. Outside the human world, the order of nature goes along 
without consulting books—but our human fear is that the Tao 
which cannot be described, the order which cannot be put into 
books, is chaos. 

If Tao signifies the order and course of nature, the question is, 


then, what kind of order? Lao-tzu (ch. 25) does indeed use the 
i 


term hun #&&s—obscure, chaotic, turgid—for the state of the Tao 
before heaven and earth arose, but f do not think that this can 


mean chaos in the sense of mess and disorder such as we see 
when things formerly organized are broken up. It has rather the 
* 


sense of hstian 3 of that which is deep, dark, and mysterious 
prior to any distinction between order and disorder—that is, 


before any classification and naming of the features of the world. 


The un-named is heaven and earth’s origin; 


Naming is the mother of ten thousand things. 
Whenever there is no desire (or, intention), 
one beholds the mystery; 
Whenever there is desire, one beholds the manifestations. 
These two have the same point of departure, 
but differ (because of) the naming. 
Their identity is hsuan— 
hstian beyond hsuan, all mystery’s gate,14 [102c] 


The “chaos” of hstan is the nature of the world before any 
distinctions have been marked out and named, the wiggly 
Rorschach blot of nature. But as soon as even one distinction has 
been made, as between yin and yang or 0 and 1, all that we call 
the laws or principles of mathematics, physics, and biology follow 
of necessity, as has recently been demonstrated in the calculus 
system of G. Spencer Brown (1). But this necessity does not 
appear to be a compulsion or force outside the system itself. In 
other words, the order of the Tao is not an obedience to anything 
else. As Chuang-tzu says, “It exists by and through itself”; it is sui 
generis (self-generating), tzu-jan (of itself so), and has the 
property of that forgotten attribute of God called aseity—that 
which is a (by) se (itself). But in the case of the Tao the form of its 
order is not only free from any external necessity; also, it does 
not impose its rule on the universe, as if the Tao and the universe 
were separate entities. In short, the order of the Tao is not law. 


J 
The Chinese word tse #5 4+ comes closer than any other to what 
we mean by positive law—to the laying down and following of 


written rules and lists of what may and may not be done, to going 
by the book. Thus we read in the Huai Nan Tzu book: 


The Tao of Heaven operates mysteriously [hsuan] and secretly; it 
has no fixed shape; it follows no definite rules [wu-tse]; it is so 
great that you can never come to the end of it; it is so deep that 
you can never fathom it.15 


= 
aa i 
But though the Tao is wu-tse **"* 3 (nonlaw), it has_an order or 
pattern which can be recognized clearly but not defined by the 


book because it has too many dimensions and too many variables. 


This kind of order is the principle of li EA , a word which has 
the original sense of such patterns as the markings in jade or the 


grain in wood.16 
Li may therefore be understood as organic order, as distinct 
from mechanical or legal order, both of which go by the book. Li 


is the asymmetrical, nonrepetitive, and unregimented order 
which we find in the patterns of moving water, the forms of trees 
and clouds, of frost crystals on the window, or the scattering of 
pebbles on beach sand. It was through the appreciation of li that 
landscape painting arose in China long before Europeans got the 
point of it, so that now painters and photographers show us 
constantly the indefinable beauty of such lilts as waterfalls and 
bubbles in foam. Even abstract and nonobjective paintings have 
the same forms that may be found in the molecules of metals or 
the markings on shells. As soon as this beauty is pointed out it is 
immediately recognized, though we cannot say just why it appeals 
to us. When aestheticians and art critics try to explain it by 
showing works of art with Euclidean diagrams superimposed on 
them—supposedly to demonstrate elegance of proportion or 
rhythm—they simply make fools of themselves. Bubbles do not 
interest one merely because they congregate in hexagons or have 
measurable surface tensions. Geometrization always reduces 
natural form to something less than itself, to an oversimplification 
and rigidity which screens out the dancing curvaceousness of 
nature. It seems that rigid people feel some basic disgust with 
wiggles; they cannot dance without seeing a diagram of the steps, 
and feel that swinging the hips is obscene. They want to “get 
things straight,” that is, in linear order, which is tse but not li. 

But who can straighten out water? Water is the essence of life 
and is therefore Lao-tzu’s favorite image of the Tao. 


The highest good is like water, 

for the good of water is that it nourishes everything without striving. 

It occupies the place which all men think bad [i.e., the lowest level].17 
[102d] 

It is thus that Tao in the world is like a river going down the valley to the 
ocean.is [102e] 

The most gentle thing in the world overrides the most hard.19 [102g] 

How do coves and oceans become kings of a hundred rivers? 

Because they are good at keeping low— 

That is how they are kings of the hundred rivers.20 [102f] 

Nothing in the world is weaker than water, 

But it has no better in overcoming the hard.21 [101a] 


So also in Chuang-tzu: 


When water is still, it is like a mirror, reflecting the beard and the 
eyebrows. It gives the accuracy of the water-level, and the 
philosopher makes it his model. And if water thus derives lucidity 
from stillness, how much more the faculties of the mind? The mind 
of the Sage being in repose becomes the mirror of the universe, the 
speculum of all creation.22 [59a] 


The fluidity of water is not the result of any effort on the part of the 
water, but is its natural property. And the virtue of the perfect man 
is such that even without cultivation there is nothing which can 
withdraw from his sway. Heaven is naturally high, the earth is 
naturally solid, the sun and moon are naturally bright. Do they 
cultivate these attributes?23 [63b] 


Chuang-tzu tells also the story of seeing an old man fall into a 
cataract and come out safely downstream. Asked for an 
explanation the old man says: 


No, ... I have no way [of doing this]. There was my original condition 
to begin with; then habit growing into nature; and lastly 
acquiescence in destiny. Plunging in with the whirl, I come out with 
the swirl. I accommodate myself to the water, not the water to me. 
And so I am able to deal with it after this fashion.... 1 was born upon 
dry land ... and accommodated myself to dry land. That was my 
original condition. Growing up on the water, I accommodated myself 
to the water. That was what I meant by nature. And doing as I did 
without being conscious of any effort so to do, that was what I 
meant by destiny.24 [67a] 


The patterns of flowing water have been shown by Schwenk 
(1), Kepes (1), and Huyghe (1) to be memorialized in muscle, 
bone, wood, and stone, and to have found their way into human 
art from very early times. In watching its flow we can never find 
an aesthetic mistake; it is invariably graceful in the wave, the 
flying spray, or the merest trickle. We ourselves are at least 
eighty percent water, and for this reason the Taoists feel that it 
should serve as ae model, as witness this remarkable passage 


from the Kuan-tzu TT book (late —4th century): 


Water is the blood of the Earth, and flows through its muscles and 
veins. Therefore it is said that water is something that has complete 
faculties.... It is accumulated in Heaven and Earth, and stored up in 
the various things (of the world). It comes forth in metal and stone, 
and is concentrated in living creatures. Therefore it is said that 
water is something spiritual. Being accumulated in plants and trees, 
their stems gain their orderly progression from it, their flowers 
obtain their proper number, and their fruits gain their proper 
measure. The bodies of birds and beasts, through having it, become 
fat and large; their feathers and hair become luxuriant, and their 
stripes and markings are made apparent. The reason why creatures 
can realize their potentialities and grow to the norm is that the 
inner regulation of their water is in accord.... 

Man is water, and when the producing elements of male and 


female unite, liquid flows into forms.... Thus water becomes 
accumulated in jade, and the nine virtues appear. It congeals to form 
man, and his nine openings and five viscera appear. This is its 
refined essence.... What is it, then, that has complete faculties? It is 
water. There is not one of the various things which is not produced 
through it. It is only he who knows how to rely (on its principles) 
who can act correctly.... 

Hence the solution for the Sage who would transform the world 
lies in water. Therefore when water is uncontaminated, men’s hearts 
are upright. When water is pure, the people’s hearts are at ease. 
Men’s hearts being upright, their desires do not become dissolute. 
The people’s hearts being upright, their conduct is without evil. 
Hence the Sage, when he rules the world, does not teach men one 
by one, or house by house, but takes water as his key.25 


To sum up thus far, Tao is the flowing course of nature and the 
universe; li is its principle of order which, following Needham, we 
can best translate as “organic pattern”; and water is its eloquent 
metaphor. But we cannot explain li by laying it out flat, as in a 
geometrical diagram, or define it in the linear order of words, 
although I am paradoxically trying to do so. Another reason why 
the Tao and its pattern escape us is that they are ourselves, and 
we are 


Like a sword that cuts but cannot cut itself; 
Like an eye that sees but cannot see itself. 26 


By watching the nucleus we change its behavior, and in our 
observing the galaxies they run away from us—and, in trying to 
figure out the brain, the obstacle is that we have no finer 
instrument than the brain itself for the purpose. The greatest 
hindrance to objective knowledge is our own subjective presence. 
There is nothing for it, then, but to trust and go with the Tao as 
the source and ground of our own being which “may be attained 
but not seen.” 

Is there any clear way of distinguishing organic pattern from 
mechanical and linear pattern, between nature and _ artifice, 
growing and making? Obviously, no animal or plant is made in the 
same way that a table is made of wood. A living creature is not an 
assemblage of parts, nailed, screwed, or glued together. Its 
members and organs are not assembled from distant sources and 
gathered to a center. A tree is not made of wood; it is wood. A 
mountain is not made of rock; it is rock. The seed grows into the 
plant by an expansion from within, and its parts or 
distinguishable organs develop simultaneously as it expands. 
Certainly, the growing seed is gathering nourishment from its 


environment, but the process is no mere sticking together of the 
nutritive elements, for it absorbs and transforms them, and one 
sees nothing like this in the manufacture of an electric motor or 
computer. Though we talk about the mechanisms of organisms, 
surely this is no more than analogy. In studying organisms by the 
analytic way of breaking them down into parts we are simply 
using a mechanical image of their structure. Such analysis is the 
linear, bit-by-bit method of conscious attention, whereas in the 
living organism the _ so-called “parts” are _ exfoliated 
simultaneously throughout its body. Nature has no “parts” except 
those which are distinguished by human systems of classification, 
and it is only by elaborate surgery that any part of a body can be 
replaced. The body is not a surgical construct put together with 
scalpels, clamps, and sutures. We must make a distinction 
between an organism which is differentiated and a machine 
which is partitive. Machines generating other machines will 
always do so by assemblage and the linear method, although we 
are coming to the point of combining such machines as 
computers with organic elements. In fact the computer was 
always combined with an organic element— man himself, for man 
is the boss and creator of the computer. 

But the Tao is not considered the boss and creator of our 
organic universe. It may reign but it does not rule. It is the 
pattern of things but not the enforced law. Thus we read in the 


Fe as 
Han Fei Tzu #4 ae book (early —3rd century): 


Tao is that whereby all things are so, and with which all principles 


£ = 
agree. Principles (li z :& are the markings (wen mo) of 
completed things. Tao is that whereby all things become complete. 


Therefore it is said that Tao is what gives principles. When things 
have their principles, the one (thing) cannot be the other.... All 
things have each their own different principle, whereas Tao brings 
the principles of all things into single agreement. Therefore it can 
be both one thing and another, and is not in one thing only.27 


This is, again, analogous to Kropotkin’s anarchy. If each thing 
follows its own [i it will harmonize with all other things following 
theirs, not by reason of rule imposed from above but by their 


mutual resonance (ying #3) and interdependence. 
The Taoists are saying, then, that seen as a whole the universe 


is a harmony or symbiosis of patterns which cannot exist without 
each other. However, when it is looked at section by section we 
find conflict. The biological world is a mutual eating society in 


which every species is the prey of another. But if there were any 
species not preyed upon by another, it would increase and 
multiply to its own self-strangulation, as human beings, through 
their skill in defeating other species (such as bacteria), are in 
danger of disrupting the whole biological order by overpopulation 
and thus of destroying themselves. For this reason anyone who 
sets out to govern the world puts everything, and especially 
himself, in danger. 


Those who would take over the world and manage it, 
I see that they cannot grasp it; 


for the world is a spiritual [shen y vessel 
and cannot be forced. 


Whoever forces it spoils it. 
Whoever grasps it loses it.28 [101b] 


In the light of this passage from Lao-tzu we must look at the 
critical section in Chuang-tzu in which the government or 
regulation of the world and its organisms is discussed. Having 
first drawn an analogy between the different sounds which 
various holes and apertures evoke from the wind, and the 
changing moods, emotions, and thoughts of the human heart, 
Chuang-tzu goes on to say: 


If there is no other, there will be no I. If there is no I, there will be 
none to make distinctions. This seems to be true. But what causes 
these varieties? It might seem as if there would be a real Lord, but 
there is no indication of His existence. One may believe that He 
exists, but we do not see His form. He may have reality, but no form. 
The hundred parts of the human body, with its nine openings, and 
six viscera, all are complete in their places. Which shall I prefer? Do 
you like them all equally? Or do you like some more than others? 
Are they all servants? Are these servants unable to control each 
other, but need another as ruler? Do they become rulers and 
servants in turn? Is there any true ruler other than themselves?29 
[73a] 


Just as every point on the surface of a sphere may be seen as the 
center of the surface, so every organ of the body and every being 
in the cosmos may be seen as its center and ruler. 

This is like the Hindu-Buddhist principle of karma—that 
everything which happens to you is your own action or doing. 
Thus in many states of mystical experience or cosmic 
consciousness the difference between what you do and what 
happens to you, the voluntary and the involuntary, seems to 


disappear. This feeling may be interpreted as the sense that 
everything is voluntary—that the whole universe is your own 
action and will. But this can easily flip into the sense that 
everything is involuntary. The individual and the will are nothing, 
and everything that might be called “I” is as much beyond control 
as the spinning of the earth in its orbit. But from the Taoist 
standpoint these two views fall short. They are polar ways of 
seeing the same truth: that there is no ruler and nothing ruled. 
What goes on simply happens of itself (tzu-jan) without either 
push or pull, since every push is also a pull and every pull a push, 
as in using a steering wheel. This is, then, a transactional view of 
the world, for as there is no buying without selling, and vice 
versa, there is no environment without organisms, and vice versa. 
This is, again, the principle of “mutual arising” (hsiang sheng). As 
the universe produces our consciousness, our consciousness 
evokes the universe; and this realization transcends and closes 
the debate between materialists and idealists (or mentalists), 
determinists and free-willers, who represent the yin and the yang 
of philosophical opinion. 

Many would object that this view of the universe abrogates the 
basic law of cause and effect, as when we think that lack of rain 
causes a drought, and a drought causes famine, and famine 
causes death. But lack of rain, drought, famine, and death are 
simply four ways of looking at, and describing, the same event. 
Given living organisms, lack-ofrain = death. The notion of 
causality is simply a lame way of connecting the various stages of 
an event which we have distinguished and separated for purposes 
of description; so that, beguiled by our own words, we come to 
think of these stages as different events which must be stuck 
together again by the glue of causality. In fact, the only single 
event is the universe itself. Li, not causality, is the rationale of the 
world.30 

If we try to sort the ideas of Taoism into the categories of 
Western thought, it appears that what we have here is a 
naturalistic pantheism in which the Tao—not being a personal 
God—must therefore be an unconscious though nonetheless 
formative energy, like a magnetic field. As I understand formal 
pantheism, it is the idea that the universe, considered as a mass 
of distinct things and events, is simply God by another name, so 
that calling it God adds nothing to it, except perhaps a certain 
attitude of awe and respect. But although Taoists speak of the 


pe ie 
universe (in the common Chinese way) as wan wu 4] 4 the “ten 
thousand things,” this does not imply that it is simply a sum of 


separate objects. Things (wu) are not so much entities as 


differentiations or forms (cf. the Sanskrit rupa) in the unified field 
of the Tao. This follows necessarily from the principle of mutual 
arising. 


The knowledge of the ancients was perfect. How perfect? At first, 
they did not know that there were things. This is the most perfect 
knowledge; nothing can be added. Next, they knew that there were 
things, but did not yet make distinctions between them. Next, they 
made distinctions between them, but they did not yet pass 
judgments upon them. When judgments were passed, Tao was 
destroyed.31 [72a] 


And again: 


The universe came into being with us together; with us, all things 
are one.32 [73b] 


Furthermore, to conceive the Tao as an unconscious energy is 
as much off the point as to conceive it as a personal ruler or God. 
But if, as is the case, the Tao is simply inconceivable, what is the 
use of having the word and of saying anything at all about it? 
Simply because we know intuitively that there is a dimension of 
ourselves and of nature which eludes us because it is too close, 
too general, and too all-embracing to be singled out as a 
particular object. This dimension is the ground of all the 
astonishing forms and experiences of which we are aware. 
Because we are aware, it cannot be unconscious, although we are 
not conscious of it—as of an external thing. Thus we can give ita 
name but cannot make any definitive statement about it—as we 
saw to be the case with whatever it is that is named “electricity.” 
Our only way of apprehending it is by watching the processes and 
patterns of nature, and by the meditative discipline of allowing 
our minds to become quiet, so as to have vivid awareness of 
“what is” without verbal comment. 


The baby looks at things all day without squinting and staring; that 
is because his eyes are not focused on any particular object. He goes 
without knowing where he is going, and stops without knowing what 
he is doing. He merges himself with the surroundings and goes 
along with them. These are the principles of mental hygiene.33 [64b] 


ae 
we) 4 ASE YS Fo ret -ad se ay Josie Boe) 
age 


BC Wer + 2 
AOS BE Ke) EAE OS WE wy ona) oF ofp veh 
ee 82 aytas) FOE DOG yess oye 
Rl Bw Ss oF HF oh sy )-39 
ry wes) 5 PEC a 9 9D ok a Woh ay 
hE eyed HD aCrshiv gas gay WORE 
So MRK BE cde aes Po set ep 2 wl 


BAYS Swe 


sysop eR 
yd 12 AR BE BY PE DA plas 8” 
2o wed DP Hons rE BE he apnetage nd SY 
wR iP Ae ey Tet ad oy 
2) Re SX om wee sy wd ojperess) 
Re jeje YT Todays yt FL 
BS erg TRAP AS TOR ERE 
SMe eh yd Stas E 

388 HH Hee 
“oP ar kw a eS aia a a0 
ay oD rds OS oD Fe oy Sots HE ry 
ae oapayoaye cy HS REY E 


wd sh aR OP 
awh FEO wy WE SS Est S wtp Rap ey) 
mK EK X oy Fie Hey Mae VY ay) 
RE ME Kk YR EHO yp ee ot 
Fo we Boe 8) ah re vi eS ed 
At 


PIAS WIA Re BAe 09 YE 
ROBE SARE Od TF Rap raw 
AK HR IN, ae ID at erg aT 
AS} BEA: EAR SS BE ye -y Ane 
Ahi rpacaplinp dy ROTA Az aye RB ow 
yay | 


VEE st 1K msl) 
C4 BE RY OW ve a Sacra 
ons wl SO ako NS | An aed he BS : 


SHALAS SH Ay vE yD BESK | she oF yt 
¥5 AE Vin a ny Az vs oP AT YD 
> renee nee asx Set yd 
BES AB riry yh ry shy yi cee 


ry AS SPT Reh y SPS aE E 


st xp 4d 
RMI oy Se Dey 8 Vsy ok 
asahr pat wo ydne) 2a oF Bb aE Es 
Sh yak pay |  ) eS PER 


rE wf gereips® Yah y FT Raa 
an Rah eo R-y BH HOE i Har 
QS Wyo wolfe F 
MARE + ¥ ARS TE PE SARE MT wef rec gap ays 
ZY RW SYK Be SSB yor & 


SH2 vps ae} 
nyme)adond sn-B SY we) ays ad shy tk AQ see 
oyr 5S latest y9 ce Xo bee ee 
aylris oy BER AT UR AL Oat APY 
re Goren sy t 


sy sp Seas 
\ wooi-peir TR Ry FY 
my Reoy EDIE Bey Tee ae 
FY OLAS EN ye BY Op ee Ea Haj 
Sp SISA eS Dap oy 


wavy 
WE << ye pas 0 BE SS edapst 939 ay) SS 
rebel BD ny VAY oy oy BERS 
RE oy ny BF RO EE sp owe Eom ny aK og- 
BRAY Wish wo oS ak aA Re 
SH AEE 99 Gh ree aya Bow 
9S vd Ako et 
wa hE oy ay 15 SS RM yD SE see 
Pe eS SO MAL oh 9 95 ET Oe 
Fad ¥5 oh FAG th ace ® ySa8 
SPELL E ¥3 AF LS HAGE ve He 
set ¥S TIO aylayt eo E 192) rE 


ssf sh wi ge 
AD sated \~ 5 AE SE oC AY SH ny 
AQ aye BI JE ny SH poe Bly ye ny 
APE MK FH oy esr SS od Jo SS 
my BS yD Se Ss a Je yea I 


Zp B wy 4p 
ah 75 ny RIAD AY ew GO rE RS Bhan 
rnd ry AWS Wyk HORS vi wks 
MI WO MS ry daa A ny a raria eRny 
2 Eeor We wg i 


sy sp we 
By BIA A) oN oS BE SS wel) -y of Bt 
adogcy Ze ry SR -y BP ryred-y Taye 
We AL oy Say RN Se IE aR cy aah v8 
isa Be owd -y FES 4g te od SO AE oy 
ast 


Sy SHAR PT A 
Lem Series yn 
VS ne Koy PETS ASICS Doh 
9§ FEN Fg ay RE s}ry hv) | 


mp spied SE a OSE RE ee th epp BS el 
Bayer alrE JE nS B rp AE F 30 
nGae Betsy < I ry yeah As= 
\ v8 ee Be HO Kae ae Tag) ak 
“AK TARE IE vo) Sl rh Ree 
alecaie THF ME vs) FE yt Fetes Rwy Pe 
ye X 2 BAord 52 Ew Wey 
aye ay Br sy we2 28 EB a Daap rf at ke 
ae hat 4 ad od BE le 
rH KA wh etry MT EAS 


ro WAY | 


SWI AE pL owsh a RE BK QB 5 
DD Be at oe wets YF HE 

SSD QB vdeo inh aK ny 
BE OP SAE shows he ef B AEE 
rath B rw} ab yeah So ond 0d 


Bh ~2 BH mb aoe eh rQ vel aR ny ay yshe 
SErQ 0D yordeshe Wee Bays 
PD whe Raye Sk AE AE AY ane SOK ool 
2 mbasine me ER oD wel EE ye 3 ae A SE 
STG FRE ep ry EEE saat Ea aD 
Kop Boye rE 9 att X og emis 
yvgwe 


seb stpye) at 
HS) vee eta Ak ah ah BIE ahs 
4esege Xk 4 Sf 2 BaP Yay yd 
@ 1S SS AEA GT TE SP oy oY 
veh AAS BEE OG a SIAL AY atte 35 
WE -BOAT AS BA SY x9 odes FT AAS 
Mae ay z 
ALBA ay She RELA rd ye shes ak 
~< BF rf xray Sk < ares os 
AY] OY WIE 5 a oY apratesn) & 
9S ys BE A AES Ae ENE ew ap oh 
Wwe ke xap i 


Ae ope <5 OS Ad 5 ak rant a2 v9 
BA yD 6 yd AE Ah eS ae Bh 
BS Ad vB eT o5 M8 07h SE 54S os 
PFS Lat oa ny OL EM ny syley BE 
5S 2 ED YA EL Bod ayy oP 
adi 

BE 32 ~L ny BooS BSmelery wel< oy 
ARS BD GG EAS AB AY 2 Gd JO 
we Soe ae Se ade Bey 8 yd 
BEA) oS Be aethe oheayomhe cg nhs ate 
YE RR ry OH KO Hoy oe) 
Dey apf 


BEE OK YH LD aK YE ek rhe nd tany 
NY Breath rt Hay ngewe 
Anry QP oS eat HA adr ISH sae 
vEnd SET Be A Be oS HSE ey BR 
BRE ae ae pe <p ny edo oY aE 
2 ASS yd AK at Heh Wajay 
NV Sh SO Hah v5 Vey ys sy 
mS 5 BAY MS 5 AY pera e 3ORL ap 
By wp ay yey 8 atlax aye yf 

DY AYE I LD Me BST oe Bag DESI 
Ml FAK BS TF ovr xtra) © “PS 
2 5= As Pak hoe wf 


stp aC SE 
AKO REAVER Ha pS Sere 
¥B Foo wee vp Jota oh 
mayo yi BLP As Kh Sst streets 
ahd SV at AS RE oy 92 9F Fp FOr 
aay KBD oy JED ¥S aOeg etd oot 
VE V3 90 rt A A e815 SOAS E 


KD BME Seger 2 ny ae Bap 
ry WD-9b Se EZ cy HADES peri ay 


Am WEEE aE ny AALS HT o BESO EN 
shyt ap panded aegn< sya | 
5h SOK wR oF ghe npadoe eG ae 


Sr wot sip i BP ach ay 32 KS EE vanish, 
ahr ey 2 rl ae ok 5 EW ae 
Porat spp aE K ways yi tel wa SE ny oe 
3°) Sp mie BS VE Aye BY eS EK Ads AKO 
aye BY WE BBE SR pgs) 95 a aA 
AQ vj ny Bae wh AE WSvat Pad > FS ae 
DAA SY EV PH BP 1S Ae eh AD na HE 
ir AY rE aS L dhe ET ORNS S as) .E 
ry REM RI BA SY AK Bor 
SY IS BS pomyeyiynsy Ff 


wees VL PTW? 
Reh “axe sa 
ae LEZRA 
Be bn gr aHe 
SMR Melt th 
F2¥R shaw 
SASH HAF PY 
id Je de LH 4 %, b 
AMOe PSE es 
ERS eORE 
FRE pees 
AEM eer 
% BY4a4 


xv 
= 


K F44 R44 A|H 
pea eter: 
& tot ae® 
ee aS eee 
BE RUPERT EHS 
3 Says tases 
Rom eKH ROHS oe 
vp EBL BY 
Bo HAPR OAK 
% HSH RT ES 
4 Las k LES 
-— B2tRr os 
HES m Has y 


1 See footnote 3 below. 


w 
2 Wu-men Kuan 19, tr. auct. In this context hsin *\4 must_be translated as 
“consciousness” rather than “mind,” “thought,” or “heart.” But even this is 


inadequate. “Ordinary consciousness” is the way the world is felt naturally, as by a 
child who does not yet know how to talk. 

3 Note the interesting divergence of Duyvendak (1) from the other versions. He 
justifies this (pp. 17-19) by pointing out that neither Lao-tzu nor Chuang-tzu uses 


tao with the meaning of “speech,” and suggests that the phrase ch’ang tao 
should not be understood as the true, eternal, and authentic Tao, but, on the 


contrary, as a Tao which is fixed and definable, and thus not the true Tao at all. 
Following his idea, I would translate, “The Tao which is truly Tao is not a fixed 
Tao.” But doesn’t it all come to the same thing? 

4 The pandits are here confused. Wieger (1) sees hsing as deriving from a 
pictogram of the left and right feet (p. 163), whereas Needham (1), p. 222, takes it 
to be crossroads. In any case, it denotes motion. 


5 Thus when the Ch’an master Yun-men was asked, “What is the Tao?” he 


answered with the single word ch’t Ew go on, walk on, go away. This has 
the sense of going right along without stickiness or hesitation, as in the phrase mo 


ry ao 
chih ch’ti GLE 
* The character fa iz * which means jaw. or the universal way in Taoism and 
a 


r 
Buddhism, is simply the two characters # —* water, and 2 * go, combined. 
Therefore, the Chinese equivalent of the title Tao: The Watercourse Way would be 


telegraphically translated as Tao-Water/Go-Flowing-Water. 

6 Lao-tzu 34, tr. auct. 

7 Chuang-tzu 6, tr. Fung Yu-lan (3), p. 117, mod. auct. Note the sophisticated 
distinction between eternity and everlasting time, and the contrast with the image 
of the Father-God as the Ancient of Days. 

8 Lao-tzu 25, tr. auct. 

9 Lao-tzu 28, tr. auct. 

10 Lao-tzu 26, tr. auct. 

11 Wittgenstein (1), 6.35. Cf. also 6.341-2. 

12 Quoted in Zenrin Kushu (Ch’an Ling Chu Chi), p. 194, tr. auct. This is a small 
book of sayings often used in Zen (Ch’an) Buddhist teaching. It consists of short 
verses ranging from one single word to nearly thirty, usually rhyming easily as in 
poetry. This particular saying is a ten-word verse divided into two five-word 
couplets. 

13 See above, pp. 22-23. Also Chuang-tzu, below, p. 52. 

14 Lao-tzu 1, tr. auct. 

15 Huai Nan Tzu 9, p. 1b, tr. Needham (1), vol. 2, p. 561. 

16 Cf. Needham (1), vol. 2, sec. 18.7. This whole section is a marvelous 
discussion of the differences between Western and Chinese views of law, both 
human and natural. Though the mature philosophy of li was formulated by Chu 
Hsi (+1130 to +1200), the word appears thirty-five times in the Chuang-tzu book. 

17 Lao-tzu 8, tr. auct. 

18 Lao-tzu 32, tr. auct. 

19 Lao-tzu 43, tr. auct. 

20 Lao-tzu 66, tr. auct. 

21 Lao-tzu 78, tr. auct. 

22 Chuang-tzu 13, tr. H. A. Giles (1), pp. 157-58. 

23 Chuang-tzu 21, tr. H. A. Giles (1), p. 268. 

24 Chuang-tzu 19, tr. H. A. Giles (1), pp. 239-40. Cf. Lieh-tzu 2 and 8. 

* Kuan-tzu, a collection of works by Kuan Chung, a statesman of pre-Confucian 
times (d. —645), was put together by the scholars of Chi-Hsia Academy (—300) 
with later Han interpretations. Some of the most penetrating statements of the 
Tao can be found in this miscellaneous source, volume. Alan Watts had often 
spoken about doing a book on Kuan-tzu and Huai Nan Tzu, another mixed source 
book compiled by scholars at the court of Liu An (d. —122). See selections from 
both in Needham (1) and in Fung Yu-lan (1); also in Kuan Tzu, a two-volume book 
by W. Allyn Rickett of the University of Pennsylvania, and in Tao the Great 
Luminant, by Evan Morgan. 

25 Kuan-tzu 39, tr. Fung Yu-lan (Bodde) (1), vol. 1, pp. 166-67. 

26 Zenrin Kushu 14, p. 267, tr. auct. 

27 Han Fei Tzu 20, tr. Fung Yu-lan (Bodde) (1), vol. 1, p. 177. 

28 Lao-tzu 29, tr. auct. Shen presents problems for the translator, for the 
usually chosen meanings—spirit, god, divine, supernatural, etc.—are 
unsatisfactory. I take it to mean that innate intelligence (or li) of each organism in 
particular and of the universe as a whole which is beyond the reach of calculation. 


29 Chuang-tzu 2, tr. Fung Yu-lan (3), pp. 46-47. But see how other translators 
render the last sentence. “It would seem as though there must be some True Lord 
among them” (Watson [1]). “Surely there is some soul which sways them all” (H. 
A. Giles [1]). “I promise you that there is a real sovereign there” (Ware [1]). 
“There must be a true Ruler among them” (Legge [1]). I would read it as, “Their 
true ruler is just in this’—referring to the previous sentence, “Do they become 
rulers and servants in turn?” 

30 Shortly before his death in 1972, Lancelot Law Whyte, the British 
morphologist and philosopher of science, explained to me that he was working on 
the idea that the angular measurement of patterns was a far more effective way of 
describing the world than the measurement of the action and reaction of 
pressures and forces. His work relevant to this theme is in the Bibliography. 

31 Chuang-tzu 2, tr. Fung Yu-lan (3), p. 53. 

32 Ibid., p. 56. 

33 Chuang-tzu 23, tr. Lin Yutang (3), p. 86, mod. auct. 


4. Wu-wei 


“THE TAO DOES nothing is left undone.”1 [101c] 
These famous w viously cannot be taken in their 


ee 
Ma - ny =f .- . 
f “nonaction” (wu-wei ** 9) is 
a, flaziness, laissez-faire, or mere 


literal sense, for the 
not to be consider 


passivity. Among the s 1] mganings of wei are to be, to do, 


4 


to make, to practice, OM; and in the Is it means false, 
simulated, counterfeit. t inJthe context of Taoist writings it 


quite clearly means f@™jng “meddling, and artifice—in other 


words, trying to act against the grain of li. Thus wu-wei Zz. “as 
“not forcing” is what we mean by going with the grain, rolling 


with the punch, swimming with the current, trimming sails to the 
wind, taking the tide at its flood, and stooping to conquer. It is 
perhaps best exemplified in the Japanese arts of judo and aikido 
where an opponent is defeated by the force of his own attack, and 
the latter art reaches such heights of skill that I have seen an 
attacker thrown to the floor without even being touched. 

The principle is illustrated by the parable of the pine and the 
willow in heavy snow. The pine branch, being rigid, cracks under 
the weight; but the willow branch yields to the weight, and the 
snow drops off. Note, however, that the willow is not limp but 
springy. Wu-wei is thus the life-style of one who follows the Tao, 
and must be understood primarily as a form of intelligence—that 
is, of knowing the principles, structures, and trends of human and 
natural affairs so well that one uses the least amount of energy in 
dealing with them. But this intelligence is, as we have seen, not 
simply intellectual; it is also the “unconscious” intelligence of the 
whole organism and, in particular, the innate wisdom of the 


nervous system. Wu-wei is a combination of this wisdom with 
taking the line of least resistance in all one’s actions. It is not the 
mere avoidance of effort. In judo, for example, one uses muscle— 
but only at the right moment, when the opponent is off balance or 
has overextended himself. But even this effort has a peculiarly 


unforced quality which is called ch’i , roughly equivalent to 
the Sanskrit prana—an energy associated with breath. 


This may be illustrated with the aikido exercise of the 
unbendable arm. The right arm is extended to the front and the 
opponent is invited to bend it. If the arm is held rigidly, a strong 
opponent will certainly bend it. If, on the other hand, it is held out 
easily, with the eyes fixed on a distant point, and with the feeling 
that it is a rubber hose through which water is flowing towards 
that point, it will be extremely difficult to bend. Without straining, 
one simply assumes that the arm will stay straight, come what 
may, because of the flow of ch’i. During the test, breathe out 
slowly, as if from the belly, and think of the breath as moving 
through the arm. This is perhaps a form of what we call, or rather 
miscall, self-hypnosis, which has nothing to do with sleep. I have 
found that something of the same kind can be used in opening a 
stiff cap on a jar and I knew an old Zen master, frail in 
appearance, who, seemingly by leaning against them, moved 
heavy rocks which defeated strong young men. 

Just as water follows gravity and, if trapped, rises to find a new 
outlet, so wu-wei is the principle that gravity is energy, and the 
Taoist finds in gravity a constant stream which may be used in the 
same way as the wind or a current. Falling with gravity 
constitutes the immense energy of the earth spinning in its orbit 
around the sun. 

The phrase wu-wei was once, and only once, used by Confucius. 
“The Master said: ‘Was it not [the Emperor] Shun who did 
nothing [wu-wei] and yet ruled well? What did he do? He merely 
corrected his person and took his proper position as ruler.’”2 The 
principle, in its political sense, was first discussed at length by 
Shen Pu-hai (d. —337) in a lost work called the Shen-tzu from 
which only quotations by other authors remain, and which may 
perhaps be earlier than both the Lao-tzu and Chuang-tzu books.3 
He explained it simply as delegation of authority and of 
administrative duties, as the noninvolvement of the Emperor in 
the fussy details of government. In Lao-tzu and Chuang-tzu it 
means this and much more, for Lao-tzu, in particular, may be 
interpreted at several different levels. The Tao Te Ching may be 
taken as a manual of advice on government, as a book of natural 
philosophy, or as a compendium of metaphysical and mystical 


wisdom. As Creel points out, these early Taoists were writing in 
the extremely troubled time of the Warring States Period (—403 
to —221) when laissez-faire in politics would have been suicidal; 
and yet they were by no means stupid people. 

We should look first, then, at the political aspect of wu-wei. 
Reading Lao-tzu and Chuang-tzu as commentary on their own 
time, they are pointing out the utter folly of ambition for political 
power, such that it is a burden to those who hold it. As we can 
clearly see today, no one in his senses would want to be the 
supreme governor of any great nation, for one cannot imagine a 
more hectic, frustrating, anxiety-ridden, and demanding way of 
life—where one is never out of reach of the telephone, is 
constantly accompanied by guards, and must make momentous 
decisions (on the basis of screened and scanty information) hour 
after hour. Under such pressure, no one can remain a human 
being with time to “stand and stare,” to wander through the 
woods with one or two politically unimportant friends, or to sit 
alone on a beach and watch the sea. Great power is worry, and 
total power is boredom, such that even God renounces it and 
pretends, instead, that he is people and fish and insects and 
plants: the myth of the king who goes wandering among his 
subjects in disguise. 

So Lao-tzu (ch. 60) advises the ruler to govern a state as one 
cooks a small fish—that is, don’t turn it so often in the pan that it 
disintegrates—and he envisages the ideal state as no bigger than 
a village. 


Supposing here is a small state with few people. 

Though there may be various mechanical contrivances, they will not 
be used. 

People will be well aware of their mortality and not 

overextend themselves. 

Though they have boats and carriages they will not travel in them; 

though they have weapons they will not show them. 

They will restore the use of knotted cords (for keeping records). 

They will be satisfied with their food, 

delighted in their clothes, 

comfortable in their homes, 

and happy with their customs. 

Though the neighboring states are within sight, 

and their cocks’ crowing and dogs’ barking within hearing, 

the people will not go abroad all their lives.4 [101d] 


It must be understood, in passing, that both Lao-tzu and Chuang- 
tzu enjoy the humor of overstating their case—the latter 
sometimes choosing truly preposterous examples to illustrate a 


point. So, in this instance, Lao-tzu is not to be taken absolutely 
seriously: but he is making the point that people would be much 
better off if they would curb ambition, slow down the tempo of 
life, and not despise working with their hands. 

Throughout Taoist writing there is a nostalgia for the “true men 
of ancient times,” reminiscent of Rousseau and the idealization of 
the Noble Savage in the +18th century—a nostalgia which 
fashionable anthropology has for a long time deplored. But today 
one wonders. Is a long life such a good thing if it is lived in daily 
dread of death or in constant search for satisfaction in a 
tomorrow which never comes? Is technological progress a 
disease, symptomatic of being unable to be centered in and to 
enjoy the present? As Chuang-tzu puts it: 


The man of perfect virtue in repose has no thoughts, in action no 
anxiety. He recognizes no right, nor wrong, nor good, nor bad. 
Within the Four Seas, when all profit—that is his repose. Men cling 
to him as children who have lost their mothers; they rally around 
him as wayfarers who have missed their road. He has wealth to 
spare, but he knows not whence it comes. He has food and drink 
more than sufficient, but knows not who provides it.... 

In an age of perfect virtue, good men are not appreciated; ability 
is not conspicuous. Rulers are mere beacons, while the people are 
as free as the wild deer. They are upright without being conscious of 
duty to their neighbors. They love one another without being 
conscious of charity. They are true without being conscious of 
loyalty. They are honest without being conscious of good faith. They 
act freely in all things without recognizing obligations to anyone. 
Thus, their deeds leave no trace; their affairs are not handed down 
to posterity.5 [62a] 


Which at once calls to mind a passage from Thoreau: 


I saw the setting sun lighting up the opposite side of a stately pine 
wood. Its golden rays straggled into the aisles of the wood as into 
some noble hall. I was impressed as if some ancient and altogether 
admirable and shining family had settled there ... unknown to me,— 
to whom the sun was servant,—who had not gone into society in the 
village,—who had not been called on. I saw their park, their 
pleasure-ground, beyond through the wood.... The pines furnished 
them with gables as they grew. Their house was not obvious to 
vision; the trees grew through it. I do not know whether I heard the 
sounds of a suppressed hilarity or not. They seemed to recline on 
the sunbeams. They have sons and daughters. They are quite well. 
The farmer’s cart-path, which leads directly through their hall, does 
not in the least put them out, as the muddy bottom of a pool is 
sometimes seen through the reflected skies. They ... do not know 
that he is their neighbor,—notwithstanding I heard him whistle as he 


drove his team through the house. Nothing can equal the serenity of 
their lives. Their coat of arms is simply a lichen. I saw it painted on 
the pines and oaks. Their attics were in the tops of the trees. They 
are of no politics. There was no noise of labor. I did not perceive that 
they were weaving or spinning. Yet I did detect, when the wind 
lulled and hearing was done away, the finest imaginable sweet 
musical hum,—as of a distant hive in May, which perchance was the 
sound of their thinking. They had no idle thoughts, and no one 
without could see their work, for their industry was not as in knots 
and excrescences embayed.6 


Is such a state of affairs possible, or is this all an idle dream? 
Remembering that Chuang-tzu exaggerates to make his points, 
the practical message seems to be that only trouble is made by 
those who strive to improve themselves and the world by forceful 
means. “Ah, Liberty—what crimes are committed in thy name!” 
The idealism of the French, American, and Russian revolutions 
has always, sooner or later, led to excesses of violence which are 
justified as being for the liberation and welfare of the peoples 
molested. 


There has been such a thing as letting mankind alone; there has 
never been such a thing as governing mankind [with success]. 
Letting alone springs from fear lest men’s natural dispositions be 
perverted and their virtue laid aside. But if their natural dispositions 
be not perverted nor their virtue laid aside, what room is there left 
for government?7 [63a] 


When it comes down to it, government is simply an abandonment 
of responsibility on the assumption that there are people, other 
than ourselves, who really know how to manage things. But the 
government, run ostensibly for the good of the people, becomes a 
selfserving corporation. To keep things under control it 
proliferates laws oof ever-increasing complexity and 
unintelligibility, and hinders productive work by demanding so 
much accounting on paper that the record of what has been done 
becomes more important than what has actually been done. 
About this one might go on and on—but in the current anxiety 
concerning overpopulation, pollution, ecological imbalance, and 
the potential disasters of nuclear fission, it is only seldom 
recognized that governed nations have become self-destroying 
institutions paralyzed and bogged in their own complications, and 
suffocated beneath mountains of paper. The Taoist moral is that 
people who mistrust themselves and one another are doomed. 
The further point is that neither an individual nor a society can 
pull itself up by its own bootstraps, even though it is now 


commonly being said that this is precisely what we must do. So 
long as we use force, whether physical or moral, to improve the 
world and ourselves, we are squandering energy that might 
otherwise be used for things which can be done. This is not the 
place to go into all the details of these problems. It is only to say 
that there is basic good sense in the Taoist view that we must 
make the desperate gamble of trusting ourselves and others. 
However, Lao-tzu makes the reservation, in describing his ideal 
community, that “though the people have weapons, they do not 
show them,” since weapons are, up to a point, a natural extension 
of teeth, claws, and shells. The Taoist view of nature was not 
sentimental. It recognized that violence had sometimes to be 
used, but always with regret, for 


The best soldier is not soldierly; 
The best fighter is not ferocious.s [100a] 


In this respect the Confucians and the Taoists were really of 
one mind. For at the head of all virtues Confucius put, not 


—_ 


i — 
righteousness (i #4), but human-heartedness (jen ——=), which is 
not so much benevolence, as often translated, but being fully and 
honestly human—a quality which he refused to define as Lao-tzu 


would not define Tao. 


True manhood requires a great capacity and the road thereto is 
difficult to reach. You cannot lift it by your hands and you cannot 
reach it by walking on foot. He who approaches it to a greater 
degree than others may already be called “a true man.” Now is it 
not a difficult thing for a man to try to reach this standard by sheer 
effort? Therefore, if the gentleman measures men by the absolute 
standard of righteousness [i], then it is difficult to be a real man. But 
if he measures by the standard of man, then the better people will 
have some standard to go by.... 

For a long time it has been difficult to find examples of true men. 
Only the superior man can reach that state. Therefore the superior 
man does not try to criticize people for what he himself fails in, and 
he does not put people to shame for what they fail in.... One who is 
not a true man cannot long stand poverty, nor can he stand 
prosperity for long. A true man is happy and natural in living 
according to the principles of true manhood, but a [merely] wise 
man thinks it is advantageous to do so.... The superior man goes 
through his life without any one preconceived course of action or 
any taboo. He merely decides for the moment what is the right thing 
to do.... The goody-goodies are the thieves of virtue.9 


In other words, a true human* is not a model of righteousness, 


a prig or a prude, but recognizes that some failings are as 
necessary to genuine human nature as salt to stew. Merely 
righteous people are impossible to live with because they have no 
humor, do not allow the true human nature to be, and are 
dangerously unconscious of their own shadows. Like all legalists 
and busybodies, they are trying to put the world on a Procrustean 
bed of linear regulations so that they are unable to make 
reasonable compromises. In warfare they fight to the death for 
unconditional surrender, and, in the name of righteous principle, 
will obliterate a territory which they would be better advised 
simply to capture and enjoy in a selfish, but much less harmful, 
spirit. It is an essential, then, of political wu-wei that one does not 
try to enforce laws against human nature and send people to jail 
for “sins,” or crimes without unwilling victims. Trust in human 
nature is acceptance of the good-and-bad of it, and it is hard to 
trust those who do not admit their own weaknesses. 

For example, let us consider what happened in China when the 
Ch’in Dynasty came to power in —221. Its policies were 
formulated in the western state of Ch’in as early as —360 by the 
Lord Shang. 


All high honors of the state were reserved for the military service 
and for achievements in war. Even the nobles of royal blood must be 
graded anew on the basis of military service. Nobles without 
military distinction were degraded to commoners. The objective is to 
create “a people that looks to warfare as a hungry wolf looks at a 
piece of meat.” “If the only gate to riches and honor is battle, then 
when the people hear that there is war they will congratulate one 
another; at home and in the street, at their eating and drinking, all 
the songs they sing will be of war.” “A ruler who can make the 
people delight in war will become the king of kings.” ... 

To enforce the new laws, the population was organized into small 
groups of five or ten families each, and members of each group were 
required to watch over and report on each other. Successful 
exposure of crime through such spying and reporting was to be 
rewarded on the same scale as killing an enemy on the battlefield. 
Shielding a criminal would be punished with the same penalty as 
surrendering to the enemy in war.10 * 


After the Ch’in state had unified all China by conquest, during the 
period —360 to —221, the Emperor Ch’in Shih Huang Ti went so 
far as to order the burning of all books not related to strictly 
practical crafts, and declared, like Hitler, that he was founding a 
dynasty that would last for a thousand years. But when he died in 
—210 the people rebelled under the leadership of Liu Pang, who 
became the Emperor Han Kao Tsu, founder of the Han Dynasty, 


which endured, with a brief interregnum, for four hundred years 
(—200 to +200). 


When his revolutionary army triumphantly entered the capital, he 
called a mass meeting of the elders of the people and declared to 
them that he knew their long suffering under the tyrannical rule of 
the Ch’in Empire and would abolish all its repressive laws. So he 
proclaimed that “hereafter only three simple laws shall prevail: 
namely, that manslaughter shall be punished by death, and that 
assault and theft shall be justly punished according to the facts of 
each case.” 

This early proclaimed policy to relieve the people from the 
authoritarian rule of too much government was consciously carried 
out by some of the great statesmen of the Han Empire. 

In —201, the second year of the empire, a General Ts’ao, one of 
the great generals of the revolution, was made governor of the 
populous and economically advanced state of Ch’i on the eastern 
coast. He selected an old philosopher to be his chief adviser. This 
old man was a follower of Lao-tzu and told the Governor that the 
best way to govern his great state comprising seventy cities was to 
do nothing and give the people a rest. The Governor religiously 
carried out his advice throughout his nine years of governorship. 
The people became prosperous, and his administration was rated 
the best in the empire. When he was appointed prime minister of the 
empire in —193, he again practiced his philosophy on a national 
scale.11 


When, in —179, the Emperor Wen Ti and his Taoist Empress Tou 
ascended the throne, they abolished collective family 
responsibility for crime, punishment by bodily mutilation, and 
taxes on interstate commerce. They reduced land taxes to a mere 
thirtieth of the produce, and tried as best they could to avoid 
warfare on the borders of the empire. Empress Tou persuaded the 
whole court to read Lao-tzu, and her advice might well be 
followed by the present potentates of China, Russia, and the 
United States of America. 


The more restrictions and avoidances are in the empire, 
the poorer become the people. 

The more sharp implements the people keep, 

the more confusions are in the country. 

The more arts and crafts men have, 

the more are frivolous things produced. 

The more laws and regulations are given, 

the more robbers and thieves there are.12 [100b] 


The question now arises whether wu-wei and following of the 
Tao can be cultivated intentionally by some spiritual or 


f _ 
sychological discipline such as_ yoga or _ ts’o-ch’an i 
(apanese, za-zen). Practices of this kind have been in general use 
among what Creel has termed the Hsien Taoists, discussed at 
more length in the next chapter. Probably under the influence of 
Buddhism and other Indian disciplines, these Taoists interested 
themselves in breath control, sexual yoga, alchemy, and medicine 
for the purpose of attaining immortality, and established a Taoist 
church with ordained priests and monasteries. But neither Lao- 
tzu nor Chuang-tzu had any interest in immortality, and what, if 
anything, they had to say about formal meditation and the 
acquisition of psychic powers is minimal. 


The True men of old knew nothing of the love of life or of the hatred 
of death. Entrance into life occasioned them no joy; the exit from it 
awakened no resistance. Composedly they went and came. They did 
not forget what their beginning had been, and they did not inquire 
into what their end would be. They accepted (their life) and rejoiced 
in it; they forgot (all fear of death), and returned (to their state 
before life). Thus there was in them the want of any mind to resist 
the Tao, and of all attempts by means of the Human to resist the 
Heavenly.13 [68a] 


So far from using any artifice or method to attain spiritual 
power or to control or rise above the transformations of life and 
death, Chuang-tzu seems to exult in just going along with the 
process. 


You have had the nerve to be born human, and you are delighted. 
But this body undergoes myriads of changes that never come to an 
end, and does it not thus afford occasion for joys incalculable? 
Therefore the sage enjoys himself in that from which there is no 
possibility of separation, and by which all things are preserved. He 
considers early death or old age, his beginning and his ending, all to 
be good, and in this other men imitate him. How much more will 
they do so in regard to that [Tao] on which all things depend, and 
from which every transformation arises!14 [68b] 


In other words, what is ordinarily felt as the wayward, 
unpredictable, dangerous, and even hostile world—including 
one’s Capricious emotions and inner feelings—is actually one’s 
own being and doing. The very sense that this is not so is, in turn, 
part of its being so. Thus from the standpoint of early, 
Contemplative Taoism (Creel’s term) any deliberate exercise to 
cultivate wu-wei would seem to be self-contradictory. In Chuang- 
tzu’s own metaphor, it would be “beating a drum in search of a 
fugitive,” or, as the Ch’an Buddhists said later, “putting legs on a 


snake.” In line with Lao-tzu (ch. 38) one might say, “Superior wu- 
wei does not aim at wu-wei and so it truly is wu-wei.” 
Understanding it is a matter of getting the point intuitively, not a 
result of some discipline. In the same way, it does not take any 
schooling to understand the trick of representing a_ third 
dimension by lines drawn in perspective; it simply has to be 
pointed out, and then the experience of depth in the picture is not 
just verbal comprehension but actual vision. 

What, then, are we to make of the venerable tradition of 
meditative exercises in Hinduism, Buddhism, Hsien Taoism, and 
Islamic Sufiism which make cosmic consciousness or supernormal 
powers their ostensible goal? If we go ahead to the early Ch’an 
writings of the T’ang Dynasty (+618 to +906), remembering that 
Ch’an was then a fusion of Taoism and Buddhism, there can, I 
think, be no question that such early Ch’an teachers as Seng- 
ts’an, Hui-neng, Shen-hui, Ma-tsu, and even Lin-chi not only laid 
no stress on meditative exercises but often dismissed them as 
irrelevant. Their entire emphasis was upon immediate intuitive 
insight resulting from the teacher’s “direct pointing” (chih-chih 


45, in question-and-answer interviews called wen-ta fej & by 
means of which one who had seen into the truth of things simply 


pointed it out to one who had not—often by nonverbal means, by 
demonstration rather than explanation.15 It was for this reason 
that Hui-neng, the Sixth Patriarch of Ch’an Buddhism (d. +713), 
called his method “the sudden school,” now derided by crypto- 
Protestant Buddhists as “instant Zen” (like instant coffee)—as if 
the value of an inspiration or intuition must be judged by the 
merely quantitative standard of the time and energy spent in 
preparation for it. How long does it take a child to know that fire 
is hot? 

On the other hand, those who understand the Tao delight, like 
cats, in just sitting and watching without any goal or result in 
mind. But when a cat gets tired of sitting, it gets up and goes for 
a walk or hunts for mice. It does not punish itself or compete with 
other cats in an endurance test as to how long it can remain 
immovable—unless there is some real reason for being still, such 
as catching a bird. Contemplative Taoists will happily sit with 
yogis and Zennists for as long as is reasonable and comfortable, 
but when nature tells us that we are “pushing the river” we will 
get up and do something else, or even go to sleep. More than this 
is certainly spiritual pride. Taoists do not look upon meditation as 
“practice,” except in the sense that a doctor “practices” medicine. 
They have no design to subjugate or alter the universe by force or 
willpower, for their art is entirely to go along with the flow of 


things in an intelligent way. Meditation or contemplation (kuan 
E 


if, develops this intelligence as a by-product, not as a direct 
objective. The objective or good of contemplation is only that, 


during a long night, 


The sound of the water 
says what I think. 


His mind is free from all thoughts. His demeanor is still and silent. 
His forehead beams with simplicity. He is cold as autumn, and warm 
as spring, for his joy and anger occur as naturally as the four 
seasons.16 [69b] 


Yet it must also be clear that wu-wei is not intentional caprice, 
as when people go out of their way to do whatever is bizarre or 
unconventional, following convention as slavishly as any square— 
as their guide for doing its opposite. This was a common 
misinterpretation of Taoism and Zen when they first became 
popular among young people in the West. Thus, in fact, 
Contemplative Taoists do sit in meditation, but not with the 
egoistic purpose of improving themselves; it is rather that, having 
understood intuitively that there is no way to go except the way of 
the Tao “they make excursion into that which things cannot 
escape” (Chuang-tzu 6) and meditate for the joy of meditation— 
the flow of breath, the sound of roosters in the distance, the light 
on the floor, the susurrus of the wind, the stillness, and, alas, all 
those things which militant activists of both West and East have, 
with their frantic purposiveness, learned to disdain. This is the 
yin aspect of the Taoist life, and thus does not exclude—when it 
becomes timely—the yang aspect of delighting in vigor, so that 


the t’ai chi chuan ie discipline of bodily movement, flowing 
and swinging, is as much appreciated as sitting in meditation. 17 
That Chuang-tzu pointed out the intuitive way of understanding 
the Tao without resorting to the artificiality of “spiritual 
exercises,” is stressed by his critic Ko Hung (c. —300), a Hsien 
Taoist, who termed Chuang-tzu’s way as nothing but “pure 
: ae 
conversation” (ch’ing t’an # oA), or what his modern 
counterparts might call “mere intellectualization” or nothing but 
a “head trip.” Chuang-tzu, he wrote, “says that life and death are 
just the same, brands the effort to preserve life as laborious 


servitude, and praises death as a rest; this doctrine is separated 


by millions of miles from that of shen hsien ry fy [holy 
immortals].”18 


The nearest that Chuang-tzu comes to outlining a method of 
attaining the Tao is put into the mouth of a sage named Nu Chu, 
presumably a woman: 


There was Pu Liang I, who had the genius of a sage, but not the Tao. 
I have the Tao, but not the genius. [This surely must be a woman 
talking.] I wished to teach him, so that he might really become a 
sage. To teach the Tao of a sage to a man who has the genius, seems 
to be an easy matter. But no, I kept on telling him; after three days, 
he began to be able to disregard all worldly matters [i.e., anxieties 
about status or gain and loss]. After his having disregarded all 
worldly matters, I kept on telling him; after seven days, he began to 
be able to disregard all external things [as being separate entities]. 
After his having disregarded all external things, I kept on telling 
him; after nine days, he began to be able to disregard his own 
existence [as an ego]. Having disregarded his own existence, he was 
enlightened. Having become enlightened, he then was able to gain 
the vision of the One. Having the vision of the One, he was then able 
to transcend the distinction of past and present. Having transcended 
the distinction of past and present, he was then able to enter the 
realm where life and death are no more. Then, to him, the 
destruction of life did not mean death, nor the prolongation of life an 
addition to the duration of his existence. He would follow anything; 
he would receive anything. To him, everything was in destruction, 
everything was in construction. This is called tranquillity in 
disturbance. Tranquillity in disturbance means perfection.19 [70- 
69a] 


There is a parallel passage in Lieh-tzu where, however, the days 
are increased to years and the teacher says nothing at all, telling 
us how Lieh-tzu learned to ride on the wind, or as we would say, 
walk on air. 


At the end of seven years, there was another change. I let my mind 
reflect on what it would, but it no longer occupied itself with right 
and wrong. I let my lips utter whatsoever they pleased, but they no 
longer spoke of profit and loss. ... At the end of nine years, my mind 
gave free rein to its reflections, my mouth free passage to its 
speech. Of right and wrong, profit and loss, I had no knowledge, 
either as touching myself or others.... Internal and External were 
blended into Unity. After that, there was no distinction between eye 
and ear, ear and nose, nose and mouth: all were the same. My mind 
was frozen, my body in dissolution, my flesh and bones all melted 
together. I was wholly unconscious of what my body was resting on, 
or what was under my feet. I was borne this way and that on the 
wind, like dry chaff or leaves falling from a tree. In fact, I knew not 
whether the wind was riding on me or I on the wind.20 


These passages suggest that wu-wei is an almost dreamlike 


state of consciousness—floating—so that the physical world lacks 
the hard reality normally present to common sense. 


Once upon a time I, Chuang-chou, dreamed that I was a butterfly, a 
butterfly flying about, enjoying itself. I did not know that it was 
Chuang-chou. Suddenly I awoke, and veritably was Chuang-chou 
again. But I do not know whether it was I dreaming that I was a 
butterfly, or whether I am a butterfly dreaming that I am Chuang- 
chou.21 [72b] 


And again: 


How do I know that the love of life is not a delusion? How do I know 
that he who is afraid of death is not like a man who was away from 
his home when young and therefore has no intention to return? ... 
How do I know that the dead will not repent of their former craving 
for life? Those who dream of a banquet at night may in the next 
morning wail and weep. Those who dream of wailing and weeping 
may in the morning go out to hunt. When they dream, they do not 
know that they are dreaming. In their dream, they may even 
interpret dreams. Only when they are awake, they begin to know 
that they dreamed. By and by comes the great awakening, and then 
we Shall find out that life itself is a great dream. All the while, the 
fools think that they are awake; that they know. With nice 
discriminations, they make distinctions between princes and 
grooms. How stupid! Confucius and you are both in a dream. When I 
say that you are in a dream, I am also in a dream.22 [71a] 


The sense that the world is dreamlike, found also in Hinduism 
and Buddhism, comes mainly from noting its transience rather 
than from speculations about knowledge and truth, epistemology 
and ontology, although these come in later. Especially as one 
grows older, it becomes ever more obvious that things are 
without substance, for time seems to go by more rapidly so that 
one becomes aware of the liquidity of solids; people and things 
become like lights and ripples on the surface of water. We can 
make fast-motion films of the growth of plants and flowers in 
which they seem to come and go like gestures of the earth. If we 
could film civilizations and cities, mountains and stars, in the 
same way, we would see them as frost crystals forming and 
dissolving and as sparks on the back of a fireplace. The faster the 
tempo, the more it would appear that we were watching, not so 
much a_ succession of things, as the movement and 
transformations of one thing—as we see waves on the ocean or 
the movements of a dancer. In a similar way, what appears 
through a microscope to be a mass of plastic lumps bristling with 
spines is, to the naked eye, the clear skin of a girl. Put very 


crudely, mysticism is the apprehension of one thing doing 
everything. Taoists put it more subtly so that “doing” does not 
have the sense of one thing, the Tao, forcing and compelling 
others. 

Generally speaking, the philosophies of the modern West do not 
take kindly to this dreamlike view of things, perhaps because of 
the feeling that if we are dreams we are not important, and that if 
we are not important there is no need to pay each other respect. 
We have all heard the cliché that human life is cheap in China. Of 
course, because there is too much of it; and we ourselves are 
becoming callous as populations multiply and the news media 
accustom us to the statistics of immense slaughters. No one, 
however, has demonstrated any necessary relation between 
people’s metaphysical views or religious beliefs and their moral 
behavior. People who are important can become too important, 
and thus nuisances to be done away with; and it should be 
remembered that the tortures and burnings of the Holy 
Inquisition were committed with deep concern for the fate of 
heretics’ immortal souls. 

Often it seems that pain is our measure of reality, for I am not 
aware that there is ever physical pain in dreams apart from some 
actual physiological reason. It is thus a common joke that 
believers in the unreality of matter have difficulty in convincing 
anyone of the unreality of pain. 


There was a faith-healer of Deal, 
Who said, “Although pain is not real, 
When the point of a pin 
Goes into my skin, 
I dislike what I fancy I feel.” 


Yet the human body contains so much empty space that its 
ponderable elements could be condensed to the size of that very 
pinpoint, for its apparent solidity is an illusion arising from the 
rapid motion of its atomic components—as when a spinning 
propeller seems to become an impenetrable disk. Perhaps pain is 
a form of “conditioning,” since we know that the type of 
conditioning called hypnosis can be an extraordinary and 
selective anaesthetic. 

However, let us try to imagine a universe, a realm of 
experience or a field of consciousness, lacking any extreme which 
could be called pain or the horrors. Although a fortunate person 
may pass days, months, and years in most pleasant and 
comfortable circumstances, there is always an apprehension, a 
thought in the back of the mind, that pain in some form is at least 


possible. It lurks around the corner, and he knows that he is 
fortunate because, all about him, there are those who suffer. All 
experience, all awareness, seems to be of varied spectra of 
vibrations so ordered that their extremes, like yin and yang, must 
in some way go together. If we cut a bar magnet in halves, so as 
to take off its north pole, we find only that each half has now 
north and south poles as before. Thus a universe without the 
polarity of pleasure and pain would be difficult indeed to imagine. 
In many societies we have gone a long way towards getting rid of 
such monstrosities as legal torture and, by medical means, of the 
pains of disease and surgery. Yet new dreads seem to take their 
place, and there is always the specter of death in the background. 

If, then, we go deep into the very nature of feeling, we begin to 
see that we do not, and even cannot, want a universe without this 
polarity. In other words, so long as we desire the experience 
called pleasure we imply, and so generate, its opposite. Therefore 
Buddhists and Taoists alike speak of the sage as one who has no 
desires, though the latter also speak of him as one whose “joy and 
anger occur as naturally as the four seasons,” and here may lie a 
clue to the problem. For is it even possible not to desire? Trying 
to get rid of desire is, surely, desiring not to desire.23 Any project 
to suppress desire would obviously be contrary to the spirit of wu- 
wei, and implies that “I” am some separate potency which can 
either subdue desire or be subdued by it. Wu-wei is to roll with 
experiences and feelings as they come and go, like a ball in a 
mountain stream, though actually there is no ball apart from the 
convolutions and wiggles of the stream itself. This is called 
“flowing with the moment,” though it can happen only when it is 
clear that there is nothing else to do, since there is no experience 
which is not now. This now-streaming (nunc fluens) is the Tao 
itself, and when this is clear innumerable problems vanish. For so 
long as there is the notion of ourselves as something different 
from the Tao, all kinds of tensions build up as between “me” on 
the one hand, and “experiences” on the other. No action, no force 
(wei) will get rid of this tension arising from the duality of the 
knower and the known, just as one cannot blow away the night. 
Light, or intuitive understanding, alone will dissipate the 
darkness. As with the ball in the stream, there is no resistance to 
the up when now going up, and no resistance to the down when 
now going down. To resist is to get seasick. 


A drunken man who falls out of a cart, though he may suffer, does 
not die. His bones are the same as other people’s; but he meets the 
accident in a different way. His spirit is in a condition of security. He 
is not conscious of riding in the cart; neither is he conscious of 


falling out of it. Ideas of life, death, and fear cannot penetrate his 
breast; and so he does not suffer from contact with objective 
existences. And if such security is to be got from wine, how much 
more is it to be got from Spontaneity.24 [67b] 


That was one of Chuang-tzu’s charming exaggerations which 
he clarifies at other points, as when he distinguishes between wu- 
wei and holding to the mean, the middle road. 


But halfway between worth and worthlessness, though it might 
seem to be a good place, really isn’t—you’ll never get away from 
trouble there. It would be very different, though, if you were to 
climb up on the Way and its Virtue and go drifting and wandering, 
neither praised nor damned, now a dragon, now a snake, shifting 
with the times, never willing to hold to one course only. Now up, 
now down, taking harmony for your measure, drifting and 
wandering with the ancestor of the ten thousand things, treating 
things as things but not letting them treat you as a thing—then how 
could you get into any trouble?25 [60a] 


Later in the chapter he returns to the same theme: 


Mark what I say! In the case of the body, it is best to let it go along 
with things. In the case of the emotions, it is best to let them follow 
where they will. By going along with things, you avoid becoming 
separated from them. By letting the emotions follow as they will, you 
avoid fatigue.26 [60b] 


But it is worth re-emphasizing the principle that “you” cannot go 
along with “things” unless there is the understanding that there 
is, in truth, no alternative since you and the things are the same 
process—the now-streaming Tao. The feeling that there is a 
difference is also that process. There is nothing to do about it. 
There is nothing not to do about it. There is only the stream and 
its myriad convolutions—waves, bubbles, spray, whirlpools, and 
eddies—and you are that. 

One would like to leave it at that—except that such a statement 
evokes, in many minds, a tumult of questions. Instead of 
experiencing the now-streaming—which would make everything 
clear—they want all kinds of preliminary guarantees that it will 
be safe and profitable to do so, as to whether this understanding 
“works” as a philosophy of life. Of course it does, and very 
effectively, but if one follows it for that reason, one will not be 
following it But if there is the understanding, the power or virtue 


of te 1%; arises spontaneously, or, as Christians say, by divine 
grace as distinct from will-power. In realizing that you are the 


is something to which no one should lay claim. As Lao-tzu says of 
the Tao itself, “When good things are accomplished, it does not 


Tao, you automatically manifest its magic—but magic, as a grace, 
claim (or, name) them.” 


hese Sp Aye 15 SK WASH aye 15 Hehe SE Sa nee rae 
ae ye ¥5 S\onke SS ay Ye 2 
we Blof BEL yegQay Yr | wd Je roma Be OP wad $B ae wt on i 
APE NE be ~< orn et Sa BE AE 


A¥ LY SO-y OE A TO AREY AF rite nae Aaa 


FH TSO BAGS y Copley ged SS 
FEVE Wey | aya oA ay) Ee a He aK 
WF ASS HS HP 50 °F mH FT BOY 
Kova) mitige teases jeadye 40K 7 mA BI ny FE 5= Fad F 
BRD -G 5S 4ph val Bs Bs oa peg wd E 

AKER wit BE ee BR 5 BER AS Pau) eS ng 
ve) Ze 2 eay= wmode ~< Bape ry SR 9S Any re) va BIAS FO eS 9 EE 
wb Ly pe ak 2 st = 3 


wh kos iad 7S 98 BW NSA omy F 


ry AAS eR 

Oe aS gt KY PEAKS ny wher age ys ate 
PI A YORE HE V5 OY 30a eh ry 
ARAM cy 7 

PDA AYO IF my 94350 F 

3 ROR RS ny Oe IT 
ARS WS es EE 9d ne) a Spal 
AH AP FS Be ashen ge BOny red 
PRA OD ery Ae ne Goong Was 
rerwhen a5 wrtks AS Ee AS ahd ny 20 
ADVE PAAR Ss rtd F 


MDL MP ALE eh G92 7 
aye I RE ORE ee F 

nh ne 9 Xe ry SEQe meni ry Bt at 
eh ee TRE we Ap avespedst Tape s- 
BES © Heke al oF shane K aE ny hs 
Spary wl Speaph Bry Soi 

Apres AEnhe MOR Ff Vinee 
id ry SOMA BFA OD E 


Ty WI RE TE etary Ar PbO E 


MY SS GS TAB be ee wlabe TF pss 
ye ry BM ataese eri 


mK Ay YUE RR A ad oy ost 


WP mofasG o§ w= 94 Heth w= 
9% -P2 Hh ek FS SAPO AE re 
ead SS ab oh oh eherh oof acd F 
DP os) Rake ne) 7 

KBD) FD A Pa ae xO By 5G 
SAE Ra vd meget od? 
XE ¥} WOE 

Je PE RIK M aNAR Aah oe 
ow) >4 oe BE OP Nery 25d J 
EB ve 9 a ver anetrhay B na) 7 


ayy 
RRA YT 
are BE OP to Bil od ad 
emer 3S v5 aE 
WAV Be ony WO oecs aah vant 1 Boe A 
orks ny 5G whe BE SS sehe we) Bh em neds SS eh 
#5 a8 RE ad a AE ak 8 A he 
ate Sy Rez i 
oh + Ray ) AR IRE Ie AY SOs ny Se 
TR DO BIALO Re esd -y EES 
ES Fat pgm Qanyany EAL 
Sey FT awQaR poy F woe f 


NOTE 


The calligraphy on pages 56-73 and 99-104 was written by Lee 
Chih-chang at the request of Alan Watts. It reproduces in Chinese 
the most important quotations from the early philosophers that 
appear in this book. 

Although the calligraphic pages are numbered in the English 
order, from front to back, the calligraphy itself follows the 
Chinese order and reads from back to front, from right to left on 
the page, and vertically down the columns. The number that 
follows the identifying letter in brackets at the end of each 
quotation refers the reader to the page on which the English 
translation of that quotation can be found. For example, quotation 
b on facing page 104 appears in English translation on page 22, 
where it is identified by the number 104b in brackets. 

Pages 56-73 contain mostly selections from the works of 
Chuang-tzu; pages 99-104, quotations from Lao-tzu. The 
arrangement of these passages on the calligraphic pages does not 
necessarily correspond to the order of their appearance in the 
English text. 


1 Lao-tzu 37, tr. auct. 

2 Lun-yu 15.4, tr. Creel (1), p. 58. 

3 Concerning whom see Creel (1), pp. 61 ff. 

4 Lao-tzu 80, tr. Ch’u Ta-kao (1), p. 95, mod. auct. Cf. Chuang-tzu 10. 

5 Chuang-tzu 12, tr. H. A. Giles (1), pp. 151-53, mod. auct. For “They act freely 
... to anyone,” Watson (1) gives, “They wriggle around like insects, performing 
services for one another, but do not know that they are being kind.” 

6 Thoreau (1), pp. 628-29. 

7 Chuang-tzu 11, tr. H. A. Giles (1), p. 119. 

8 Lao-tzu 68, tr. Ch’u Ta-kao (1), p. 83. 

9 Li Chi 32, tr. Lin Yutang (2), pp. 830-35. 

* Note that in the quotation above, the use of such terms as “manhood,” 
“gentleman,” “a true man,” “superior man” is in the tradition in which “man” 
denotes human beings of both sexes. In Chinese, the word jen =. s human beings, 
has no gender differentiation. In the future, I propose that all translators of 
Chinese use the word “human” when speaking of man in this sense. After all, we 


4 


do not translate the Confucian word jen !== as “man-heartedness,” but rather as 
“human-heartedness.” 


10 Hu Shih, p. 43. 

* One of the least spontaneous chores in finishing this book has been the 
tracking down of titles and page numbers of the sources of Alan’s quotations. He 
never kept account of where and how he found them, at least not on paper. I am 
grateful to many scholar friends and resourceful librarians who, during the past 
months, have helped me locate all of them except one. I have decided to let this 


one go, simply to show that the circle with the open end is generally more real 
and less sterile. Hu Shih wrote so many different versions of this same historical 
account in both Chinese and English, and Alan had probably come upon it in the 
most obscure place—or the most obvious. So far, we have not been able to find it 
in any of Hu Shih’s books that are available in English, or to trace it to any of the 
articles he contributed to various books and journals on Chinese culture. We do 
know that he wrote it. All Hu Shih specialists will know where to find it. The 
others probably couldn’t care less. 

In my grade-school days, I was once presented to Hu Shih by my father, who 
knew and admired him. I remember Hu patting me on the head approvingly when 
I proudly recited by memory a paragraph from his writing, which we were 
currently studying in our Chinese literature class. Thank you, Uncle Hu, for your 
contribution to this book. 

11 Ibid., pp. 44-45. 

12 Lao-tzu 57, tr. Ch’u Ta-kao (1), p. 72, mod. auct. “Frivolous things” are the 
kind of objects to be found on sale in “gift shops.” 

13 Chuang-tzu 6, tr. Legge (1), p. 286. 

14 Ibid., p. 291, mod. auct. 

15 In making this point I realize that vis-d-vis modern Ch’an (Zen) 
disciplinarians of the “aching legs” brand of Buddhism, I am a deplorable heretic, 
since for them za-zen (sitting Zen) and sesshin (long periods of it) are the sine qua 
non of awakening (or enlightenment) according to their school. I have been 
sharply reprimanded for this opinion in Kapleau (1), pp. 21-22, 83-84, although 
the only text he quotes from early Zen literature in refutation is from the Huang- 
po Tuan-chi Ch’an-shih Wang-ling Lu (before +850): “When you practice mind- 
control [ts’o-ch’an], sit in the proper position, stay perfectly tranquil, and do not 
permit the least movement of your minds to disturb you” (tr. Blofeld [1], p. 131). 
Considering the vast emphasis laid on za-zen in later times, it is strange that this 
is all Huang-po has to say about it. The reader interested in the roots of this 
matter has only to consult Hui-neng’s T’an-ching (tr. Chan Wing-tsit [1] or 
Yampolsky [1], esp. sec. 19), or the Shen-hui Ho-chang I-chi (tr. Gernet [1], esp. 
sec. 1.111), or Ma-tsu in Ku-tsun-hsu Yu-lu (tr. Watts [1], p. 110). For later 
discussions see Fung Yu-lan (1), vol. 2, pp. 393-406, and Hu Shih. All this evidence 
corroborates the view that the T’ang masters of Ch’an deplored the use of 


meditation ey as a means to the attainment of true insight (wu t% or 


Japanese satori oo I_ had further confirmation of this view in private 
discussions with D. T. Suzuki and R. H. Blyth, both of whom regarded compulsive 


“aching legs” za-zen as a superstitious fetish of modern Zen practice. 

16 Chuang-tzu 6, tr. Fung Yu-lan (3), p. 113, mod. auct. 

17 It is hard to think of a Western equivalent of t’ai chi chuan. Part dance, part 
physical exercise, and part slow-motion combat, it is nevertheless none of these, 
but rather, “T’ai chi exemplifies the most subtle principle of Taoism, known as wu- 
wei ... to act without forcing—to move in accordance with the flow of nature’s 
course ... and is best understood from watching the dynamics of water” (Huang 
[1], p. 2). 

18 Creel (1), p. 22. 

19 Chuang-tzu 6, tr. Fung Yu-lan (3), pp. 119-20. 

20 Lieh-tzu 2, tr. L. Giles (1), pp. 40-42. It seems that Lieh-tzu is giving physical 
metaphors for psychological states, and thus that riding on the wind, mind frozen, 
and body dissolved must not be understood literally. 

21 Chuang-tzu 2 ad fin., tr. Fung Yu-lan (3), p. 64, mod. auct. 

22 Chuang-tzu 2, tr. Fung Yu-lan (3), pp. 61-62. 

23 As, of course, the Buddhists very soon found out. It is not usually understood 


that Buddhism is not so much a doctrine as a dialogue which goes along with a 
series of experiments. The Buddha did not “teach,” as some sort of dogma, that 
the cure for suffering is the elimination of desire (trishna). He simply suggested it 
as a preliminary experiment, which would, of course and as he surely intended, 
lead people to see that they were desiring not to desire, and thus involved in a 
vicious circle. 

24 Chuang-tzu 19, tr. H. A. Giles (1), p. 232, mod. auct. 

25 Chuang-tzu 20, tr. Watson (1), pp. 209-10. 

26 Ibid., p. 216. 


5. Te—Virtuality 


AS IT IS SAID the the ribed is not the real Tao, so one 


irtuality) as either contrived or 


prescubed is not genuingf @gg li. Let us remind ourselves that 
aoism is based on the rgfo ion that the world as described is 
included in but is not t Ye the world as it is. As a way of 
contemplation, it is be are of life without thinking about it, 
and then carrying this while one is thinking, so that 
thoughts are not confuse nature. This sounds contradictory 
until one has experienced if as by following the suggestions at 
the end of the second chapter. 

Te is the realization or expression of the Tao in actual living, 
but this is not virtue in the sense of moral rectitude. It is rather 
as when we speak of the healing virtues of a plant, having the 
connotation of power or even magic, when magic refers to 
wonderful and felicitous events which come about spontaneously. 
In theistic terms, te is what happens “by the grace of God” as 
distinct from human striving, though without the implication of 
any supernatural intervention in the course of nature. We might 
call it “virtuality” as the word was used by William Caxton to 
mean the possession of force or power, or as when Sir Thomas 
Browne said that “in one graine of corne there lyeth dormant the 
virtuality of many other, and from thence sometimes proceed an 
hundred eares.” Te is thus already present in the “miraculous” 
fruition of plants, the formation of eyes and ears, the circulation 
of blood, and the reticulation of nerves—since all this comes 
about without conscious direction. Cultures which limit the 
definition of “self” to the faculty of conscious attention therefore 
attribute these workings to an external God, or to “unconscious 
mechanisms” (dei ex machina). 

But for the Taoists there is more to te than our ordinary natural 
functioning, even though “ordinary mind [hsin '“4] is the Tao.” 
Te is also the unusual and thus remarkable naturalness of the 
sage—his unself-conscious and uncontrived skill in handling 


| fe 
might say that{te Ms" 


social and practical affairs, which John Lilly calls “coincidence 
control.” 


Superior virtue [te] is not (intentionally) virtuous, 
and thus is virtue. 

Inferior virtue does not let go of being virtuous, 
and thus is not virtue. 

Superior virtue uses no force, 
but nothing is left undone. 

Inferior virtue uses force, 
but achieves nothing.1 [100c] 


But te often goes unnoticed because of its apparent ordinariness, 
as if it involved a sort of spiritual camouflage or anonymity like 
the unintentional protective coloring of a bird or moth. 


The greatest perfection seems imperfect; 

Yet its use will last without decay. 

The greatest fullness seems empty; 

Yet its use cannot be exhausted. 

The greatest straightness seems crooked; 

The greatest dexterity seems awkward; 

The greatest eloquence seems stammering.2 [100d] 


And so also: 


The best soldier is not soldierly; 

The best fighter is not ferocious; 

The best conqueror does not take part in war; 

The best employer of men keeps himself below them.3 
[99a] 


This, however, is not deliberate self-effacement, not punishment 
of oneself, and not assumed humility in the presence of That 
which is greater than ourselves. It is more like the innocent 
practicality of a cat—though “knowing,” in that the sage is well 
aware of the artificialities of the world of men. 

One could say that te is natural virtue, based on inner feeling, 
as distinct from artificial virtue, based on a following of rules— 
but doesn’t this raise an artificial distinction between the natural 
and the artificial? Perhaps such a distinction does not exist 
fundamentally, since “the Tao is that from which nothing can 
deviate.” But those who do not realize this try to harmonize 
themselves with the Tao by attempting to state the principles of 
nature in words, and then to follow them as if they were laws. So 
Lao-tzu continues his chapter on te: 


- _ 
(Even) the best will in the world [jen ‘!=*], when forced, 
achieves nothing. 


The best righteousness, when forced, 
achieves nothing. 

The best good-form, when forced, 
does not come out right, 

and so, as ever, mere “elbow-grease” is used 
to enforce law.4 [99b] 


Te is thus the natural miracle of one who seems born to be wise 
and humane, comparable to what we call “perfect specimens” of 
flowers, trees, or butterflies—though sometimes our notions of 
the perfect specimen are too formal. Thus Chuang-tzu enlarges 
on the extraordinary virtue of being a hunchback, and goes on to 
suggest that being weird in mind may be even more 
advantageous than being weird in body. He compares the 
hunchback to a vast tree which has grown to a great old age by 
virtue of being useless for human purposes because its leaves are 
inedible and its branches twisted and pithy.5 Formally healthy and 
upright humans are conscripted as soldiers, and straight and 
strong trees are cut down for lumber; wherefore the sage gets by 
with a perfect appearance of imperfection, such as we see in the 
gnarled pines and craggy hills of Chinese painting. 

Many passages in Taoist literature illustrate te in terms of 
various skills—of the carpenter, butcher, wheelwright, boatman, 
and so forth. 


Ch’ui the artisan could draw circles with his hand better than with 
compasses. His fingers seemed to accommodate themselves so 
naturally to the thing he was working at, that it was unnecessary to 
fix his attention. His mental faculties thus remained one, and 
suffered no hindrance.« [66a] 


Those who cannot make perfect without arc, line, compasses, and 
square, injure the natural constitution of things. Those who require 
cords to bind and glue to stick, interfere with the natural functions 
of things. And those who seek to satisfy the mind of man by fussing 
with ceremonies and music and preaching charity and duty to one’s 
neighbor, thereby destroy the intrinsic nature of things. For there is 
such an intrinsic nature in things, in this sense:—Things which are 
curved require no arcs; things which are straight require no lines; 
things which are round require no compasses; things which are 
rectangular require no squares; things which stick require no glue; 
things which hold together require no cords.7 [57a] 


In this way old-fashioned Japanese carpenters use no blueprints 
and judge everything by eye, putting together marvelous pieces 


of joinery without nails or glue. But the art is being lost because 
their children, who should begin studying the craft at least by the 
time they are seven years old, must instead be sent to school to 
learn bureaucracy and business. 


Ch’ing, the chief carpenter, was carving wood into a stand for 
hanging musical instruments. When finished, the work appeared to 
those who saw it as though of supernatural execution. And the 
prince of Lu asked him, saying, “What mystery is there in your art?” 

“No mystery, your Highness,” replied Ch’ing; “and yet there is 
something. When I am about to make such a stand, I guard against 
any diminution of my vital power. I first reduce my mind to absolute 
quiescence. Three days in this condition, and I become oblivious of 
any reward to be gained. Five days, and I become oblivious of any 
fame to be acquired. Seven days, and I become unconscious of my 
four limbs and my physical frame. Then, with no thought of the 
Court present in my mind, my skill becomes concentrated, and all 
disturbing elements from without are gone. I enter some mountain 
forest. I search for a suitable tree. It contains the form required, 
which is afterwards elaborated. I see the stand in my mind’s eye, 
and then set to work. Otherwise, there is nothing. I bring my own 
natural capacity into relation with that of the wood. What was 
suspected to be of supernatural execution in my work was due solely 
to this.”s [65a] 


Remembering that Chuang-tzu puts his own words into the 
mouth of Confucius, there is this about the skill of the boatman: 


Yen Yuan said to Confucius, “When I crossed over the Shang-shen 
rapid, the boatman managed his craft with marvellous skill. I asked 
him if handling a boat could be learnt. ‘It can,’ replied he. ‘The way 
of those who know how to keep you afloat is more like sinking you. 
They row as if the boat wasn’t there.’ I enquired what this meant, 
but he would not tell me. May I ask its signification?” 

“It means,” answered Confucius, “that such a man is oblivious of 
the water around him. He regards the rapid as though dry land. He 
looks upon an upset as an ordinary cart accident. And if a man can 
but be impervious to capsizings and accidents in general, whither 
should he not be able comfortably to go?”9 [66b] 


But the expert cannot always explain the secret of his craft, and 
even when, in the Chuang-tzu writings, he does explain, the 
explanation is always somewhat elusive. Here is the wheel-wright 
speaking: 


In making a wheel, if you work too slowly, you can’t make it firm; if 
you work too fast, the spokes won’t fit in. You must go neither too 
slowly nor too fast. There must be co-ordination of mind and hand. 


Words cannot explain what it is, but there is some mysterious art 
herein. I cannot teach it to my son; nor can he learn it from me. 
Consequently, though seventy years of age, I am still making wheels 
in my old age.1o [59b] 


But there is the irresistible temptation in us to find out how, 
which is to learn the secret by a linear, step-by-step method, or to 
be told in words. How is it that people ask for, say, dancing to be 
explained to them, instead of just watching and following? Why is 
there formal instruction to teach something so natural as 
swimming? Why do human beings have to read books to 
understand copulation? The mythologies of many cultures 
contain, in varying ways, the theme that man has fallen from 
grace and has had to replace it with technology. 


When the great Tao was lost, 

there came (ideas of) humanity and justice. 

When knowledge and cleverness arrived, 

there came great deceptions. 

When familial relations went out of harmony, 

there came (ideas of) good parents and loyal children. 
When the nation fell into disorder and misrule, 

there came (ideas of) loyal ministers.11 [99c] 


The organization of the physical organism is far more complex 
than that of any political or commercial corporation, and yet it 
works with a minimum of conscious control. The circuits of brain 
and nerve are more subtle than any computer system, and we 
hardly know how we grew them. But when history began we put 
on clothes, picked up tools, and learned how to speak and think. 
In the words of Lancelot Whyte: 


Thought is born of failure. When action satisfies there is no residue 
to hold the attention; to think is to confess a lack of adjustment 
which we must stop to consider. Only when the human organism 
fails to achieve an adequate response to its situation is there 
material for the processes of thought, and the greater the failure the 
more searching they become.... Confucius is the first clear example 
of a man in this situation. Concerned at the disintegration of 
primitive Chinese civilization, he sought to restore order by relying 
on the power of ideas to organize behavior. He was aware of what 
he was trying to do: society was to be set right by calling everything 
by its right name, or as he put it, by the “rectification of names” 


[cheng ming JE. #2).12 


The Taoists saw the “rectification of names” as a vicious circle, 
for with what names are the right names to be defined? The 


conscious control of life seems to involve us in ever more 
bewildering webs of complexity so that, despite their initial 
successes, technics create more problems than they solve. 

The failure from which thought is born is, of course, failure to 
survive. The Contemplative Taoists, while rejecting the quest for 
immortality, were certainly concerned with “living out one’s 
natural term of life,” which is why Chuang-tzu commended the 
hunchback and the useless tree. But they are also saying that the 
chances of survival are best when there is no anxiety to survive, 
and that the greatest power (te) is available to those who do not 
seek power and who do not use force. To be anxious to survive is 
to wear oneself out, and to seek power and use force is to 
overstrain one’s system. One is best preserved by floating along 
without stress, all of which is the same as Jesus’ doctrine of not 
being anxious for the morrow, and the Bhagavad-Gita’s principle 
of action without concern for results (nishkama karma). This 
theme runs throughout the spiritual literature of the world: that 
you will get it if you do not want (i.e., lack) it, and that to him that 
hath shall be given. 

To those who feel that they have not, this is an exasperating 
paradox. If, deep down inside, you want most desperately to 
survive and to be in control of things, you cannot genuinely take 
the attitude of not worrying about it. Yet, surely, trying to stop the 
worry is still effort to control, and, in the spirit of wu-wei, you 
must allow yourself the freedom to worry—to “let the mind think 
whatever it wants to think” (Lieh-tzu). But “you must allow 
yourself” is just a way of talking, a grammatic fiction, since—to 
drive the point home—you are at least all that you experience, 
and your mind or consciousness is identical with what we call 
space, all of it. If someone cuts off your head, this, and all the 
terror involved, is what you are doing to yourself. The total 
unconsciousness which “follows” is the intense negative 
counterpart of the intense positive sensation of being alive and 
real, the yin aspect of the yang. The prospect, and memory, of 
very real death—total annihilation—are what give verve and 
importance to life. As in the yin-yang symbol of the double helix, 
they are the alternating pulses of that eternal series of surprises 
called oneself, in which the forgettory is as necessary as the 
memory. Thus Chuang-tzu writes of the death of Lao-tzu: 


The Master came because it was time. He left because he followed 
the natural flow. Be content with the moment, and be willing to 
follow the flow; then there will be no room for grief or joy. In the old 
days this was called freedom from bondage. The wood is consumed 
but the fire burns on, and we do not know when it will come to an 


end.13 [61a] 


Hsien Taoism, with its yogic and alchemical practices for 
attaining immortality or, at least, great longevity, was therefore 
almost the antithesis of the Lao-tzu and Chuang-tzu teachings. 
Such practices must have existed already in Chuang-tzu’s time, 
for he ridicules them: 


To exhale and inhale, to puff out old breath and draw in new, to 
stretch like a bear and crane like a bird, with concern only for 


longevity—all this is induced Tao [tao-yin ia 5 h racticed by 
hygienists who hope to live as long as P’eng Tsu.14 (stb) 


Somewhat comparable is the difference in Buddhism between the 
Way of Wisdom (prajna) and the Way of Powers (siddhi). Intuitive 
understanding may or may not give one supernormal powers 
which function to the extent that they are not forcefully willed or 
claimed, for the truly awakened ones know that their real siddhi 
is everything going on in the universe. On the other hand, siddhi, 
such as telepathy and clairvoyance, may be cultivated by special 
disciplines just as exercises are used for physical hygiene. But 
however far such disciplines may be pursued they do not lead to 
prajna, but tend rather to obstruct it by encouraging the sort of 
egocentricity which is often noted in great athletes and actors. 
Thus Chuang-tzu reproves Po Lo for his excessive skill in training 
horses: 


Horses live on dry land, eat grass and drink water. When pleased, 
they rub their necks together. When angry, they turn round and kick 
up their heels at each other Thus far only do their natural 
dispositions carry them. But bridled and bitted, with a plate of metal 
on their foreheads, they learn to cast vicious looks, to turn the head 
to bite, to resist, to get the bit out of the mouth or the bridle into it. 
And thus their natures become depraved—the fault of Po Lo.15* 
[64a] 


To blend the Taoist and Buddhist terms, we might say that te is 
the virtuality, the grace in living, which comes naturally from 
prajna—the intuitive realization of being one with the Tao. Te is 
not to be confused with siddhi as cultivated by psychophysical 
gymnastics. However, the following passage from Chuang-tzu is 
often cited by Hsien Taoists as authority for the cultivation of 
miraculous powers: 


He who understands the Way [Tao] is certain to have command of 
basic principles. He who has command of basic principles is certain 


to know how to deal with circumstances. And he who knows how to 
deal with circumstances will not allow things to do him harm. When 
a man has perfect virtue [te], fire cannot burn him, water cannot 
drown him, cold and heat cannot afflict him, birds and beasts cannot 
injure him. 


But, he goes on to say: 


I do not say that he makes light of these things. I mean that he 
distinguishes between safety and danger, contents himself with 
fortune or misfortune, and is cautious in his comings and goings. 
Therefore nothing can harm him.1i6 [58b] 


In other words, his freedom from harm is due, not to magic, but 
to intelligent circumspection. 
Lieh-tzu, although having the reputation of being able to ride 


on the wind HA quotes Yang Chu with apparent 
approval —in a passage which seems to go even further than 


Chuang-tzu in praise of taking life easily: 


Let the ear hear what it longs to hear, the eye see what it longs to 
see, the nose smell what it likes to smell, the mouth speak what it 
wants to speak, let the body have every comfort that it craves, let 
the mind do as it will. Now what the ear wants to hear is music, and 
to deprive it of this is to cramp the sense of hearing. What the eye 
wants to see is carnal beauty; and to deprive it is to cramp the sense 
of sight. What the nose craves for is to have near it the fragrant 
plants shu [dogwood] and Jan [orchids]; and if it cannot have them, 
the sense of smell is cramped. What the mouth desires is to speak of 
what is true and what false; and if it may not speak, then knowledge 
is cramped. What the body desires for its comfort is warmth and 
good food. Thwart its attainment of these, and you cramp what is 
natural and essential to man. What the mind wants is liberty to stray 
whither it will, and if it has not this freedom, the very nature of man 
is cramped and thwarted. Tyrants and oppressors cramp us in every 
one of these ways. Let us depose them, and wait happily for death to 
come.18 


But this passage might easily be misunderstood if not read in 
conjunction with Chuang-tzu’s idea of “fasting the heart (mind)” 
nS AR 
(hsin chai !_). The words are again put into the mouth of 
Confucius, speaking to one who has practiced ordinary, or 
religious, fasting to no effect. 


You are trying to unify yourself, so you don’t listen with your ears 
but with your heart (mind); you don’t listen with your mind but with 


3 
your spirit [ch’i A, * (Let) hearin stop with the ears, and the 
mind stop at thinking (or, at symbols). Then the spirit is a void 


embracing everything, and only the Tao includes the void. This void 
is the fasting of the heart (mind).19 [61b] 


To understand this we must go back to the basic Taoist 
philosophy of natural order and political government. “The Tao 
loves and nourishes all things, but does not lord it over them.” So, 
in the same way, the government of the body and psyche must not 
be egocentric. The senses, feelings, and thoughts must be allowed 
to be spontaneous (tzu-jan) in the faith that they will then order 
themselves harmoniously. To try to control the mind forcefully is 
like trying to flatten out waves with a board, and can only result 
in more and more disturbance. As some of our own 
psychotherapists have put it, “Leave your mind alone”—and this 
is surely what Chuang-tzu means by fasting it. Thus “trying to 
unify yourself” must mean trying to subject your organism to 
autocratic government. There is a clear parallel in the psychology 
of Indian Yoga, as when it is said in the Gita: 


The man who is united with the Divine and knows the truth thinks “I 
do nothing at all” for in seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, tasting, 
walking, sleeping, breathing; in speaking emitting, grasping, 
opening and closing the eyes he holds that only the senses are 
occupied with the objects of the senses. 20 


In many cultures people are brought up to mistrust their own 
organisms, and, as children, are taught to control their thoughts, 
emotions, and appetites by muscular efforts such as clenching the 
teeth or fists, frowning to concentrate attention, scratching the 
head to think, staring to see, holding the breath or tightening the 
diaphragm or rectum to inhibit emotion. These strainings are 
largely futile because the nervous system is not muscle but 
electric circuitry, and one does not use a sledge hammer for 
tuning a radio. Those who raise children in this way are simply 
unintelligent people who think that mere force can achieve 
anything. They remind one of the story of a cigar-chewing Texan 
who harnessed a kitten to his broken-down Cadillac. When 
bystanders pointed out that this was absurd, he replied, “You-all 
may think so, but I got a horsewhip.” 

The human organism has the same kind of innate intelligence 
as the ecosystems of nature, and the wisdom of the nerves and 
senses must be watched with patience and respect. This is why, 
as Joseph Needham points out, the Taoists contributed far more 
to Chinese science than the Confucians, for whereas the latter 


had their noses in books and were concerned with the following 
of rules, the former were observers of nature. Taoist literature 
abounds with comments on the behavior of animals, insects, 
reptiles, plants, wind, water, and the heavenly bodies, whereas 
Confucian literature is almost exclusively preoccupied with 
political and social relations. He goes on to show, with parallels 
from the West, that mysticism and empiricism go together in 
opposition to scholasticism—that they base themselves on the 
nonlinear world of experience rather than the linear world of 
letters. What is important for the mystic is not belief in the right 
doctrine but attainment of the true experience, whereas the 
scholastic theologians would not look through Galileo’s telescope 
because they considered that they already knew, from Scripture, 
the order of the heavens. The scientist and the mystic both make 
experiments in which what has been written is always 
subordinate to the observation of what is.21 

Confucians, along with Hebrew, Islamic, and Catholic 
scholastics, as well as Protestant fundamentalists, are like 
tourists who study guidebooks and maps instead of wandering 
freely and looking at the view. Speech and writing are 
undoubtedly marvelous, but for this very reason they have a 
hypnotic and fascinating quality which can lead to the neglect of 
nature itself until they become too much of a good thing. Thus 
when “the rule of law” becomes absolutized and everything is 
done by the book or the computer, people call out in desperation 
for the intervention of a reasonable human being. 

This is why there are no rules for te, and why there can be no 
textbook for instructing judges and lawyers in the senses of 
equity and fair play. One has to have the “feel” for it, in the same 
way that Chuang-tzu’s wheelwright had the feel for making 
wheels but could not put it into words. The same is true in music, 
painting, and cookery, for Lao-tzu says: 


The five colors blind one’s eyes; 
The five tones deafen one’s ears; 
The five tastes ruin one’s palate.22 [99d] 


He is, of course, referring to the formal rules and classifications 
for these arts, as to say that if you think there are only five colors, 
you must be blind, and deaf if you think that all music has to be in 
the pentatonic scale. This is, alas, the reason why schools for 
these various arts produce so few geniuses, and why the genius— 
the person of te—is always going beyond the rules, not because of 
an obstreperous and antisocial spirit with hostile intent, but 
because the fountain of creative work is an intelligent questioning 


of the rules. The early Taoists were therefore questioning the 
validity of normal Chinese, and generally Confucian, common 
sense. 

Thus, in the modern West as also in Communist China and 
industrial Japan, the Taoist would be asking awkward questions 
concerning basic assumptions about the good life. Is it so good a 
thing to go on living for a long time? Would you rather go off with 
a prolonged whimper or with a glorious bang? Would you really 
like to hold a position of power, such as the presidency of the 
United States or of a great corporation, wherein you must make 
momentous decisions at almost every moment and never be 
separated from the telephone? And how about becoming so 
famous that you are recognized wherever you go, and so rich that 
everyone wants to rob you? Or what is so good about a country of 
organized mediocrity, in which everyone must eat the same, dress 
the same, and dwell the same—since everyone knows that variety 
is the spice of life? 

At root, then, the idea of te is power exercised without the use 
of force and without undue interference with the order of 
surrounding circumstances. 


Entering the forest without moving the grass; 
Entering the water without raising a ripple.23 


oa 
Going back to the original form of the ideogram, te 1& means 
going along with unity of eye and heart (mind). This is intelligent 


perception of the course of things, as the navigator observes the 
stars and the sailor watches the currents and winds. Thor 
Heyerdahl’s (1) story Kon-Tiki is a perfect example of te in 
operation, showing how he and his crew drifted on a balsa-wood 
raft from Peru to distant islands in the South Seas just by going 
along with the natural processes of the ocean. Yet this 
intelligence is more than mere calculation and measurement. It 
includes that; but Heyerdahl’s genius was that he had a basic 
trust in the unified system of his own organism and the ecosystem 
of the Pacific, and was therefore almost as intelligent as a 
dolphin. By virtue of this attitude he was helped along by events 
which he had not consciously expected. In water, the balsa wood 
swelled so as to bind the logs of the raft more securely, and 
almost every morning there were flying-fish on the deck for 
breakfast. 

In a material and practical sense, Heyerdahl and such other 
Taoists succeed. But their success depends on a confidence and 
lack of self-frustrating anxiety which in turn is derived from the 


insight that in the course of nature, and in following the line of 
least resistance, nothing can go wrong. I do not think this is the 
superficial attitude of Pangloss, of the hearty and thoughtless 
view that this is the best of all possible worlds. 

However, to say that it is much more difficult and subtle than 
that will dismay simplehearted people and delight those proud 
intellectual athletes who need to be quite sure that, in attaining 
wisdom, they have done something extremely arduous. The 
superficiality of Voltaire’s Pangloss is that he is all talk, and will 
not willingly and shamelessly scream when eaten by a shark. 
Certainly he will scream, but he will feel that in so doing he has 
betrayed his philosophy—not realizing that screaming and 
squirming are the natural way of going along with pain. Taoism is 
not a philosophy of compelling oneself to be calm and dignified 
under all circumstances. The real and astonishing calm of people 
like Lao-tzu comes from the fact that they are ready and willing, 
without shame, to do whatever comes naturally in all 
circumstances. The unbelievable result is that they are far more 
sociable and civilized than those who try to live rigorously by laws 
and watchwords. 


1 Lao-tzu 38, tr. auct. 

2 Lao-tzu 45, tr. Ch’u Ta-kao (1), p. 60. 

3 Lao-tzu 68, tr. Ch’u Ta-kao (1), p. 83. 

4 Lao-tzu 38, tr. auct. This chapter is translated in so many ways that it is 
sometimes hard to realize that they represent the same Chinese text. I have had to 
assume, for the sake of consistency, that in the second sentence (on 

fd 


righteousness) yu should be read as wu *¥*"*. 
3 See Chuang-tzu 4, where he also notes that such trees are regarded as 


sacred. 

6 Chuang-tzu 19, tr. H. A. Giles (1), p. 242. 

7 Chuang-tzu 8, tr. H. A. Giles (1), pp. 101-2, mod. auct. 

8 Chuang-tzu 19, tr. H. A. Giles (1), pp. 240-41. 

9 Chuang-tzu 19, tr. H. A. Giles (1), pp. 233-34. But there is a very different 
rendering in Watson (1), p. 200, where the boatman says, “Certainly. A good 
swimmer will in no time get the knack of it. And if a man can swim under water, 
he may never have seen a boat before and still he’ll know how to handle it!” 

10 Chuang-tzu 13, tr. H. A. Giles (1), p. 171. 

11 Lao-tzu 18, tr. auct. 

12 Whyte (1), p. 1. 

13 Chuang-tzu 3 ad fin., tr. Gia-fu Feng (2), p. 59. 

14 Chuang-tzu 15, tr. auct., adjuv. H. A. Giles (1) and Watson (1). The term tao- 
yin refers to breathing exercises comparable to pranayama in Yoga. P’eng Tsu is 
the Chinese counterpart of Methuselah. However, in Chuang-tzu 6 it is said that 
“the pure men of old drew breath from their uttermost depths; the vulgar only 
from their throats.” The point, as I see it, is that if the breath is allowed to follow 
its own course it will of itself become slow and deep, so that there is no need for 
artificial exercises. Cf. Welch (1), pp. 92-93. 


15 Chuang-tzu 9, tr. H. A. Giles (1), pp. 108-9. Presumably this is the source 
from which the game of polo gets its name. 


* Also, the Chinese character if 5 meaning “false,” “simulated.”_ or 


“counterfeit,” can be literally translated as what man Aw does to horses #*¥ . 
Pictorially, the character wel, as in wu-wei, looks like a horse being tamed and 


manipulated by man. See Chapter 4, “Wu-wei,” above, pp. 74-98. 

16 Chuang-tzu 17, tr. Watson (1), p. 182. 

17 As already suggested, I doubt if this is to be taken literally. To ride the wind 
must be an equivalent of what we call walking on air or being lighthearted. 

18 Lieh-tzu 7.5, tr. Waley (1), pp. 41-42. 

19 Chuang-tzu 4, tr. auct. The text here is ambiguous. Fung Yu-lan, Lin Yutang, 
and Watson take the words up to the * to be in the imperative, whereas Giles 
reads them in the indicative, which seems to me correct. To say, “Do not listen 
with your ears, but with your mind” (imperative) does not go along with the 
metaphor of fasting the mind. Pure linguistics doesn’t help much here, for one has 
to understand the passage in the light of Chuang-tzu’s philosophy as a whole. A 
much later text, the T’ai I Chin Hua Tsung Chih (a +17th-century rendition of a 
Tang tradition), says: “When a person looks at something, listens to something, 
eyes and ears move and follow the things until they have passed. These 
movements are all underlings, and when the Heavenly ruler [i.e., the ch’i] follows 
them in their tasks, it means: To live together with demons” (tr. Wilhelm [2], p. 
61). This seems to catch the sense of this “fasting” as explained below. 

20 Bhagavad-Gita 5. 8-9, tr. Radhakrishnan (1), p. 177. 

21 Needham (1), vol. 2, pp. 89-98. It should also be pointed out that the 
mysticism of the Brothers of the Free Spirit, the Anabaptists, the Levellers, and 
the Quakers underlies the political philosophy of Jefferson and others who 
formulated the sadly neglected Constitution of the United States. As I have 
suggested elsewhere, there is a peculiar contradiction in trying to be the loyal 
citizen of a republic while believing that the universe is a monarchy. 

22 Lao-tzu 12, tr. auct. 

23 Zenrin Kushu 10, p. 164, tr. auct. 


Once Again: A New Beginning 


Al Chung-liang Huang 


FIVE YEARS AGO when my father was dying, my wife and I were 
most grateful to know that another life very dear to us was 
growing inside her body. Our second child was conceived shortly 
after Alan’s passing. During my early months of mourning for 
him, I was happy to realize that a new life would continue to 
contain and radiate the energy and spirit of the Tao. 

On August 20, 1974, nine months after Alan’s departure, long 
enough for a ripened fruition, I began to write these pages during 
labor and delivery with my wife, Suzanne. I was almost certain 
that this, indeed, was what Alan had meant by “fun and 
surprises.” 

While breathing to ride the waves of each of Suzanne’s 
accelerated contractions, we began to rediscover the meaning of 
“labor.” “Woman in labor.” What a strange expression to describe 
such spontaneous muscular activity of the uterus when it is ready 
to expel the full-grown fetus! On the other hand, the word “labor” 
can be perfectly neutral when applied to nonintellectuals. 
Primitive people work naturally in hunting and fishing. Farmers 
labor to till the land. Peasant women labor easily during 
childbirth, often while still working in the fields. Only we, the 
intellectuals, find the concept of labor misleading. 


[My father came from a strict Confucian upbringing. He would 
never have entertained the notion of witnessing the birth of any 
one of his seven children, although my mother had always had the 
choice and dignity of having her children in her own bed. Only 
once, during the war, was she forced to subject herself to the 
antiseptic bureaucracy of a hospital. Even then, with all the 
medical staff gone because of heavy bombing, my grandmother 
delivered me, relying simply on her instinctive female knowhow. ] 


When my first daughter, Lark, was born, I shared with Alan my 
revelation and joy. I had experienced as closely as I was able the 
process of giving birth and being born. I was ecstatic and danced 
all night long in the moonlight afterwards. I became keenly aware 


of the superficiality and egocentricity in all my various artistic 
endeavors. It was clear to me that no matter how I strove I could 
never surpass that transcendental experience. Alan was delighted 
and confessed to me his initial reluctance and resistance to such 
an adventure until the birth of one of his grandchildren. Like me, 
he had realized that all his years of reading and writing about 
cosmic union, sexual entity, and universal nature could not 
measure up to that one real experience. It was truly a miracle to 
see and feel the happening of the small universe contained in the 
human infant. 

We reminded each other of all the Taoist stories of craftsmen- 
artisans who told about the impossibility of transmitting their arts 
to future generations. True knowledge can be encompassed only 
by instinct and by actual experience. How sad and ludicrous to 
admit that we must go to classes to learn how to breathe properly 
and take lessons in such natural skills as swimming, dancing, and 
making love. 

For a long time old friends remembered Alan Watts as the 
brilliant young scholar, stiff, proper, and basically very shy. During 
his life he went through many changes, becoming transformed 
from the slightly stuffy, slightly snobbish personality with the old- 
country upbringing, so that by the time I first knew him he was 
identified mostly by his role as guru to the flower children. He 
was criticized by his peers, especially the academicians, for what 
appeared to them this abrupt full swing to the other side. They 
were envious of him, also, because he was obviously having a 
wonderful time. 

Through his theatrical talents and game-plays, Alan was able to 
forgo many of his Victorian inhibitions and create for himself and 
others a curious kind of balance which somehow sustained him. 
In later life, he depended more on his external need to perform 
and to receive support from his audience. Constantly pulled by 
outside demands, he was too successful to stop—and too brilliant 
to submit to his own nature. He became the perfect example of 
the Western man as victim of the yang-dominant world. He 
revealed the crux of this tragedy shared by most men in this 
unbalanced time by admitting, “But I don’t like myself when I am 
sober,” as he surrendered to another shot of vodka at a time when 
he knew he need not and should not rely on it any more. 

When I first came to America I was amazed to find how hard it 
was for people to touch one another, and to see the reluctance of 
men to share simple affection. Alan was no exception. We liked 
each other right away, but the few times I remember his being 
affectionate and embraceable were usually after we had been 


dancing. And in order to dance as easily and joyously as we did, a 
few loosening-up drinks were often necessary. I could always 
sense the strain in Alan and feel his constant struggle to 
transcend his heavy intellectual burdens. Alan’s journey to his 
own East had not been an easy one, for he was the kind of man 
who created traps for himself with his own words and then had to 
maneuver his way in and out of them. On the last page of his 
autobiography, In My Own Way, he wrote: “I have tried for years, 
as a philosopher, but in words it comes out all wrong: in black and 
white with no color.... when you try to pin [life] down you get the 
banality of formal nihilism, wherein the universe is seen as ‘a tale 
told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.’ But 
this sense of ‘turning to ashes in one’s mouth’ is the result of 
trying to grasp something which can only come to you of itself.” 
Was he at the threshold of giving up that “grasping,” and had that 
“something” begun coming to him of itself? 

I met Alan Watts after a year’s visit with my father at home in 
China, having already spent fourteen years in America. Back in 
California, I was totally disoriented in my multiple identities. I 
was treading precariously on the two shores of my personal 
cultural split. Alan reconfirmed my belief that the East-West 
balance had always existed within myself, as a personal growing 
experience. I recognized in Alan a rare and wonderful ability to 
be both Occidental and Oriental. When he allowed it, he could be 
both at once, easily bridging the gaps within his own learning and 
experience. Unlike so many Westerners who try to be Oriental by 
disinheriting their own culture, Alan could be simply himself. He 
knew that a blue-eyed, pink-skinned guru could be just as 
inscrutable as a slitty-eyed, yellow-skinned one. There was no 
reason for him to be foreign to either the West or the East. He 
reminded us by his own successes as well as failures how 
perfectly natural life’s imbalance is to all of us. He showed us 
how Eastern philosophy has been gradually permeating all walks 
of life in the West while everyone laments the disappearance of 
the gentle East under increasing technological and industrial 
demands. Undoubtedly, there will be more freeways and polluting 
chimneys in the East while most great masters of the Orient are 
emigrating one by one to the mountains and growth-center 
retreats in the West. I often prepare my friends and students for 
the shock of discovering the next Chinese they meet to be well 
versed in technological jargon but completely ignorant of t’ai chi 
or Tao. The majority of friends of kindred spirit who have shared 
my studies of the East have been Westerners. 

An old Chinese parable tells how the two fastest horses began 


a race with the sun behind them in the east and at the end 
inevitably found themselves facing the sun in the west. Hermann 
Hesse’s Journey to the East and Wu Ch’eng-en’s Journey to the 
West (or Monkey King) share essentially the same theme. What is 
East and what is West? How can two words like Tao and Dow 
become an easy pun and paradox when they have the same sound 
yet are so different in essence? In Chinese, East-West, as a 
“a 


“ 


connecting two-word expression, means a thing,” 
something”—and perhaps “nothing” at all. 


Note on My Calligraphy 


THE CHINESE CHARACTERS that appear on the cover and throughout 
this book have been executed in the spirit of the Tao. After each 
intellectual session on the existing chapters, I would prepare ink 
and brush and meditate on the essence of Alan’s words and 
thoughts in Chinese, allowing them to move with me bodily until 
they were no longer separate from the dance. Still dancing, I 
would then roll out the rice paper and let it happen, moving the 
ink-filled brush continuously without stopping to think. 

The Watercourse Way is not one man’s way. It is the universal 
way. The calligraphy done by me is not really mine exclusively; it 
is also Alan Watts’s, for so much of his spirit-energy had been 
embodied within me when I wrote these cursive words. It is yours 
too, our reader, when you are in tune with us in this watercourse 
way. 

In essence, if you quickly leaf through the length of this book, 
simply following the connective energy from one calligraphic 
page to the next, you should be able to feel the spirit of the Tao. 
The words are thoughts for enjoyment, and you have here the 
words of the supreme master Alan himself to entertain you. 
Meanwhile, he is alerting you not to dwell upon the words; he 
wishes you to play and dance with these Chinese characters 
whenever you find your head heavy, your thoughts stuck. 

The Tao is all here, in black or in white and in the in-between. 
After all, it was Alan who used to say, “When you get the 
message, hang up the phone!” So, enjoy your conversations with 
him; let the chatter-in-the-skull cease when your heart-minds are 
met. Put the book aside and dance for a while. 


Bibliography 


1. ORIGINAL CHINESE SOURCES 


ca 1 4 
| H20tB 
CHIEH TzU YUAN HUA CHUAN. ak 


The Mustard-Seed Garden Manual of Painting: 

Classified Collections of Facsimiles of Chinese Old Masters. 
Copies and Commentaries by Wang An-chieh and Lee Li-oon. 
The Wen-kwang Book Store, Hong Kong, 1956. 


% 
. at ) 
ie £i: 
Cuu Tzu K’ao SHIH. J 


By Liang Ch’i-ch’ao oh 1929). 
Chung-hua Book Co., Taipei, 1957. 


b 
us + 
CHUANG-TZU. 


(1) Chuang-tzu Nan Hua Ching. 
Hsiang Ch’i Lao Jen, ed. 
Chung-hua Book Co., Taipei, 1917. 
Reprint, Hung-yeh Book Co., Taipei, 1969. 
(2) Chuang-tzu. 
Yeh Yu-lin, ed. 
Kwang-yi Book Co., Shanghai, 1941. 
(3) Pai Hua Chuang-tzu Peng. 
Yeh Yu-lin, ed. 
Wen-yuen Book Co., Taipei, 1967. 
(4) Chuang-tzu Yin Te. 
Harvard-Yenching Institute, Sinological Index Series No. 20, 1965. 


wo 
CuuNG Kuo CHE HSuEH SHIH. Y 3) 4 8 re 


The History of Chinese Philosophy. 
By Fung Yu-lan. 
Commercial Press, Shanghai, 1934. 


CHUNG Kuo CHUNG Ku SHIH HSIANG CH’ANG PIEN. 


The Longhand Edition of Medieval Chinese Thoughts. 
By Hu Shih. 
The Hu Shih Memorial Series. 
Mei-ya Publishers, Taipei, 1971. 


V 
+wy 
e yy Tal CHE HSUEH SHIH. ¥ ¥) a } ¥ 


The History of Ancient Chinese Philosophy. 
By Hu Shih. 
Commercial Press, Shanghai, 1920. 


HAN FEI Tzu. # i + 


Writings of Han Fei. 
Wang Hsian-shen, ed. 
Commercial Press, Taipei, 1965. 


HSIEN CH’IN CHENG CHIH SSU SHIH. 


LEAGEMY 


A History of ike s Political Thoughts in the Pre-Ch’in Period. 
By Liang Ch’i-ch’ao. 
Commercial Press, Shanghai, 1925. 


ifs _ ww 
‘ ' —_ 
Huai NaN Tzu. ® * af 


Writings of Liu An, d. -122. 
Kao Yu, ed. (+205-212). 
Chung-hua Book Co., Taipei, 1966. 


Y >a 


pee 
I CHING. 
The Book of Changes. 


(1) Han Shih Ching Chou I Ts’an Tsu Chi Cheng. 
The Han Dynasty Stone Rubbing of I Ching. 
Ch’u Wan-li, ed. 


Historical Language Studies, Central Research Study Bureau 
Edition No. 46, Taipei, 1961. 
(2) I Ching Yun Ta I. 
Hsieh Meng, ed., Yuan Dynasty. 
Commercial Press, Taipei, 1971. 


KUAN-TZU. 
Writings of Kuan Chung, d. -122. 


(1) Fang Hsuan-ling, ed., T’ang Dynasty, +578-648. 
Reprint, Cheh-chiang Book Co., 1876. 
(2) T’ang Ching-kao, ed. 
Commercial Press, Shanghai, 1926; Commercial Press, Taipei, 1967. 


7 , ? rf 
Lao-1zu: Tao TE CHING. 4 J id iy, af 


Original commentaries by Wang Pi, Wei Dynasty (+226-249). 
Chi T’ang Tzu Lao-tzu Tao Te Ching Chu. 

Reprint of Ku I Ch’un Hsu Peng, 1884. 

I-wen Press, Taipei, 1950. 


woah 3 


Records of Rites. 

Original commentaries by Cheng Hsuan, Han Dynasty. 

(1) Harvard-Yenching Institute, Sinological Index Series No. 27. 
Chinese Materials and Research Aids Service Center, Inc., Taipei, 
1966. 

(2) Li Chi Chi Shieh. 

Sun Hsi-tan, ed. 
Commercial Press, Taipei, 1965. 
(3) Li Chi Ching Hua Lu. Chung-hua Book Co., Taipei, 1966. 


« 
a 


LIEH-TZU. 
Writings of Lieh Yu-ko, -4th century. 


(1) Chang Kan, ed. 

Commercial Press, Shanghai, 1959. 
(2) T’ang Ching-kao, ed. 

Commercial Press, Taipei, 1965. 


SHIH CHI. vy Hd 


Records of the Grand Historian of China. 
By Ssu-ma Ch’ien. 
Preface dated 1747. 
Pei Yin, ed. 
Tung-wen Book Co., Shanghai, 1884. 


Later editions: Ch’uin Hsueh Book Co., Shanghai, 
1929. 
Commercial Press, Shanghai, 1934. 
Commercial Press, Taipei, 1965. 
Chung-hua Book Co., Peking, 1973. 


> dr ik 
TAO CHIA SHIH TzU HSING PIEN. if & 9) 7 n ! 


Taoism: Sacred Books. 
By Yen Ling-feng. 
Commercial Press, Taipei, 1968. 


¥ 2 1U PEI TsAl LAO-TZU CHI CH’ENG CHU PIEN. 


BL BHA SEA Mw 


By Yen Ling-feng. 
Chung-hua Book Co., Taipei, 1965. 


2. WORKS IN EUROPEAN LANGUAGES 


Blofeld, John, ed. The Zen Teaching of Huang Po on the 
Transmission of Mind. Grove Press, New York, and Rider & 
Co., London, 1958. 

Brown, G. Spencer. Laws of Form. George Allen & Unwin, 
London, 1969. Julian Press, New York, 1972. 

Chan, Wing-tsit, tr. The Platform Scripture of the Sixth Patriarch. 
St. Johns University Press, Jamaica, N.Y., 1963. 

Chiang, Yee. Chinese Calligraphy. Methuen & Co., London, 1938. 
3rd ed., revised and enlarged, Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge, Mass., 1973. 

Ch’u Ta-kao, tr. Tao Te Ching. George Allen & Unwin for Buddhist 
Society, London, 1937. 

Creel, Herrlee G. What Is Taoism? and Other Studies in Chinese 
Cultural History. University of Chicago Press, 1970. 


Dhiegh, Khigh Alx. The Eleventh Wing: An Exposition of the 
Dynamics of I Ching for Now. Dell Publishing Co., New York, 
1973. 

Duthuit, Georges. Chinese Mysticism and Modern Painting. 
Chroniques du Jour, Paris, and A. Zwemmer, London, 1936. 
Duyvendak, J. J. L., tr. Tao Te Ching: The Book of the Way and Its 
Virtue. John Murray, London, and Transatlantic Arts, 

Hollywood, Fla., 1954. 

Feng, Gia-fu, and Jane English, trs. (1) Tao Te Ching. Alfred A. 
Knopf, New York, 1972. Wildwood House, London, 1973. (2) 
Chuang Tsu: Inner Chapters. Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1974. 

Forke, Alfred. The World-Conception of the Chinese. Arthur 
Probs-thain & Co., London, 1925. 

Forrest, Robert Andrew. The Chinese Language. 2nd rev. ed. 
Humanities Press, New York, and Faber & Faber, London, 
1965. 

Fung Yu-lan (1) A History of Chinese Philosophy. 2 vols. Tr. Derk 
Bodde. Princeton University Press, and George Allen & 
Unwin, London, 1952-53. 

(2) A Short History of Chinese Philosophy. Ed. Derk Bodde. 
Free Press, New York, 1966. 

(3) Chuang Tzu: A New Selected Translation. The Commercial 
Press, Shanghai, 1933. Repr., Paragon Book Reprint Corp., 
New York, 1963. 

Gernet, J. “Entretiens du Maitre de Dhyana Chen-houei du Ho- 
ts6.” Publications de l’Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient, vol. 
31. 1949. 

Giles, Herbert A., tr. Chuang Tzu: Mystic, Moralist, and Social 
Reformer. Kelly & Walsh, Shanghai, 1926. Repr. AMS Press, 
New York, 1972. 

Giles, Lionel, tr. Taoist Teachings: From the Book of Lieh Tzu. E. 
P. Dutton, New York, and John Murray, London, 1912. Repr., 
Paragon Book Reprint Corp., New York, n.d. 

Graham, Angus Charles. Two Chinese Philosophers: Ch’eng Ming- 
tao and Ch’eng Yi-ch’uan. Lund, Humphries & Co., London, 
and Clarke, Irwin & Co., Toronto, 1958. 

Heyerdahl, Thor. The Kon-Tiki Expedition. George Allen & Unwin, 
London, 1965. Rand McNally & Co., Chicago, 1968. 

Hu Shih (1) “The Development of Zen Buddhism in China.” 
Chinese Political and Social Review, vol. 15, no. 4. 1932. 

(2) “Ch’an (Zen) Buddhism in China, Its History and Method.” 
Philosophy East and West, vol. 3, no. 1. Honolulu, 1953. 

Huang, Al Chung-liang. Embrace Tiger, Return to Mountain: The 

Essence of T’ai Chi. Real People Press, Moab, Utah, 1973. 


Huyghe, René. Art and the Spirit of Man. Tr. Norbert Guterman. 
Harry N. Abrams, New York, and Thames & Hudson, London, 
1962. 

Kapleau, Philip, ed. and tr. Three Pillars of Zen: Teaching, 
Practice, Enlightenment. Harper & Row, New York, 1966. 

Kepes, Gyorgy. The Language of Vision. P. Theobald, Chicago, and 
Alec Tiranti, London, 1945. 

Legge, James, tr. The Sacred Books of China: The Texts of Taoism. 
Ed. F Max Muller. 2 vols. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1891. 
Repr., Dover Publications, New York, 1962. 

Lin Yutang (1) The Importance of Living. William Heinemann, 
London, 1938. J. PR. Putnam’s Sons, New York, 1974. 

(2) The Wisdom of China and India. Random House, New York, 
1942. Michael Joseph, London, 1944, (2 vols.). 

(3) The Wisdom of Lao-tse. Random House, Modern Library, 
New York, 1948. 

Morgan, Evan. Tao the Great Luminant. Kelly & Walsh, Shanghai, 
1934. Repr., Paragon Book Reprint Corp., New York, 1969. 
Needham, Joseph. Science and Civilization in China. 5 vols. 

Cambridge University Press, 1954-74. 

Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli, tr. The Bhagavadgita. Harper & Row, 
New York, and George Allen & Unwin, London, 1948. 

Reps, Paul. Zen Flesh, Zen Bones: A Collection of Zen and Pre- 
Zen Writings. Charles E. Tuttle Co., Tokyo and Rutland, Vt., 
1957. 

Rickett, W. Allyn. Kuan Tzu. Hong Kong University, 1965. Oxford 
University Press, New York and London, 1966. 

Rose-Innes, A. C. Beginner’s Dictionary of Chinese-Japanese 
Characters. 4th ed. International Publications Service, New 
York, 1973. 

Rozin, Paul, Susan Poritsky, and Raina Sotsky. “American Children 
with Reading Problems Can Easily Learn to Read English 
Represented by Chinese Characters.” Science, March 26, 
1971. 

Schwenk, Theodor. Sensitive Chaos. Tr. Olive Whicher and 
Johanna Wrigley. Rudolph Steiner Press, London, 1965. 

Senzaki, Nyogen, and Paul Reps, trs. The Gateless Gate, or Wu 
Men Kuan (Mumon Kan) by Ekai. J. Murray, Los Angeles, 
1934. 

Siu, R. G. H. The Man of Many Qualities: A Legacy of the I Ching. 
M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1968. 

Sze, Mai-mai. The Tao of Painting. Bollingen Series XLIX, 2nd ed. 
(2 vols. in 1). Princeton University Press, 1963. 

Thoreau, Henry David. “Walking.” In Walden and Other Writings 


of Henry David Thoreau. Random House, Modern Library, 
New York, 1950. 

Waley, Arthur. The Way and Its Power: A Study of the Tao Te-ching 
and Its Place in Chinese Thought. George Allen & Unwin, 
London, 1956. Grove Press, New York, 1958. 

Ware, James R., tr. The Sayings of Chuang Tzu. New American 
Library, Mentor Books, New York, 1963. 

Watson, Burton, tr. Complete Works of Chuang-tzu. Columbia 
University Press, New York, 1968. 

Watts, Alan (1) Zen Buddhism. Buddhist Society, London, and P. D. 
and Ione Perkins, Pasadena, Calif., 1947. 

(2) Zen (same book as above, but enlarged). Delkin, Stanford, 
Calif., 1948. 

Welch, Holmes. The Parting of the Way. Methuen & Co., London, 
1958. Beacon Press, Boston, 1966 (as Taoism: The Parting of 
the Way). 

Whyte, Lancelot Law. The Next Development in Man. Cresset 
Press, London, 1944. Henry Holt, New York, 1948. 

Wieger, Leon. Chinese Characters: Their Origin, Etymology, 
History, Classification, and Signification. Tr. L. Davrout. 2nd 
ed. 1927. Repr., Dover Publications, New York, 1965. 

Wilhelm, Richard (1) I Ching or the Book of Changes. Tr. Cary F. 
Baynes. Bollingen Series XIX. 3rd ed. Princeton University 
Press, 1967. 

(2) The Secret of the Golden Flower: A Chinese Book of Life. 
Tr. Cary F. Baynes. Rev. ed. Harcourt, Brace & World, New 
York, and Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1962. 

Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Routledge 
& Kegan Paul, London, and Harcourt, Brace & Co., New York, 
1922. 

Yampolsky, Philip B., ed. and tr. The Platform Sutra of the Sixth 
Patriarch. Columbia University Press, New York, 1967. 


ALSO BY ALAN WATTS 


The Spirit of Zen 

The Legacy of Asia and Western Man 
The Meaning of Happiness 

The Theologia Mystica of Saint Dionysius 
Behold the Spirit 

Zen 

Easter—Its Story and Meaning 

The Supreme Identity 

The Wisdom of Insecurity 

Myth and Ritual in Christianity 

The Way of Liberation in Zen Buddhism 
The Way of Zen 

Nature, Man, and Woman 

This Is It 

Psychotherapy East and West 

The Joyous Cosmology 

The Two Hands of God 

Beyond Theology: The Art of Godmanship 
The Book: On the Taboo Against Knowing 
Who You Are 

Does It Matter? Essays on Man’s Relation to Materiality 
The Art of Contemplation 

In My Own Way: An Autobiography 
Cloud-Hidden, Whereabouts Unknown: A Mountain 
Journal 


Copyright 


First published in Great Britain in 2011 
by Souvenir Press, 43 Great Russell Street, London WC1B 3PD 


This ebook edition first published in 2011 


Copyright © 1975 by Mary Jane Yates Watts 
Literary Executrix of the Will of Alan W. Watts, deceased. 


Foreword, Afterword, Bibliography, and illustrations Copyright © 1975 by Al 
Chung-liang Huang 


Originally published in the USA by Pantheon Books, a division of Random House, 
Inc., in 1975 


The right of Alan Watts to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in 
accordance with Section 77 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 


This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced, transferred, 
distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used in any way except as 
specifically permitted in writing by the publishers, as allowed under the terms and 
conditions under which it was purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable 
copyright law. Any unauthorised distribution or use of this text may be a direct 
infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights, and those responsible may be 

liable in law accordingly 
Grateful acknowledgement is made to the following for permission to reprint previously published material: 
proval of the Buddhist Society, London: Excerpts (some slightly modified) from 


George Allen & Unwin Ltd with the ap. 

Tao Te Ching by Lao-tzu, translated by Ch’u Ta-kao, 1939. 

AMS Press, Inc.: Excerpts from Chuang Tzu: Mystic, Moralist, and Social Planner, by Chuang Tzu, translated from the 

Chinese by Herbert A. Giles. Second edition, revised, published by AMS Press, Inc., N.Y., 1972. Originally published by 
Kelly and Walsh, Shanghai, 1926. 


Columbia University Press: Excerpts from pages 108-9, 182, 209-210, 216 of The Complete Works of Chuang Tzu, 
y Burton Watson. Columbia University Press, 1968. 


translated 
ly modified) from Tao Te Ching by Lao Tzu, translated by Gia-fu Feng and Jane 


Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.: Excerpt (slight! 
English, Copyright © 1972 by Gia-fu Feng and Jane English; and one excerpt from Chuang Tsu: Inner Chapters, 
translated by Gia-fu Feng and Jane English, Copyright © 1974 by Gia-fu Feng and Jane English. 


Paragon Book Gallery, Ltd.: Excerpts (some slightly modified) from Chuang-Tzu: A New Selected Translation, by Fung 
Yu-lan, reprinted by Paragon Book Reprint Corp., 1963. 


Princeton University Press: Quotation from The I Ching: Or Book of Changes, translated by Richard Wilhelm, rendered 


into English by Cary F. Baynes, Bollingen Series XIX, Copyright 1950, © 1967 by Bollingen Foundation; and selections 
from pages 166-167, 177 of Vol I, The Period of the Philosophers from the Beginnings to circa 100 B.C. in Fung Yu-lan, 
A History of Chinese Philosophy, translated by Derk Bodde, Princeton University Press, 1952. 


ISBN 9780285640610 


