ALAN 
WATTS 


THIS 
SIT 


Experience 


i 


THIS IS 


IT 


AND OTHER ESSAYS 
ON ZEN AND 
SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE 


Alan Watts 


VINTAGE BOOKS 
A DIVISION OF RANDOM HOUSE 
NEW YORK 


First Vintage Books Edition, April 1973 
Copyright © 1958, 1960 by Alan W. Watts 


All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright 
Conventions. Published in the United States by Random House, Inc., 
New York, and simultaneously in Canada by Random House of 
Canada Limited, Toronto. Originally published by Pantheon Books, a 
division of Random House, Inc., in November 1960. 


Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 


Watts, Alan Wilson, 1915- 
This is it. 


Reprint of the 1960 ed. 

1. Mysticism 2. Zen Buddhism. I. Title. 
[BL625.W35 1973] 294.3 4 72-8394 
eISBN: 978-0-307-78432-2 


v3.1_r1 


TO ANN 
daughter and dancer, 
with love 


CONTENTS 


Cover 
Title Page 


Copyright 
Dedication 
Preface 


1 
This Is IT 


2 
Instinct, Intelligence, and Anxiety 


3 
Zen and the Problem of Control 


4 
Beat Zen, Square Zen, and Zen 


5 
Spirituality and Sensuality 


6 
The New Alchemy 


Bibliography 


About the Author 


PREFACE 


A rover written at different times during the past four 


years, the essays here gathered together have a common point of 
focus—the spiritual or mystical experience and its relation to 
ordinary material life. Having said this, I am instantly aware that 
I have used the wrong words; and yet there are no satisfactory 
alternatives. Spiritual and mystical suggest something rarefied, 
otherworldly, and loftily religious, opposed to an ordinary 
material life which is simply practical and commonplace. The 
whole point of these essays is to show the fallacy of this 
opposition, to show that the spiritual is not to be separated from 
the material, nor the wonderful from the ordinary. We need, 
above all, to disentangle ourselves from habits of speech and 
thought which set the two apart, making it impossible for us to 
see that this—the immediate, everyday, and present experience— 
is IT, the entire and ultimate point for the existence of a universe. 
But the recognition that the two are one comes to pass in an 
elusive, though relatively common, state of consciousness which 
has fascinated me beyond all else since I was seventeen years old. 

I am neither a preacher nor a reformer, for I like to write and 
talk about this way of seeing things as one sings in the bathtub or 
splashes in the sea. There is no mission, nor intent to convert, and 
yet I believe that if this state of consciousness could become more 
universal, the pretentious nonsense which passes for the serious 
business of the world would dissolve in laughter. We should see 
at once that the high ideals for which we are killing and 
regimenting each other are empty and abstract substitutes for the 
unheeded miracles that surround us—not only in the obvious 
wonders of nature but also in the overwhelmingly uncanny fact of 
mere existence. Not for one moment do I believe that such an 
awakening would deprive us of energy or social concern. On the 


contrary, half the delight of it—though infinity has no halves—is 
to share it with others, and because the spiritual and the material 
are inseparable this means the sharing of life and things as well 
as insight. But the possibility of this depends entirely upon the 
presence of the vision which could transform us into the kind of 
people who can do it, not upon exhortation or appeals to our 
persistent, but consistently uncreative, sense of guilt. Yet it would 
spoil it all if we felt obliged, by that same sense, to have the 
vision. 

For, contradictory as it may sound, it seems to me that the 
deepest spiritual experience can arise only in moments of a 
selfishness so complete that it transcends itself, by “the way down 
and out,” which is perhaps why Jesus found the companionship 
of publicans and sinners preferable to that of the righteous and 
respectable. It is a sort of first step to accept one’s own selfishness 
without the deception of trying to wish it were otherwise, for a 
man who is not all of one piece is perpetually paralyzed by trying 
to go in two directions at once. As a Turkish proverb puts it, “He 
who sleeps on the floor will not fall out of bed.” And so, when the 
sinner realizes that even his repentance is sinful, he may perhaps 
for the first time “come to himself”? and be whole. Spiritual 
awakening is the difficult process whereby the increasing 
realization that everything is as wrong as it can be flips suddenly 
into the realization that everything is as right as it can be. Or 
better, everything is as It as it can be. 

Only two of the essays that follow have been published 
previously, “Zen and the Problem of Control” and “Beat Zen, 
Square Zen, and Zen,” the former in the first issue of Contact and 
the latter in The Chicago Review for the summer of 1958, and 
then, in expanded form, as a separate booklet by City Lights 
Books of San Francisco. I wish to thank the respective editors and 
publishers concerned for permission to include them in this 
volume. 

Because of the rather personal and, indirectly, autobiographical 
nature of most of these essays, it seemed appropriate to include 
here a bibliography of the books and major articles which I have 
written to date. 


San Francisco, 1960 
Aan W. Watts 


1 


THIS IS IT 


ie most impressive fact in man’s __ spiritual, 


intellectual, and poetic experience has always been, for me, the 
universal prevalence of those astonishing moments of insight 
which Richard Bucke called “cosmic consciousness.” There is no 
really satisfactory name for this type of experience. To call it 
mystical is to confuse it with visions of another world, or of gods 
and angels. To call it spiritual or metaphysical is to suggest that it 
is not also extremely concrete and physical, while the term 
“cosmic consciousness” itself has the unpoetic flavor of occultist 
jargon. But from all historical times and cultures we have reports 
of this same unmistakable sensation emerging, as a rule, quite 
suddenly and unexpectedly and from no clearly understood cause. 

To the individual thus enlightened it appears as a vivid and 
overwhelming certainty that the universe, precisely as it is at this 
moment, as a whole and in every one of its parts, is so completely 
right as to need no explanation or justification beyond what it 
simply is. Existence not only ceases to be a problem; the mind is 
so wonder-struck at the self-evident and self-sufficient fitness of 
things as they are, including what would ordinarily be thought 
the very worst, that it cannot find any word strong enough to 
express the perfection and beauty of the experience. Its clarity 
sometimes gives the sensation that the world has become 
transparent or luminous, and its simplicity the sensation that it is 
pervaded and ordered by a supreme intelligence. At the same 
time it is usual for the individual to feel that the whole world has 
become his own body, and that whatever he is has not only 
become, but always has been, what everything else is. It is not 
that he loses his identity to the point of feeling that he actually 
looks out through all other eyes, becoming literally omniscient, 
but rather that his individual consciousness and existence is a 
point of view temporarily adopted by something immeasurably 
greater than himself. 

The central core of the experience seems to be the conviction, 
or insight, that the immediate now, whatever its nature, is the 
goal and fulfillment of all living. Surrounding and flowing from 
this insight is an emotional ecstasy, a sense of intense relief, 


freedom, and lightness, and often of almost unbearable love for 
the world, which is, however, secondary. Often, the pleasure of 
the experience is confused with the experience and the insight 
lost in the ecstasy, so that in trying to retain the secondary effects 
of the experience the individual misses its point—that the 
immediate now is complete even when it is not ecstatic. For 
ecstasy is a necessarily impermanent contrast in the constant 
fluctuation of our feelings. But insight, when clear enough, 
persists; having once understood a particular skill, the facility 
tends to remain. 

The terms in which a man interprets this experience are 
naturally drawn from the religious and philosophical ideas of his 
culture, and their differences often conceal its basic identity. As 
water seeks the course of least resistance, so the emotions clothe 
themselves in the symbols that lie most readily to hand, and the 
association is so swift and automatic that the symbol may appear 
to be the very heart of the experience. Clarity—the disappearance 
of problems—suggests light, and in moments of such acute clarity 
there may be the physical sensation of light penetrating 
everything. To a theist this will naturally seem to be a glimpse of 
the presence of God, as in the celebrated testimony of Pascal: 


The year of grace 1654, 
Monday the 23rd of November, St. Clement’s days ee @ 
From about half past ten in the evening 
until about half past twelve, midnight, 
FIRE 


God of Abraham. God of Isaac. God of Jacob 
not of the philosophers and the wise. 


Certainty, joy, certainty, feeling, joy, peace. 
Or in a case quoted by William James: 


The very heavens seemed to open and pour down rays of light 
and glory. Not for a moment only, but all day and night, 
floods of light and glory seemed to pour through my soul, and 
oh, how I was changed, and everything became new. My 
horses and hogs and everybody seemed changed. 


But clarity may also suggest transparency, or the sense that the 
world confronting us is no longer an obstacle and the body no 
longer a burden, and to a Buddhist this will just as naturally call 
to mind the doctrine of reality as the ungraspable, indefinable 
Void (sunyata). 


I came back into the hall and was about to go to my seat when 
the whole outlook changed. A broad expanse opened, and the 
ground appeared as if all caved in.... As I looked around and 
up and down, the whole universe with its multitudinous 
sense-objects now appeared quite different; what was 
loathsome before, together with ignorance and passions, was 
now seen to be nothing else but the outflow of my own inmost 
nature which in itself remained bright, true, and transparent.1 


As one and the same pain may be described either as a hot 
pang or as a cold sting, so the descriptions of this experience may 
take forms that seem to be completely opposed. One person may 
say that he has found the answer to the whole mystery of life, but 
somehow cannot put it into words. Another will say that there 
never was a mystery and thus no answer to it, for what the 
experience made clear to him was the irrelevance and artificiality 
of all our questions. One declares himself convinced that there is 
no death, his true self being as eternal as the universe. Another 
states that death has simply ceased to matter, because the present 
moment is so complete that it requires no future. One feels 
himself taken up and united with a life infinitely other than his 
own. But as the beating of the heart may be regarded as 
something that happens to you or something that you do, 
depending on the point of view, so another will feel that he has 
experienced, not a transcendent God, but his own inmost nature. 
One will get the sense that his ego or self has expanded to 
become the entire universe, whereas another will feel that he has 
lost himself altogether and that what he called his ego was never 
anything but an abstraction. One will describe himself as 
infinitely enriched, while another will speak of being brought to 
such absolute poverty that he owns not even his mind and body, 
and has not a care in the world. 

Rarely is the experience described without metaphors that 
might be misleading if taken literally. But in reading Bernard 


Berenson’s Sketch for a Self-Portrait I came across a passage which 
is one of the simplest and “cleanest” accounts of it I have ever 
seen. 


It was a morning in early summer. A silver haze shimmered 
and trembled over the lime trees. The air was laden with their 
fragrance. The temperature was like a caress. I remember—I 
need not recall—that I climbed up a tree stump and felt 
suddenly immersed in Itness. I did not call it by that name. I 
had no need for words. It and I were one.2 


Just “It”—as when we use the word to denote the superlative, or 
the exact point, or intense reality, or what we were always 
looking for. Not the neuter sense of the mere object, but 
something still more alive and far wider than the personal, and 
for which we use this simplest of words because we have no word 
for it. 

It is especially difficult to find the right means of expression for 
the experience in the cultural context of Christianity. For while 
this enlightenment comes just as much to Christians as to anyone 
else, the Christian mystic has always been in danger of conflict 
with the defenders of orthodoxy. Christian dogmatics insist firmly 
upon the radical difference between God and his created 
universe, as between God and the human soul. They insist upon 
God’s eternal opposition to and abhorrence of evil and sin, and, 
since these are very present realities, upon the effective salvation 
of the world only at the end of time. Even then, hell will remain 
forever as the state of permanent imprisonment and torment for 
the forces of evil. Nevertheless, the doctrine of omnipotence— 
that nothing, not even sin, can happen without the permission of 
God’s will—makes it possible even in this difficult framework for 
the Christian mystic to express the unspeakable doctrine that “sin 
is behovable, but all shall be well, and all shall be well, and all 
manner of thing shall be well.”3 

The Christian sense of the reality of evil and of time and 
history as the process of overcoming evil remains with us so 
strongly even in the post-Christian intellectual climate of today 
that we have difficulty in accepting the “cosmic consciousness” as 
more than an inspiring hallucination. Admissible it may be as the 
vision of some “far-off divine event” in the future, but with our 


progressive view of the world it seems impossible to accept it as a 
vision of the way things are. Even in the description which Bucke 
gives of his own experience there is a significant use of the future 
tense: 


All at once, without warning of any kind, I found myself 
wrapped in a flame-colored cloud. For an instant I thought of 
fire, an immense conflagration somewhere close by in that 
great city; the next, I knew that the fire was within myself. 
Directly afterward there came upon me a sense of exultation, 
of immense joyousness accompanied or immediately followed 
by an intellectual illumination impossible to describe. Among 
other things, I did not merely come to believe, but I saw that 
the universe is not composed of dead matter, but is, on the 
contrary, a living Presence; I became conscious in myself of 
eternal life. It was not a conviction that I would have eternal 
life, but a consciousness that I possessed eternal life then; I 
saw that all men are immortal; that the cosmic order is such 
that without any peradventure all things work together for the 
good of each and all; that the foundation principle of the 
world, of all the worlds, is what we call love, and that the 
happiness of each and all is in the long run absolutely certain. 
The vision lasted a few seconds and was gone; but the 
memory of it and the sense of the reality of what it taught has 
remained during the quarter of a century which has since 
elapsed.4 


Nevertheless, the “consciousness that I possessed eternal life then” 
corresponds to the Buddhist realization that “all things are in 
Nirvana from the very beginning,” and that the enlightenment or 
awakening is not the creation of a new state of affairs but the 
recognition of what always is. 

Such experiences imply, then, that our normal perception and 
valuation of the world is a subjective but collective nightmare. 
They suggest that our ordinary sense of practical reality—of the 
world as seen on Monday morning—is a construct of socialized 
conditioning and repression, a system of selective inattention 
whereby we are taught to screen out aspects and relations within 
nature which do not accord with the rules of the game of 
civilized life. Yet the vision almost invariably includes the 


realization that this very restriction of consciousness is also part 
of the eternal fitness of things. In the words of the Zen master 
Gensha: 


If you understand, things are such as they are; 
If you do not understand, things are such as they are— 


this “such as they are” being the utterly unproblematic and self- 
sufficient character of this eternal now in which, as Chuang-tzu 
said, 


A duck’s legs, though short, cannot be lengthened without 
discomfort to the duck; a crane’s legs, though long, cannot be 
shortened without discomfort to the crane. 


For in some way the vision seems to come about through 
accepting the rightness of the fact that one does not have it, 
through being willing to be as imperfect as one is—perfectly 
imperfect. 

Now it is easy to see how this way of seeing things might be 
acceptable in cultures without the sense of hope and history, 
how, indeed, it might be the only basis for a philosophy that 
would make life tolerable. Indeed, it is very probable that the 
“historical dynamism” of the Christian West is a rather recent 
theological discovery, for we can no longer sing, without qualms 
of the social conscience, the laissez-faire hymn. which says: 


The rich man in his castle, the poor man at his gate, 
He made them high or lowly, and ordered their estate— 


and then go on to exclaim: 


All things bright and beautiful, all creatures great and small, 
All things wise and wonderful, the Lord God made them all! 


But, even though it may be exploited for this purpose, the 
experience itself is in no sense a philosophy designed to justify or 
to desensitize oneself to the inequalities of life. Like falling in 
love, it has a minimal connection with any particular cultural 
background or economic position. It descends upon the rich and 
the poor, the moral and the immoral, the happy and the 


miserable without distinction. It carries with it the overwhelming 
conviction that the world is in every respect a miracle of glory, 
and though this might logically exclude the necessity to share the 
vision with others and awaken them from their nightmare the 
usual reaction is a sense, not of duty, but of sheer delight in 
communicating the experience by word or deed. 


From this new perspective the crimes and follies of man’s 
ordinary nightmare life seem neither evil nor stupid but simply 
pitiable. One has the extraordinarily odd sensation of seeing 
people in their mean or malicious pursuits looking, at the same 
time, like gods—as if they were supremely happy without 
knowing it. As Kirillov puts it in Dostoyevsky’s The Possessed, 


“Man is unhappy because he doesn’t know he’s happy. It’s 
only that. That’s all, that’s all! If anyone finds out he’ll 
become happy at once, that minute.... It’s all good. I 
discovered it all of a sudden.” 


“And if anyone dies of hunger,” [asks Stavrogin], “and if 
anyone insults and outrages the little girl, is that good?” 


“Yes! And if anyone blows his brains out for the baby, that’s 
good too. And if anyone doesn’t, that’s good too. It’s all good, 
all. It’s good for all those who know that it’s all good. If they 
knew that it was good for them, it would be good for them, 
but as long as they don’t know it’s good for them, it will be 
bad for them. That’s the whole idea, the whole of it!... They’re 
bad because they don’t know they’re good. When they find 
out, they won’t outrage a little girl. They’ll find out that 
they’re good and they’ll all become good, every one of them.”s 


Ordinarily one might feel that there is a shocking contrast 
between the marvellous structure of the human organism and its 
brain, on the one hand, and the uses to which most people put it, 
on the other. Yet there could perhaps be a point of view from 
which the natural wonder of the organism simply outshines the 
degrading performances of its superficial consciousness. In a 
somewhat similar way this strange opening of vision does not 
permit attention to remain focussed narrowly upon the details of 
evil; they become subordinate to the all-pervading intelligence 
and beauty of the total design. 

Such insight has not the slightest connection with “shallow 


optimism” nor with grasping the meaning of the universe in 
terms of some neat philosophical simplification. Beside it, all 
philosophical opinions and disputations sound like somewhat 
sophisticated versions of children yelling back and forth—“ ’Tis!” 
“-Tisn’t!” “Tis!” “’Tisn’t!”—until (if only the philosophers 
would do likewise) they catch the nonsense of it and roll over 
backwards with hoots of laughter. Furthermore, so far from being 
the smug rationalization of a Mr. Pangloss, the experience has a 
tendency to arise in situations of total extremity or despair, when 
the individual finds himself without any alternative but to 
surrender himself entirely. 

Something of this kind came to me in a dream when I was 
about eight years old. I was sick at the time and almost delirious 
with fever, and in the dream I found myself attached face- 
downward and spread-eagled to an immense ball of steel which 
was spinning about the earth. I knew in this dream with complete 
certainty that I was doomed to be spun in this sickening and 
terrifying whirl forever and ever, and the conviction was so 
intense that there was nothing for it but to give up—for this was 
hell itself and nothing lay before me but a literal everlastingness 
of pain. But in the moment when I surrendered, the ball seemed 
to strike against a mountain and disintegrate, and the next thing I 
knew was that I was sitting on a stretch of warm sand with 
nothing left of the ball except crumpled fragments of sheet-metal 
scattered around me. This was not, of course, the experience of 
“cosmic consciousness,” but simply of the fact that release in 
extremity lies through and not away from the problem. 

That other experience came much later, twice with intensity, 
and other times with what might be called more of a glow than a 
brilliant flash. Shortly after I had first begun to study Indian and 
Chinese philosophy, I was sitting one night by the fire, trying to 
make out what was the right attitude of mind for meditation as it 
is practiced in Hindu and Buddhist disciplines. It seemed to me 
that several attitudes were possible, but as they appeared 
mutually exclusive and contradictory I was trying to fit them into 
one—all to no purpose. Finally, in sheer disgust, I decided to 
reject them all and to have no special attitude of mind 
whatsoever. In the force of throwing them away it seemed that I 
threw myself away as well, for quite suddenly the weight of my 
own body disappeared. I felt that I owned nothing, not even a 


self, and that nothing owned me. The whole world became as 
transparent and unobstructed as my own mind; the “problem of 
life” simply ceased to exist, and for about eighteen hours I and 
everything around me felt like the wind blowing leaves across a 
field on an autumn day. 

The second time, a few years later, came after a period when I 
had been attempting to practice what Buddhists call 
“recollection” (smriti) or constant awareness of the immediate 
present, as distinct from the usual distracted rambling of 
reminiscence and anticipation. But, in discussing it one evening, 
someone said to me, “But why try to live in the present? Surely 
we are always completely in the present even when we’re 
thinking about the past or the future?” This, actually quite 
obvious, remark again brought on the sudden sensation of having 
no weight. At the same time, the present seemed to become a 
kind of moving stillness, an eternal stream from which neither I 
nor anything could deviate. I saw that everything, just as it is 
now, is IT—is the whole point of there being life and a universe. I 
saw that when the Upanishads said, “That art thou!” or “All this 
world is Brahman,” they meant just exactly what they said. Each 
thing, each event, each experience in its inescapable nowness and 
in all its own particular individuality was precisely what it should 
be, and so much so that it acquired a divine authority and 
originality. It struck me with the fullest clarity that none of this 
depended on my seeing it to be so; that was the way things were, 
whether I understood it or not, and if I did not understand, that 
was IT too. Furthermore, I felt that I now understood what 
Christianity might mean by the love of God—namely, that despite 
the commonsensical imperfection of things, they were 
nonetheless loved by God just as they are, and that this loving of 
them was at the same time the godding of them. This time the 
vivid sensation of lightness and clarity lasted a full week. 

These experiences, reinforced by others that have followed, 
have been the enlivening force of all my work in writing and in 
philosophy since that time, though I have come to realize that 
how I feel, whether the actual sensation of freedom and clarity is 
present or not, is not the point—for, again, to feel heavy or 
restricted is also IT. But with this point of departure a 
philosopher is faced with a strange problem of communication, 
especially to the degree that his philosophy seems to have some 


affinity with religion. People appear to be under the fixed 
impression that one speaks or writes of these things in order to 
improve them or do them some good, assuming, too, that the 
speaker has himself been improved and is able to speak with 
authority. In other words, the philosopher is forced into the role 
of preacher, and is in turn expected to practice what he preaches. 
Thereupon the truth of what he says is tested by his character and 
his morals—whether he shows anxiety or not, whether he 
depends upon “material crutches” such as wine or tobacco, 
whether he has stomach ulcers or likes money, whether he loses 
his temper, or gets depressed, or falls in love when he shouldn’t, 
or sometimes looks a bit tired and frayed at the edges. All these 
criteria might be valid if the philosopher were preaching freedom 
from being human, or if he were trying to make himself and 
others radically better. 

In the span of one lifetime it is, of course, possible for almost 
every human being to improve himself—within limits set by 
energy, time, temperament, and the level from which he begins. 
Obviously, then, there is a proper place for preachers and other 
technical advisers in the disciplines of human betterment. But the 
limits within which such improvements may be made are small in 
comparison with the vast aspects of our nature and our 
circumstances which remain the same, and which will be very 
difficult to improve even were it desirable to do so. I am saying, 
therefore, that while there is a place for bettering oneself and 
others, solving problems and coping with situations is by no 
means the only or even the chief business of life. Nor is it the 
principal work of philosophy. 

Human purposes are pursued within an immense circling 
universe which does not seem to me to have purpose, in our 
sense, at all. Nature is much more playful than purposeful, and 
the probability that it has no special goals for the future need not 
strike one as a defect. On the contrary, the processes of nature as 
we see them both in the surrounding world and in the 
involuntary aspects of our own organisms are much more like art 
than like business, politics, or religion. They are especially like 
the arts of music and dancing, which unfold themselves without 
aiming at future destinations. No one imagines that a symphony 
is supposed to improve in quality as it goes along, or that the 
whole object of playing it is to reach the finale. The point of 


music is discovered in every moment of playing and listening to 
it. It is the same, I feel, with the greater part of our lives, and if 
we are unduly absorbed in improving them we may forget 
altogether to live them. The musician whose chief concern is to 
make every performance better than the last may so fail to 
participate and delight in his own music that he will impress his 
audience only with the anxious rigor of his technique. 

Thus it is by no means the main work of a philosopher to be 
classed with the moralists and reformers. There is such a thing as 
philosophy, the love of wisdom, in the spirit of the artist. Such 
philosophy will not preach or advocate practices leading to 
improvement. As I understand it, the work of the philosopher as 
artist is to reveal and celebrate the eternal and purposeless 
background of human life. Out of simple exuberance or wonder 
he wants to tell others of the point of view from which the world 
is unimaginably good as it is, with people just as they are. No 
matter how difficult it may be to express this point of view 
without sounding smug or appearing to be a wishful dreamer, 
some hint of it may be suggested if the philosopher has had the 
good fortune to have experienced it himself. 

This may sound like a purpose, like a desire to improve, to 
those who insist upon seeing all human activity in terms of goal- 
seeking. The trouble is that our Western common sense is firmly 
Artistotelian, and we therefore believe that the will never acts 
except for some good or pleasure. But upon analysis this turns out 
to say no more than that we do what we do, for if we always do 
what pleases us—even in committing suicide—there is no means 
of showing what pleases us apart from what we do. In using such 
logic I am only throwing a stone back to the glass house from 
which it came, for I am well aware that expressions of mystical 
experience will not stand the test of logic. But, unlike the 
Aristotelian, the mystic does not claim to be logical. His sphere of 
experience is the unspeakable. Yet this need mean no more than 
that it is the sphere of physical nature, of all that is not simply 
conceptions, numbers, or words. 

If the experience of “cosmic consciousness” is unspeakable, it is 
true that in trying to utter it in words one is not “saying” 
anything in the sense of conveying information or making a 
proposition. The speech expressing such an experience is more 
like an exclamation. Or better, it is the speech of poetry rather 


than logic, though not poetry in the impoverished sense of the 
logical positivist, the sense of decorative and beautiful nonsense. 
For there is a kind of speech that may be able to convey 
something without actually being able to say it. Korzybski ran 
into this difficulty in trying to express the apparently simple point 
that things are not what we say they are, that, for example, the 
word “water” is not itself drinkable. He formulated it in his “law 
of nonidentity,” that “whatever you say a thing is, it isn’t.” But 
from this it will follow that it isn’t a thing either, for if I say that 
a thing is a thing, it isn’t. What, then, are we talking about? He 
was trying to show that we are talking about the unspeakable 
world of the physical universe, the world that is other than 
words. Words represent it, but if we want to know it directly we 
must do so by immediate sensory contact. What we call things, 
facts, or events are after all no more than convenient units of 
perception, recognizable pegs for names, selected from the 
infinite multitude of lines and surfaces, colors and textures, 
spaces and densities which surround us. There is no more a fixed 
and final way of dividing these variations into things than of 
grouping the stars in constellations. 

From this example, however, it is certainly clear that we can 
point out the unspeakable world, and even convey the idea of its 
existence, without being able to say exactly what it is. We do not 
know what it is. We know only that it is. To be able to say what it 
is we must be able to classify it, but obviously the “all” in which 
the whole multiplicity of things is delineated cannot be classified. 

The sphere of “cosmic consciousness” is, I believe, the same as 
the unspeakable world of Korzybski and the semanticists. It is 
nothing “spiritual” in the usual sense of abstract or ideational. It 
is concretely physical, yet for this very reason ineffable (or 
unspeakable) and indefinable. “Cosmic” consciousness is a release 
from self-consciousness, that is to say from the fixed belief and 
feeling that one’s organism is an absolute and separate thing, as 
distinct from a convenient unit of perception. For if it becomes 
clear that our use of the lines and surfaces of nature to divide the 
world into units is only a matter of convenience, then all that I 
have called myself is actually inseparable from everything. This is 
exactly what one experiences in these extraordinary moments. It 
is not that the outlines and shapes which we call things and use to 
delineate things disappear into some sort of luminous void. It 


simply becomes obvious that though they may be used as 
divisions they do not really divide. However much I may be 
impressed by the difference between a star and the dark space 
around it, I must not forget that I can see the two only in relation 
to each other, and that this relation is inseparable. 

The most astonishing feature of this experience is, however, the 
conviction that this entire unspeakable world is “right,” so right 
that our normal anxieties become ludicrous, that if only men 
could see it they would go wild with joy, 


And the king be cutting capers, 
And the priest be picking flowers. 


Quite apart from the difficulty of relating this sensation to the 
problem of evil and pain, there is the question of the very 
meaning of the assertion “All shall be well, and all shall be well, 
and all manner of thing shall be well.” I can say only that the 
meaning of the assertion is the experience itself. Outside that 
state of consciousness it has no meaning, so much so that it 
would be difficult even to believe in it as a revelation without the 
actual experience. For the experience makes it perfectly clear that 
the whole universe is through and through the playing of love in 
every shade of the word’s use, from animal lust to divine charity. 
Somehow this includes even the holocaust of the biological 
world, where every creature lives by feeding on others. Our usual 
picture of this world is reversed so that every victim is seen as 
offering itself in sacrifice. 

If we are to ask whether this vision is true, we may first answer 
that there are no such things as truths by themselves: a truth is 
always in relation to a point of view. Fire is hot in relation to 
skin. The structure of the world appears as it does in relation to 
our organs of sense and our brains. Therefore certain alterations 
in the human organism may turn it into the sort of percipient for 
which the world is as it is seen in this vision. But, in the same 
way, other alterations will give us the truth of the world as it 
appears to the schizophrenic, or to the mind in black depression. 

There is, however, a possible argument for the superior truth of 
the “cosmic” experience. Its basis is simply that no energy system 
can be completely self-controlling without ceasing to move. 
Control is restraint upon movement, and because complete 


control would be complete restraint, control must always be 
subordinate to motion if there is to be motion at all. In human 
terms, total restraint of movement is the equivalent of total 
doubt, of refusal to trust one’s senses or feelings in any respect, 
and perhaps its embodiment is the extreme catatonic who refuses 
every motion or communication. On the other hand, movement 
and the release of restraint are the equivalent of faith, of 
committing oneself to the uncontrolled and unknown. In an 
extreme form this would mean the abandonment of oneself to 
utter caprice, and at first sight a life of such indiscriminate faith 
might seem to correspond to a vision of the world in which 
“everything is right.” Yet this point of view would exclude all 
control as wrong, and thus there would be no place in it for the 
rightness of restraint. An essential part of the “cosmic” experience 
is, however, that the normal restriction of consciousness to the 
ego-feeling is also right, but only and always because it is 
subordinate to absence of restriction, to movement and faith. 

The point is simply that, if there is to be any life and movement 
at all, the attitude of faith must be basic—the final and 
fundamental attitude—and the attitude of doubt secondary and 
subordinate. This is another way of saying that toward the vast 
and all-encompassing background of human life, with which the 
philosopher as artist is concerned, there must be total affirmation 
and acceptance. Otherwise there is no basis at all for caution and 
control with respect to details in the foreground. But it is all too 
easy to become so absorbed in these details that all sense of 
proportion is lost, and for man to make himself mad by trying to 
bring everything under his control. We become insane, unsound, 
and without foundation when we lose consciousness of and faith 
in the uncontrolled and ungraspable background world which is 
ultimately what we ourselves are. And there is a very slight 
distinction, if any, between complete, conscious faith and love. 


1 Ytian-chou (d. 1287), quoted by Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, vol. 2, p. 92. 


2 Bernard Berenson, Sketch for a Self-Portrait, p. 18. Pantheon Books, New York, 
1949. 


3 Dame Julian of Norwich (1342—c. 1414), Revelations of Divine Love, xxvii. Ed. 
Grace Warrack. London, 1949. “Behovable” has the sense of “playing a 
necessary part.” Compare the celebrated passage in the Roman liturgy of Holy 
Saturday, “O truly necessary sin of Adam, which the death of Christ has blotted 


out! O happy fault, that merited such and so great a redeemer!” 

4 Quoted from a privately printed account of the experience by William James, 
Varieties of Religious Experience, p. 399. London, 1929. Italics mine. 

5 Dostoyevsky, The Possessed, pp. 240-41. Trans. Constance Garnett. Modern 
Library, New York, 1936. 


2 


INSTINCT, INTELLIGENCE, 
AND ANXIETY 


| the moment of birth it is only a matter of weeks 


for little birds to fly, ducklings to swim, kittens to hunt and climb 
trees, and young monkeys to swing in the branches. Though these 
creatures live much shorter lives than men, proportionately it 
takes them only a fraction of the time required for the civilized 
human being to learn the essential arts of life. For them the mere 
fact of existence seems to guarantee the skills for survival, and 
one might almost say that its techniques are built into their 
bodies. But for human beings, survival in the context of a 
civilized community demands the mastery of an art of thinking, 
learning, and choosing which takes up about a quarter of the 
average span of life. Furthermore, it seems that living in a 
civilized society calls for a way of thinking and acting entirely 
different from the ways of animals, insects, and plants. Ordinarily 
this is called, rather vaguely, the way of intelligence as over 
against the way of instinct. The difference is roughly that action 
by instinct is spontaneous, whereas action by intelligence 
involves a difficult process of analysis, prediction, and decision. 

Both forms of action are astonishingly skillful, though thus far 
it seems that the way of intelligence is the better guarantor of 
survival—at least in so far as its application in technology has 
increased our average life expectancy by some twenty years. But 
the gains of action by intelligence are bought at a price which at 
times seems so heavy that we might ask whether they are worth 
it. For the price of intelligence as we now know it is chronic 
anxiety, anxiety which appears to increase—oddly enough—to 
the very degree that human life is subjected to intelligent 
organization. 

The type of intelligence that we have cultivated brings anxiety 
for at least three principal reasons. The first is that intelligent 
thinking works by dividing the world of experience into separate 
facts and events, simple enough for conscious attention to focus 
upon them one at a time. But there are innumerable ways of 
dividing and selecting for attention the facts and events, the data, 
required for any prediction or decision, and thus when the 
moment comes for a choice there is always the rankling doubt 


that important data may have been overlooked. There is therefore 
no complete assurance that an important decision is right. Thus 
the ever-frustrated effort to gain complete assurance by reviewing 
the data becomes the special anxiety which we call a sense of 
responsibility. The second is that the sense of responsibility goes 
hand in hand with a heightened sense of being an independent 
individual—a source of action which cannot depend upon simple 
instinct or spontaneity for doing the appropriate thing. The 
intelligent man therefore feels independent of or cut off from the 
rest of nature, and in trying, ever frustratedly, to figure nature 
out with sufficient accuracy he acquires a feeling of fear and 
hostility toward everything outside his own will and its full 
control. The third is that conscious attention reviews facts and 
events in series, even though they may be happening all together 
at once. Thinking about them in series and making predictions 
and decisions about the future course of the series gives the 
intelligent man a vivid awareness of time. It appears to him as a 
basic life process which he must work against. He knows that he 
must calculate rapidly to forestall it, though reviewing nature 
analytically, piece by piece, is not conducive to speed. 
Furthermore, knowledge of the future brings about emotional 
reactions to future events before they happen, and thus anxiety 
because, for example, one may get sick or will eventually die. 
And apparently this does not trouble the creatures who act by 
instinct. 

Now action by intelligence is in a special and high degree 
characteristic of Western civilization, though other civilizations 
have developed it highly enough to experience the same problem 
of chronic anxiety. But Western civilization has acquired by far 
the greatest measure of skill in controlling the course of events by 
organized intelligence. Yet this appears to have intensified rather 
than abated our anxiety. For to the extent that we have analyzed 
the natural world and the human world more thoroughly, to that 
extent it appears to us to be more complicated. The scope of our 
detailed information about the world is so vast that every 
individual, every responsible source of action, finds it too great to 
master—without depending upon the collaboration of others who 
are, however, beyond his control. Collaboration requires faith, 
but faith is an instinctual attitude; speaking quite strictly, it is not 
intelligent to trust what you have not analyzed. 


It looks, then, as if there is conflict, contradiction, and thus 
anxiety in the very nature of intelligence. As an efficient though 
slow and laborious means of conscious control, it builds up a 
body of information too complex to be grasped by its own 
method of reviewing events and facts one after another in series. 
Machines or other people must be trusted to assist: but how much 
must one know, how many facts must one review, before 
deciding to accept a collaborator? Intelligence, which is in some 
sense systematic doubt, cannot proceed very far without also 
having to embrace its polar opposite—instinctual faith. So long as 
intelligence and faith seem mutually exclusive this is an 
impossible contradiction, for to the degree that intelligence is 
systematic doubt it cannot trust itself. This is why lack of self- 
confidence is the peculiar neurosis of civilized man, and why he 
elaborates ever more complex arrangements for legal 
safeguarding, foolproofing, and checking, double-checking, and 
triple-checking every decisive action. All of which leads to the 
kind of bureaucratic stalemate with which we are so familiar. (I 
recall a recent incident in a department of the University of 
California where it was impossible to spend twenty-five dollars on 
a supply typist without filling out a complex form with twelve 
carbons, four of which were illegible.) 

Not only the anxiety but also the sheer stalemate and paralysis 
which often attend strictly intelligent and noninstinctual action 
are the more important causes of anti-intellectual movements in 
our society. It is through impatience and exasperation with such 
snarls that democracies vote themselves into dictatorships. It is in 
protest against the laborious unmanageability of vast technical 
knowledge in literature, painting, and music that writers and 
artists go berserk and break every rule in the name of sheer 
instinctual exuberance. It is in revolt against the insufferable 
heaps of unproductive paper-work that small businesses sell out 
to big corporations, and independent professional men take 
routine salaried jobs without responsibility. It is in disgust with 
the complex organization of the omnipotent registrar’s office and 
the unimaginative pedantry of the Ph.D. course that people of 
real genius or creative ability are increasingly unable to work in 
our universities. It is also in despair of being able to understand 
or make any productive contribution to the highly organized 
chaos of our politico-economic system that large numbers of 


people simply abandon political and social commitments. They 
just let society be taken over by a pattern of organization which 
is as self-proliferative as a weed, and whose ends and values are 
neither human nor instinctual but mechanical. And we should 
note that a self-contradictory system of action breeds forms of 
revolt which are contradictory among themselves. 

To some extent it is certainly a manifestation of this anti- 
intellectualism that there has recently been a marked increase of 
Western interest in the philosophies and religions of Asia. Unlike 
Christianity—for reasons which we shall explain—these are ways 
of life which seem, above all, to offer release from conflict and 
anxiety. Their goal is a state of inner feeling in which oppositions 
have become mutually co-operative instead of mutually exclusive, 
in which there is no longer any conflict between the individual 
man and nature, or between intelligence and instinct. Their view 
of the world is unitary (or, to be quite technical, “nondualistic”), 
and in such a world there is no absolute overwhelming urgency 
to be right rather than wrong, or to live rather than die. It is, 
however, quite difficult for us to understand this point of view, 
for the very reason that we habitually regard opposites as 
mutually exclusive, like God and the Devil. Because of this, our 
idea of unity and our way of solving conflicts is simply to 
eliminate one of the two parties. In other words, we have 
difficulty in seeing the relativity or mutual interdependence of 
contraries. For this reason our revolts against the excesses of 
intelligence are always in danger of selling out to instinct. 

But this is the habitual dualist’s solution to the problem of 
dualism: to solve the dilemma by chopping off one of the horns. 
At the same time, it is perhaps an understandable reaction to the 
conflict in which Western man has been placed by both 
Christianity and scientific rationalism. Christianity, even as it is 
understood by quite thoughtful Christians, is certainly no remedy 
for anxiety. In Christianity it matters not just very much but 
absolutely that one choose good rather than evil, for one’s eternal 
destiny depends upon the decision. Yet to be certain that one is 
saved is the sin of presumption and to be certain that one is 
damned is the sin of despair. Likewise God as the rational 
principle of the universe stands on the side of intelligence rather 
than instinct, and particularly on the side of a humble or self- 
doubting intelligence—since man has been perverted by original 


sin in all his faculties, both animal and rational. To be contrite, 
repentant, and free from pride demands a constant and vigilant 
revival of the conflict between one’s better half and one’s innate 
perversity. This is certainly a heroic and energetically fact-facing 
discipline. But the more sensitively and wakefully it is pursued, 
the more one comes to a paralysis of the will. The facts of one’s 
nature are discovered to be astoundingly complex and slippery, 
evil masquerading with endless subtlety as good, and construing 
the good as evil. And in this perplexity it still matters absolutely 
that one choose the good. 

There are two obvious escapes from this dilemma. One is to 
stop being too keenly intelligent and too acutely conscious of the 
facts of one’s inner life, and to fall back upon an inflexibly 
formal, traditional, and authoritarian pattern of thought and 
action—as if to say, “Just do the right thing, and don’t be 
sophisticatedly psychological about your motives. Just obey, and 
don’t ask questions.” This is called sacrificing the pride of the 
intellect. But here we find ourselves in another dilemma, for the 
religion of simple obedience soon totters toward empty formalism 
and moral legalism with no heart in it the very Pharisaism against 
which Christ railed. The other escape is into a romanticism of the 
instincts, a glorification of mere impulse ignoring the equally 
natural gift of will and reason. This is actually a modern form of 
the old practice of selling one’s soul to the Devil—always a 
possible release from anxiety and conflict because damnation 
could at least be certain. 

Hinduism and Buddhism have recognized that man’s path is a 
razor’s edge and that there is no real escape from the great 
conflicts of feeling and action. Yet, unlike most forms of 
Christianity, they do envisage, not an escape, but a resolution of 
the conflict within this present life. Their answer is, moreover, 
deceptively close to the “anything goes” attitude of instinctual 
romanticism—at least this is true of the more profound and 
inward forms of their doctrine, which are just those having so 
much appeal to the West. For they do indeed teach that good and 
evil, pleasure and pain, life and death are mutually 
interdependent, and that there is a Tao; a way of nature or a 
balance of nature, from which we can never actually deviate— 
however wrongly we may act from a limited point of view. 

Yet their grasp of the mutuality of opposites is infinitely more 


thorough than that of our romanticist with his exclusive valuation 
of precipitate and uncalculated action. The difficult and subtle 
point which the romanticist misses and which, on the other 
extreme, the strict intellectual rationalist cannot understand at 
all, is that if all action and existence is in accord with the 
undeviating Tao or way of nature, no special means or methods 
are required to bring this accord into being. In the language of 
Zen, such means are “legs on a snake,” or irrelevancies—and 
these include precisely the choice of impulsive rather than 
reflective and intelligent action. The romanticist advertises his 
ignorance of the Tao in the very act of trying to be spontaneous, 
and of preferring the so-called natural and instinctual to the 
artificial and intelligent. 

To overcome the conflict between intelligence and instinct it is 
first necessary to understand, or at least imagine, a point of view, 
or perhaps a state of mind, which is experiential rather than 
intellectual—a kind of sensation rather than a set of ideas. When 
put into words, this sensation is always paradoxical, but in 
experience it is not paradoxical at all. Everyone who has felt it 
has always felt at the same time that it is totally simple and clear. 
However, I think the same is true of all our sensations. There 
seems to be no paradox in describing our more ordinary 
sensations because everyone has had them, and the listener 
always knows what you mean. There is no problem in 
understanding me when I say, “I see light because of the sun.” 
But it is also true that the sun is light because I see—because, in 
other words, light is a relationship between the eyes and the sun, 
and the description of relationships always tends to sound 
paradoxical. When the earth collides with a meteor, we can say 
either that the meteor ran into the earth or that the earth ran into 
the meteor. Whichever we say depends upon an arbitrary frame 
of reference, and so both statements are true, even though 
apparently contradictory. 

In the same way it is only apparently contradictory to describe a 
sensation in which it seems that whatever I do freely and 
intelligently is at the same time completely determined, and vice 
versa. It seems that absolutely everything both inside and outside 
me is happening by itself; yet at the same time that I myself am 
doing all of it, that my separate individuality is simply a function, 
something being done by everything which is not me, yet at the 


same time everything which is not me is a function of my 
separate individuality. Ordinarily we can see the truth of these 
seemingly paradoxical feelings if we take them separately, if we 
look at one without looking simultaneously at the other. This is 
why, for example, the arguments for free will and determinism 
are equally cogent though seemingly contradictory. The same 
goes for almost all the great debates of Western philosophy—the 
realists against the nominalists, the idealists against the 
materialists, and so on. We get into conflicts and debates about 
these problems because our language and our way of thinking are 
somewhat clumsy in their grasp of relationship. In other words, 
because it is much easier for us to see opposites as mutually 
exclusive than as mutually interdependent. 

The sensation I am trying to describe is the experience of things 
and events in relationship, as distinct from the partial experience 
of things and events in separation. I have sometimes said that if 
we could translate the modern Western theory of relativity into 
experience, we should have what the Chinese and the Indians call 
the Absolute—as when they say that everything which happens is 
the Tao, or that all things are of one “suchness.” What they mean 
is that all things are in relation, and thus that—considered simply 
by itself—no thing, no event, has any reality. There seem to be 
relatively few people, even in the civilizations of Asia, for whom 
relationship is an actual sensation, over and above a mere idea. 
The anxiety which comes about through the conflict of 
intelligence with instinct, of man as the conscious will with 
nature both in and around him, does not seem to me to have any 
solution unless we can actually feel relationship, unless it is a 
matter of clear sensation that as determined beings we are free, 
and that as free beings we are determined. For if we can feel this 
way, it will not appear that the use of will and intelligence is a 
conflict with our natural environment and endowment. 

It is surely obvious that how you do things depends crucially 
upon how you feel. If you feel inwardly isolated from the natural 
world, your dealings with it will tend to be hostile and 
aggressive. It is not so much a matter of what you do as of how 
you do it, not so much the content as the style of action adopted. 
It is easy enough to see this in leading or persuading other 
people, for one and the same communication may have quite 
opposite results according to the style or feeling with which it is 


given. Yet this is equally true in dealing with inanimate nature 
and with our own inner nature—with our instincts and appetites. 
They will yield to intelligence much more agreeably to the extent 
that we feel ourselves to be one with them, or, to put it in 
another way, to be in relationship to them, to have the unity of 
mutual interdependence. 

Furthermore, the sensation of relationship simply wipes out 
those special anxieties of the intelligence which come about as a 
result of the exaggerated feeling of individual responsibility of 
choice and of working against time. For this is the sensation 
which, however garbled and perverted, is the impulse underlying 
the great religious traditions of the world—the sensation of basic 
inseparability from the total universe, of the identity of one’s own 
self with the Great Self beneath all that exists. 

Why, then, do we not feel relationship? Why is the mutual 
interdependence between ourselves and the external world not 
the most obvious and dominant fact of consciousness? Why do we 
not see that the world we try to control, our whole inner and 
outer natural environment, is precisely that which gives us the 
power to control anything? It is because we look at things 
separately instead of simultaneously. When we are busy trying to 
control or change our circumstances, we ignore and are 
unconscious of the dependence of our consciousness and energy 
upon the outer world. When, on the other hand, we are oppressed 
by circumstances and feel controlled by the outer world, we 
forget that our very own consciousness is bringing that world into 
being. For, as I said, the sun is light because there are eyes to see 
it—noises because there are ears to hear them, hard facts because 
there is soft skin to feel them. But this is an unfamiliar point of 
view, and at once we disclaim it, saying, “Oh, but I didn’t make 
my consciousness, my eyes, my ears, and my sensitive skin! They 
were given to me by my father and mother, or perhaps by God.” 

But should we not, then, make the same disclaimer when 
things are going well, and when the conscious intellect is busy 
pushing the universe around? Furthermore, if my consciousness is 
something which I do not fully control, something given to me by 
my parents, who or what is the “I” which “has” this 
consciousness? Who am I if not this consciousness which I have 
just disclaimed? Surely it is obvious that there is no sort of little 
man inside us who has or who owns this consciousness on trust. 


This is a figment of speech taken too seriously. If, therefore, 
consciousness ceases to ignore itself and becomes fully self- 
conscious, it discovers two things: (1) that it controls itself only 
very slightly, and is thoroughly dependent on other things— 
father and mother, external nature, biological processes, God, or 
what you will, and (2) that there is no little man inside, no “I” 
who owns this consciousness. And if that is so, if 1 do not own my 
consciousness, and if there is even no “me” to own it, to receive 
it, or to put up with it, who on earth is there to be either the 
victim of fate or the master of nature? “What is troubling us,” 
said Wittgenstein, “is the tendency to believe that the mind is like 
a little man within.” 

Now if we examine the records of mystical experience, or of 
what I am now calling the experience of relationship, we shall 
find that, time and time again, it is connected with “spiritual 
poverty”—that is to say, with giving up the ownership of 
everything, including oneself or one’s consciousness. It is the total 
abandonment of proprietorship on the external world of nature 
and the internal world of the human organism. This does not 
come about through the virtue of the will, through one’s own 
strength, which in any case is not one’s own. It comes about from 
the insight that there is no proprietor, no inner controller. This 
becomes evident as soon as the consciousness which has felt itself 
to be the inner controller starts to examine itself, and finds out 
that it does not give itself the power of control. Its push is 
nature’s pull; it is a loop in an endless knot, where a pull from the 
right is a push from the left. 

When it thus becomes clear that I own nothing, not even what I 
have called myself, it is as if, to use St. Paul’s words, I had 
nothing but possessed all things. When I can no more identify 
myself with that little man inside, there is nothing left to identify 
with—except everything! There is no longer the slightest 
contradiction between feeling like a leaf on a stream and 
throwing one’s whole energy into responsible action, for the push 
is the pull. And thus in using intelligence to change what has 
hitherto been the course of nature, one has the realization that 
this is a new bend in the course and that the whole flood of the 
stream is behind it. 

All that I have been describing is a subjective feeling. It gives 
no specific direction as to what is or is not a proper use of 


intelligence in varying the course of nature—which must always 
be a matter of opinion and of trial and error. What it does give is 
what I feel to be a correct apprehension of the continuum, of the 
context, in which we are working, and this seems to me to be 
prior to, basic to, the problem of what exactly is to be done. 
Much as we discuss the latter question, is it really sensible to do 
so until we are more aware of the context in which action is to be 
taken? That context is our relationship to the whole so-called 
objective world of nature—and relationship as something 
concrete, as more than an abstract and theoretical positioning of 
billiard balls, is practically screened out of consciousness by our 
present use of intelligence. 

Just as the study of natural history was first an elaborate 
classification of the separate species and only recently involved 
ecology, the study of the interrelation of species, so intelligence 
as a whole is at first no more than a division of the world into 
things and events. This overstresses the independence and 
separateness of things, and of ourselves from them, as things 
among things. It is the later task of intelligence to appreciate the 
inseparable relationships between the things so divided, and so to 
rediscover the universe as distinct from a mere multiverse. In so 
doing it will see its own limitations, see that intelligence alone is 
not enough—that it cannot operate, cannot be intelligence, 
without an approach to the world through instinctual feeling with 
its possibility of knowing relationship as you know when you 
drink it that water is cold. 


3 


ZEN AND THE PROBLEM 
OF CONTROL 


A. we now know him, the human being seems to be a 


trap set to catch himself. Though this has doubtless been true for 
thousands of years, it has recently been accentuated in a peculiar 
way by man’s sudden development, through science and 
technology, of so many new means of controlling himself and his 
environment. In the early days of modern science the situation 
was less obvious, for the application of scientific controls to 
nature and to ourselves seemed to be something that we could 
extend indefinitely along wide and unobstructed roads. But 
today, after the Second World War and past the middle of the 
twentieth century, the snag in the problem of control is beginning 
to make itself obvious in almost every field of man’s activity. It is, 
perhaps, at its very clearest in the sciences of communication 
which include study of the dynamics of control, and also in 
psychology, the science which deals most intimately with man 
himself. 

In its simplest and most basic form—of which all its other 
forms are just extensions and exaggerations—the problem is this: 
man is a self-conscious and therefore self-controlling organism, 
but how is he to control the aspect of himself which does the 
controlling? All attempts to solve this problem seem to end in a 
snarl, whether at the individual level or at the social. At the 
individual level the snarl manifests itself in what we call acute 
self-consciousness, as when a public speaker frustrates himself by 
his very effort to speak well. At the social level it manifests itself 
as a loss in freedom of movement increasing with every attempt 
to regulate action by law. In other words, there is a point beyond 
which self-control becomes a form of paralysis—as if I wanted 
simultaneously to throw a ball and hold it to its course with my 
hand. 

Technology, which increases the power and range of human 
control, at the same time increases the intensity of these snarls. 
The apparent multiplication of psychological disorders in our 
technological culture is perhaps due to the fact that more and 
more individuals find themselves caught in these snarls—in 
situations which the psychiatric anthropologist Gregory Bateson 


has called the “double-bind” type, where the individual is 
required to make a decision which at the same time he cannot or 
must not make. He is called upon, in other words, to do 
something contradictory, and this is usually within the sphere of 
self-control, the sort of contradiction epitomized in the title of a 
well-known book, You Must Relax. Need it be said that the 
demand for effort in “must” is inconsistent with the demand for 
effortlessness in “relax”? 

Now it is of great interest that we cannot effectively think 
about self-control without making a separation between the 
controller and the controlled, even when—as the word “self- 
control” implies—the two are one and the same. This lies behind 
the widespread conception of man as a double or divided being 
composed of a higher self and a lower, of reason and instinct, 
mind and body, spirit and matter, voluntary and involuntary, 
angel and animal. So conceived, man is never actually self- 
controlling. It is rather that one part of his being controls 
another, so that what is required of the controlling part is that it 
exert its fullest effort and otherwise be freely and uninhibitedly 
itself. And the conception is all very well—until it fails. Then who 
or what is to blame? Was the lower, controlled self too strong, or 
was the higher, controlling self too weak? If the former, man as 
the controller cannot be blamed. If the latter, something must be 
done to correct the weakness. But this means, in other words, 
that the higher, controlling self must control itself—or else we 
must posit a still higher self available to step in and control the 
controller. Yet this can go on forever. 

The problem is well illustrated in the Christian theory of virtue, 
which for centuries has put an immense double-bind on Western 
man. The greatest commandment is that “Thou shalt love the Lord 
thy God”—and, note the addition—“with all thy heart, and all thy 
soul, and all thy mind.” How can such a commandment be 
obeyed? The addition implies that it is not enough to think and 
act as if I loved God. I am not asked to pretend that I love. I am 
asked really to mean it, to be completely sincere. Jesus’ whole 
condemnation of the Parisees was that they obeyed the law of 
God insincerely—with their lips and hands, but not with their 
hearts. But, if the heart is the controller, how is it to convert 
itself? If Iam to love sincerely, I must love with my whole being, 
with unhindered spontaneity. But this amounts to saying that I 


must be spontaneous, and controlled or willed spontaneity is a 
contradiction! 

Christian theology has attempted to clarify the problem by 
saying that the heart cannot convert itself without the help of 
God, without divine grace, a power that descends from above to 
control the controller. But this has never been a solution because 
it is really a postponement of the solution, or a repetition of the 
same problem at another level. For if I am commanded to love 
God, and if obeying the commandment requires God’s grace, then 
I am commanded to get God’s grace. Once again, I am 
commanded to control the controller who, in this case, is God. Or 
to put it in still other terms, I am commanded to lay myself open 
to the influence of God’s grace. But will I truly lay myself open if 
I do it halfheartedly? And if I have to do it wholeheartedly, must 
I not have the grace to lay myself open to grace? This, too, can go 
on forever. 

The point which emerges here is that the problem of self- 
control is not made any clearer, but rather the contrary, by 
splitting the self into two parts—and it matters not whether the 
self in question be the human organism or the whole universe. 
This is why all types of dualistic philosophy are ultimately 
unsatisfactory, even though we do not seem to be able to think 
effectively about problems of control without resorting to 
dualism. For if the human organism does not have a separate 
controlling part, if the higher self is simply the same as the lower, 
self-control must seem to our dualistic way of thinking as 
impossible as trying to make a finger point at its own tip. We 
might argue that self-control is an illusion and that man’s 
organism is a completely determined machine. But the argument 
is actually self-contradictory. For when a machine states that it is 
a machine, it is presuming that it is able to observe itself—and 
once again we have the apparent absurdity of the finger pointing 
at itself. In other words, to assert that I am not capable of self- 
control at once implies a measure of self-knowledge, self- 
observation, and, to that degree, of self-control. The human 
predicament seems to be a trap whichever way we look at it—if 
to deny one’s self-consciousness is to assert it, and if to assert it, 
as seems inevitable, is to be caught in a paradox and involved in 
a double-bind. 

The division of man into higher and lower selves does not 


clarify the problem of self-control, because it remains a useful 
description of the dynamics of control only so long as the (higher) 
will succeeds in mastering the (lower) feelings. But when the will 
fails and needs somehow to strengthen itself or transform itself 
from ill-will to good, the dualistic description of man is not only 
useless but confusing. For it is a way of thinking which divides 
man from himself at the very moment when he needs “to get with 
himself.” That is to say, when the will is struggling with itself and 
is in conflict with itself it is paralyzed, like a person trying to 
walk in two opposite directions at once. At such moments the will 
has to be released from its paralysis in rather the same way that 
one turns the front wheel of a bicycle in the direction in which 
one is falling. Surprisingly, to the beginner, one does not lose 
control but regains it. The moralist, like the beginning bicyclist, 
can never believe that turning to the direction in which one’s will 
is falling will bring about anything but a complete moral fall. Yet 
the unexpected psychological fact is that man cannot control 
himself unless he accepts himself. In other words, before he can 
change his course of action he must first be sincere, going with 
and not against his nature, even when the immediate trend of his 
nature is toward evil, toward a fall. The same is true in sailing a 
boat, for when you want to sail against the direction of the wind, 
you do not invite conflict by turning straight into the wind. You 
tack against it, keeping the wind in your sails. So, also, in order 
to recover himself the automobile driver must turn in the 
direction of a skid. 

Our problem is that our long indoctrination in dualistic 
thinking has made it a matter of common sense that we can 
control our nature only by going against it. But this is the same 
false common sense which urges the driver to turn against the 
skid. To maintain control we have to learn new reactions, just as 
in the art of judo one must learn not to resist a fall or an attack 
but to control it by swinging with it. Now judo is a direct 
application to wrestling of the Zen and Taoist philosophy of wu- 
wei, of not asserting oneself against nature, of not being in frontal 
opposition to the direction of things. The objective of the Zen 
way of life is the experience of awakening or enlightenment 
(insight, we should say in current psychological jargon), in which 
man escapes from the paralysis, the double-bind, in which the 
dualistic idea of self-control and self-consciousness involves him. 


In this experience man overcomes his feeling of dividedness or 
separateness—not only from himself as the higher controlling self 
against the lower controlled self, but also from the total universe 
of other people and things. The interest of Zen is that it provides 
a uniquely simple and classic example of a way of recognizing 
and dissolving the conflict or contradiction of self-consciousness. 
The student of Zen is confronted by a master who has himself 
experienced awakening, and is in the best sense of the expression 
a completely natural man. For the adept in Zen is one who 
manages to be human with the same artless grace and absence of 
inner conflict with which a tree is a tree. Such a man is likened to 
a ball in a mountain stream, which is to say that he cannot be 
blocked, stopped, or embarrassed in any situation. He never 
wobbles or dithers in his mind, for though he may pause in overt 
action to think a problem out, the stream of his consciousness 
always moves straight ahead without being caught in the vicious 
circles of anxiety or indecisive doubt, wherein thought whirls 
wildly around without issue. He is not precipitate or hurried in 
action, but simply continuous. This is what Zen means by being 
detached—not being without emotion or feeling, but being one in 
whom feeling is not sticky or blocked, and through whom the 
experiences of the world pass like the reflections of birds flying 
over water. Although possessed of complete inner freedom, he is 
not, like the libertine, in revolt against social standards, nor, like 
the self-righteous, trying to justify himself. He is all of a piece 
with himself and with the natural world, and in his presence you 
feel that without strain or artifice he is completely “all here”’— 
sure of himself without the slightest trace of aggression. He is 
thus the grand seigneur, the spiritual aristocrat comparable to the 
type of worldly aristocrat who is so sure of the position given to 
him by birth that he has no need to condescend or put on airs. 
Confronted by such an example, the ordinary Zen student feels 
totally uncouth and ill at ease—particularly because his situation 
as student requires him to try to respond to the master with the 
same unhesitating and unself-conscious naturalness. Worse still, 
the gambits to which he must respond are koans or problem- 
questions which are designed to plunk him straight into double- 
bind situations. A typical koan is, “Show me your original face 
which you had before your father and mother conceived you!” 
Show me—in other words—your genuine, deepest self, not the 


self which depends on family and conditioning, on learning or 
experience, or any kind of artifice. 

Obviously, a consciously planned and thought-out answer will 
not do, for this will spring from the student’s culturally 
conditioned ego, from the personal role which he is playing. Thus 
no deliberate or willed response will answer the problem, since 
this will show only the acquired self. On the other hand, the only 
alternative under the circumstances will be for the student to try 
to make a _ response which is wholly spontaneous and 
unpremeditated. But here is the double-bind. Just try to be 
natural! A student once asked one of the old Chinese masters, 
“What is the Way?” He replied, “Your ordinary [that is, natural] 
mind is the Way.” “How,” continued the student, “am I to accord 
with it?” “When you try to accord with it,” said the master, “you 
deviate from it.” This means, too, that it will be no good for the 
student not to try, for this will still be intentional and thus an 
indirect way of trying. Under these circumstances most students 
are nonplussed and blocked for a considerable length of time, for 
when asked to act without controlling themselves they are faced 
with their own acting and existing and so paralyzed by self- 
consciousness. 

In this predicament, the student discovers that so long as he is 
aware of himself he cannot—obviously—be unself-conscious. 
When he tries to forget himself, he remembers that he is trying to 
forget. On the other hand, when he does forget himself by 
absorption in everyday affairs, he finds that he is carried away by 
affairs and that he is responding to them not spontaneously but 
by socially conditioned habit. He is just unconsciously acting his 
role, and still not showing his original face. The master will not 
let him escape into this unconsciousness, for every confrontation 
with the student reminds him painfully of his awkward self. By 
these means the student is at last convinced that his ego, the self 
which he has believed himself to be, is nothing but a pattern of 
habits or artificial reactions. Strain as it will, there is nothing it 
can do to be natural, to let go of itself. 

At this point the student feels himself to be a complete and 
abject failure. His acquired personality, his learning and 
knowledge seem—at least for this purpose—worthless. Hitherto, 
be it remembered, he has been trying—or trying not to try—to 
show his genuine self, to act in perfect sincerity. He now knows 


beyond any shadow of doubt that he cannot do it; somehow it 
must happen by itself. He finds, then, that he has no alternative 
but to be, to accept, the awkward, self-conscious, and conditioned 
creature that he is. But here, too, he runs into an apparent 
contradiction. For the idea of accepting oneself is another double- 
bind. Oneself includes conflicts—objections and resistances to 
oneself—and thus one is asked to accept one’s not-accepting. Let 
your mind alone; let it think whatever it likes. But one of the 
things it likes is interfering with itself. Or look at it the other way 
around. As a Zen student he has been meditating, spending hours 
trying to keep his mind still, concentrating only on the koan or on 
his breathing, and cutting out distracting thoughts. But this is the 
blind leading the blind, for the mind that needs to be controlled 
is the one that does the controlling. Thought is trying to drive out 
thought. 

At this moment there is a sudden flash of psychological 
lightning. What should have been obvious all the time has leaped 
into full clarity, and the student runs to his master and, without 
the least difficulty, shows him his “original face.” What 
happened? All this time the student had been paralyzed by the 
ingrained conviction that he was one thing, and his mind, or 
thoughts, or sensations, another. Thus when faced with himself, 
he had always felt split in two—unable to show himself all of a 
piece, without contradiction. But now it has suddenly become a 
self-evident feeling that there is no separate thinker who “has” or 
who controls the thoughts. Thinker and thoughts are the same. 
After all, if you begin to let your mind think what it likes, the 
next moment it wants to interfere with itself, so let it do that. So 
long as you let it think what it wants at each successive moment, 
there is absolutely no effort, no difficulty, in letting it go. But the 
disappearance of the effort to let go is precisely the disappearance 
of the separate thinker, of the ego trying to watch the mind 
without interfering. Now there is nothing to try to do, for 
whatever comes up moment by moment is accepted, including 
not-accepting. For a second the thinker seems to be responding to 
the flow of thought with the immediacy of a mirror image, and 
then suddenly it dawns that there is no mirror and no image. 
There is simply the flow of thought—one after another without 
interference—and the mind really knows itself. There is no 
separate mind which stands aside and looks at it. 


Furthermore, when the dualism of thinker and thought 
disappears so does that of subject and object. The individual no 
more feels himself to be standing back from his sensations of the 
external world, just as he is no longer a thinker standing back 
from his thoughts. He therefore has a vivid sense of himself as 
identical with what he sees and hears, so that his subjective 
impression comes into accord with the physical fact that man is 
not so much an organism in an environment as an organism- 
environment relationship. The relationship is, as it were, more 
real than its two terms, somewhat as the inner unity of a stick is 
more solid than the difference of its two ends. 

The human being who has realized this unity is no longer a 
trap set to catch itself. For self-consciousness is no more a state of 
being in two minds, which, fortuitously enough, also means a 
state of indecision and dither and psychic paralysis. This is what 
self-consciousness becomes when we try to handle it dualistically, 
taking as real the conventions of thought and speech which 
separate “I” from “myself,” as well as mind from body, spirit from 
matter, knower from known. In separation, the self I know is 
never the one I need to know, and the one I control is never the 
one I need to control. Politically, this dualism is manifested in the 
separation of the government or the state from the people, which 
occurs even in a democracy, a supposedly self-governing 
community. But governments and states have to exist when 
people have no inner feeling of their solidarity with others, when 
human society is nothing more than an abstract term for a 
collection of individuals—divided from each other because each 
one is divided from himself. 

In the Eastern world, Zen and other means of setting man free 
from his own clutches have been the concern only of small 
minorities. In the West, where we believe in, or are at least 
committed to, the dissemination of knowledge to all, we have no 
Zen masters with whom to study. Yet in this we may have an 
advantage, for the separation of master from student is another 
form of the duality of the controller and the controlled which— 
obviously—would not have to exist if the organism-environment 
called man were truly self-controlling. This is why, in Zen, the 
master does not actually teach the student anything, but forces 
him to find out for himself, and, furthermore, does not think of 
himself as a master, since it is only from the standpoint of the 


unawakened student that there are masters. We are forced to find 
out for ourselves, not by masters, but by their absence, so that 
there is no temptation for us to lean on others. It is true that the 
Japanese Zen student has the presence of the master’s naturalness 
to embarrass him. But cannot we be embarrassed by our very 
natural environment of sky, earth, and water, as by the marvel of 
our own bodies, into making a response, into acting in a way that 
is commensurate with their splendor? Or must we continue to 
buffet them blindly with bulldozers, fancying ourselves as the 
independent controllers and conquerors of what is, after all, the 
greater and perhaps better half of ourselves? 

It is not my purpose here, nor is it really in the spirit of this 
whole point of view, to indicate the specific things which should 
be done to bring about some technological application of this 
new feeling of man’s relation to nature, both within and without 
his own organism. For what is important is not the particular 
things to be done but the attitude—the inner feeling and 
disposition—of the doer. What is needed is not a new kind of 
technique but a new kind of man, for as an old Taoist text says, 
“When the wrong man uses the right means, the right means 
work in the wrong way.” And the task of developing a new kind 
of man is not as difficult as it seems once we are disabused of the 
idea that self-change and self-control are no more a matter of 
conflict between higher and lower natures, of good intentions 
against recalcitrant instincts. The problem is to overcome the 
ingrained disbelief in the power of winning nature by love, in the 
gentle (ju) way (do) of turning with the skid, of controlling 
ourselves by cooperating with ourselves. 


4 


BEAT ZEN, SQUARE ZEN, 
AND ZEN 


NOTE 


The following essay first appeared in the Chicago Review for the 
Summer of 1958, and was later issued as a pamphlet by City Lights 
Books in San Francisco, to which certain additions were made, 
because this seemed to be a good context in which to discuss the 
influence of Zen on Western art, and because the original was 
published before the appearance of Kerouac’s Dharma Bums. The 
present version contains some further additions and amendments. 

I had supposed that the original version of this essay had made my 
own position with respect to “Beat Zen” and “Square Zen” perfectly 
clear. It was, of course, obvious that I was not using the word 
“square” as a taunt since I was not speaking from the standpoint of 
“beat.” But as a result of Stephen Mahoney’s article “The Prevalence 
of Zen” which appeared in The Nation in October, 1958, the 
impression has been circulating that I am a spokesman for “Square 
Zen.” By this term I was designating the traditional and official Zen 
schools of Japan, Binzai and Soto, to which many Westerners do 
indeed belong. I do not, nor do I represent them in any capacity. This 
is not because I disrespect them or have some quarrel with them, but 
because in matters of this kind I am temperamentally not a joiner. I 
do not even style myself a Zen Buddhist. For the aspect of Zen in 
which I am personally interested is nothing that can be organized, 
taught, transmitted, certified, or wrapped up in any kind of system. It 
can’t even be followed, for everyone has to find it for himself. As 
Plotinus said, it is “a flight of the alone to the Alone,” and as an old 
Zen poem says: 


If you do not get it from yourself, 
Where will you go for it? 


Fundamentally, this is in a sense the position of the whole Zen 
Buddhist tradition. Strictly speaking, there are no Zen masters because 
Zen has nothing to teach. From the earliest times those who have 
experienced Zen have always repulsed would-be disciples, not just to 
test their sincerity, but to give fair warning that the experience of 
awakening (satori) is not to be found by seeking, and is not in any 
case something that can be acquired or cultivated. But seekers have 
persistently refused to take this “No!” for an answer, and to this the 


Zen sages have responded with a kind of judo. Realizing the 
uselessness of just telling the seeker that seeking will not find, they 
have replied with counterquestions (koan) which have the effect of 
exciting the effort of seeking until it explodes with its own force, so 
that the student realizes the folly of seeking for himself—not just 
verbally but through to the very marrow of his bones. At this point the 
student “has” Zen. He knows himself to be one with all, for he is no 
longer separating himself from the universe by seeking something from 
it. 

On the surface, this looks like a master-disciple relationship. But 
essentially it is what Buddhists call upaya or “skillful means,” 
sometimes known as “giving a yellow leaf to a child to stop it crying 
for gold.” In the course of centuries, however, the process of refusal 
and counterquestioning has become increasingly formal. Temples and 
institutions have arisen where it may be carried on, and these have in 
turn created problems of ownership, administration, and discipline 
compelling Zen Buddhism to assume the form of a traditional 
hierarchy. In the Far East this has gone on for so long that it is part of 
the landscape, and some of its disadvantages are offset by the fact 
that it seems perfectly natural. There is nothing exotic or “special” 
about it. Even organizations can grow naturally. But it seems to me 
that the transplantation of this style of Zen to the West would be 
completely artificial. It would simply become another of the numerous 
cult organizations with their “spiritual claims, vested interests, and 
“in-groups” of followers, with the additional disadvantage of the snob 
appeal of being a “very esoteric” form of Buddhism. Let Zen soak into 
the West informally, like the drinking of tea. We can digest it better 
that way. 


I, is as difficult for Anglo-Saxons as for the Japanese to 


absorb anything quite so Chinese as Zen. For though the word 
“Zen” is Japanese and though Japan is now its home, Zen 
Buddhism is the creation of T’ang dynasty China. I do not say this 
as a prelude to harping upon the incommunicable subtleties of 
alien cultures. The point is simply that people who feel a 
profound need to justify themselves have difficulty in 
understanding the viewpoints of those who do not, and the 
Chinese who created Zen were the same kind of people as Laotzu, 
who, centuries before, had said, “Those who justify themselves do 
not convince.” For the urge to make or prove oneself right has 
always jiggled the Chinese sense of the ludicrous, since as both 
Confucians and Taoists—however different these philosophies in 
other ways—they have invariably appreciated the man who can 
“come off it.” To Confucius it seemed much better to be human- 
hearted than righteous, and to the great Taoists, Lao-tzu and 
Chuang-tzu, it was obvious that one could not be right without 
also being wrong, because the two were as inseparable as back 
and front. As Chuang-tzu said, “Those who would have good 
government without its correlative misrule, and right without its 
correlative wrong, do not understand the principles of the 
universe.” 

To Western ears such words may sound cynical, and the 
Confucian admiration of “reasonableness” and compromise may 
appear to be a weak-kneed lack of commitment to principle. 
Actually they reflect a marvellous understanding and respect for 
what we call the balance of nature, human and otherwise—a 
universal vision of life as the Tao or way of nature in which the 
good and the evil, the creative and the destructive, the wise and 
the foolish are the inseparable polarities of existence. “Tao,” said 
the Chung-yung, “is that from which one cannot depart. That from 
which one can depart is not the Tao.” Therefore wisdom did not 
consist in trying to wrest the good from the evil but in learning to 
“ride” them as a cork adapts itself to the crests and troughs of the 
waves. At the roots of Chinese life there is a trust in the good- 
and-evil of one’s own nature which is peculiarly foreign to those 


brought up with the chronic uneasy conscience of the Hebrew- 
Christian cultures. Yet it was always obvious to the Chinese that a 
man who mistrusts himself cannot even trust his mistrust, and 
must therefore be hopelessly confused. 

For rather different reasons, Japanese people tend to be as 
uneasy in themselves as Westerners, having a sense of social 
shame quite as acute as our more metaphysical sense of sin. This 
was especially true of the class most attracted to Zen, the samurai. 
Ruth Benedict, in that very uneven work Chrysanthemum and 
Sword, was, I think, perfectly correct in saying that the attraction 
of Zen to the samurai class was its power to get rid of an 
extremely awkward self-consciousness induced in the education 
of the young. Part and parcel of this self-consciousness is the 
Japanese compulsion to compete with oneself—a compulsion 
which turns every craft and skill into a marathon of self- 
discipline. Although the attraction of Zen lay in the possibility of 
liberation from self-consciousness, the Japanese version of Zen 
fought fire with fire, overcoming the “self observing the self” by 
bringing it to an intensity in which it exploded. How remote from 
the regimen of the Japanese Zen monastery are the words of the 
great T’ang master Lin-chi: 


In Buddhism there is no place for using effort. Just be 
ordinary and nothing special. Eat your food, move your 
bowels, pass water, and when you’re tired go and lie down. 
The ignorant will laugh at me, but the wise will understand. 


Yet the spirit of these words is just as remote from a kind of 
Western Zen which would employ this philosophy to justify a 
very self-defensive Bohemianism. 

There is no single reason for the extraordinary growth of 
Western interest in Zen during the last twenty years The appeal of 
Zen arts to the “modern” spirit in the West, the work of Suzuki, 
the war with Japan, the itchy fascination of “Zen stories,” and the 
attraction of a nonconceptual, experiential philosophy in the 
climate of scientific relativism—all these are involved. One might 
mention, too, the affinities between Zen and such purely Western 
trends as the philosophy of Wittgenstein, Existentialism, General 
Semantics, the metalinguistics of B. L. Whorf, and certain 
movements in the philosophy of science and in psychotherapy. 


Always in the background there is our vague disquiet with the 
artificiality or “antinaturalness” of both Christianity, with its 
politically ordered cosmology, and _ technology, with its 
imperialistic mechanization of a natural world from which man 
himself feels strangely alien. For both reflect a psychology in 
which man is identified with a conscious intelligence and will 
standing apart from nature to control it, like the architect-God in 
whose image this version of man is conceived. The disquiet arises 
from the suspicion that our attempt to master the world from 
outside is a vicious circle in which we shall be condemned to the 
perpetual insomnia of controlling controls and _ supervising 
supervision ad infinitum. 

To the Westerner in search of the reintegration of man and 
nature these is an appeal far beyond the merely sentimental in 
the naturalism of Zen—in the landscapes of Ma-yuan and Sesshu, 
in an art which is simultaneously spiritual and secular, which 
conveys the mystical in terms of the natural, and which, indeed, 
never even imagined a break between them. Here is a view of the 
world imparting a profoundly refreshing sense of wholeness to a 
culture in which the spiritual and the material, the conscious and 
the unconscious, have been cataclysmically split. For this reason 
the Chinese humanism and naturalism of Zen intrigue us much 
more strongly than Indian Buddhism or Vedanta. These, too, have 
their students in the West, but their followers seem for the most 
part to be displaced Christians—people in search of a more 
plausible philosophy than Christian supernaturalism to carry on 
the essentially Christian search for the miraculous. The ideal man 
of Indian Buddhism is clearly a superman, a yogi with absolute 
mastery of his own nature, according perfectly with the science- 
fiction ideal of “men beyond mankind. But the Buddha or 
awakened man of Chinese Zen is “ordinary and nothing special”; 
he is humorously human like the Zen tramps portrayed by Mu- 
ch’i and Liang-k’ai. We like this because here, for the first time, is 
a conception of the holy man and sage who is not impossibly 
remote, not superhuman but fully human, and, above all, not a 
solemn and sexless ascetic. Furthermore, in Zen the satori 
experience of awakening to our “original inseparability” with the 
universe seems, however elusive, always just around the corner. 
One has even met people to whom it has happened, and they are 
no longer mysterious occultists in the Himalayas or skinny yogis 


in cloistered ashrams. They are just like us, and yet much more at 
home in the world, floating much more easily upon the ocean of 
transience and insecurity. 

Above all, I believe that Zen appeals to many in the post- 
Christian West because it does not preach, moralize, and scold in 
the style of Hebrew-Christian prophetism. Buddhism does not 
deny that there is a relatively limited sphere in which human life 
may be improved by art and science, reason and good will. 
However, it regards this sphere of activity as important but 
nonetheless subordinate to the comparatively limitless sphere in 
which things are as they are, always have been, and always will 
be—a sphere entirely beyond the categories of good and evil, 
success and failure, and individual health and sickness. On the 
one hand, this is the sphere of the great universe. Looking out 
into it at night, we make no comparisons between right and 
wrong stars, nor between well and badly arranged constellations. 
Stars are by nature big and little, bright and dim. Yet the whole 
thing is a splendor and a marvel which sometimes makes our 
flesh creep with awe. On the other hand, this is also the sphere of 
human, everyday life which we might call existential. 

For there is a standpoint from which human affairs are as much 
beyond right and wrong as the stars, and from which our deeds, 
experiences, and feelings can no more be judged than the ups and 
downs of a range of mountains. Though beyond moral and social 
valuation, this level of human life may also be seen to be just as 
marvellous and uncanny as the great universe itself. This feeling 
may become particularly acute when the individual ego tries to 
fathom its own nature, to plumb the inner sources of its own 
actions and consciousness. For here it discovers a part of itself— 
the inmost and greatest part—which is strange to itself and 
beyond its understanding and control. Odd as it may sound, the 
ego finds that its own center and nature is beyond itself. The 
more deeply I go into myself, the more I am not myself, and yet 
this is the very heart of me. Here I find my own inner workings 
functioning of themselves, spontaneously, like the rotation of the 
heavenly bodies and the drifting of the clouds. Strange and 
foreign as this aspect of myself at first seems to be, I soon realize 
that it is me, and much more me than my superficial ego. This is 
not fatalism or determinism, because there is no longer anyone 
being pushed around or determined; there is nothing that this 


deep “I” is not doing. The configuration of my nervous system, 
like the configuration of the stars, happens of itself, and this 
“itself” is the real “myself.” 

From this standpoint—and here language reveals its limitations 
with a vengeance—I find that I cannot help doing and 
experiencing, quite freely, what is always “right,” in the sense 
that the stars are always in their “right” places. As Hsiang-yen put 
it, 


There’s no use for artificial discipline, 
For, move as I will, I manifest the ancient Tao. 


At this level, human life is beyond anxiety, for it can never make 
a mistake. If we live, we live; if we die, we die; if we suffer, we 
suffer; if we are terrified, we are terrified. There is no problem 
about it. A Zen master was once asked, “It is terribly hot, and 
how shall we escape the heat?” “Why not,” he answered, “go to 
the place where it is neither hot nor cold?” “Where is that place?” 
“In summer we sweat; in winter we shiver.” In Zen one does not 
feel guilty about dying, or being afraid, or disliking the heat. At 
the same time, Zen does not insist upon this point of view as 
something which one ought to adopt; it does not preach it as an 
ideal. For if you don’t understand it, your very not-understanding 
is also IT. There would be no bright stars without dim stars, and, 
without the surrounding darkness, no stars at all. 

The Hebrew-Christian universe is one in which moral urgency, 
the anxiety to be right, embraces and penetrates everything. God, 
the Absolute itself, is good as against bad, and thus to be immoral 
or in the wrong is to feel oneself an outcast not merely from 
human society but also from existence itself, from the root and 
ground of life. To be in the wrong therefore arouses a 
metaphysical anxiety and sense of guilt—a state of eternal 
damnation—utterly disproportionate to the crime. This 
metaphysical guilt is so insupportable that it must eventually 
issue in the rejection of God and of his laws—which is just what 
has happened in the whole movement of modern secularism, 
materialism, and naturalism. Absolute morality is profoundly 
destructive of morality, for the sanctions which it invokes against 
evil are far, far too heavy. One does not cure the headache by 
cutting off the head. The appeal of Zen, as of other forms of 


Eastern philosophy, is that it unveils behind the urgent realm of 
good and evil a vast region of oneself about which there need be 
no guilt or recrimination, where at last the self is 
indistinguishable from God. 

But the Westerner who is attracted by Zen and who would 
understand it deeply must have one indispensable qualification: 
he must understand his own culture so thoroughly that he is no 
longer swayed by its premises unconsciously. He must really have 
come to terms with the Lord God Jehovah and with his Hebrew- 
Christian conscience so that he can take it or leave it without fear 
or rebellion. He must be free of the itch to justify himself. Lacking 
this, his Zen will be either “beat” or “square,” either a revolt from 
the culture and social order or a new form of stuffiness and 
respectability. For Zen is above all the liberation of the mind 
from conventional thought, and this is something utterly different 
from rebellion against convention, on the one hand, or adapting 
foreign conventions, on the other. 

Conventional thought is, in brief, the confusion of the concrete 
universe of nature with the conceptual things, events, and values 
of linguistic and cultural symbolism. For in Taoism and Zen the 
world is seen as an inseparably interrelated field or continuum, 
no part of which can actually be separated from the rest or 
valued above or below the rest. It was in this sense that Huineng, 
the Sixth Patriarch, meant that “fundamentally not one thing 
exists,” for he realized that things are terms, not entities. They 
exist in the abstract world of thought, but not in the concrete 
world of nature. Thus one who actually perceives or feels this to 
be so no longer feels that he is an ego, except by definition. He 
sees that his ego is his persona or social role, a somewhat 
arbitrary selection of experiences with which he has been taught 
to identify himself. (Why, for example, do we say “I think” but 
not “I” am beating my heart”?) Having seen this, he continues to 
play his social role without being taken in by it. He does not 
precipitately adopt a new role or play the role of having no role 
at all. He plays it cool. 

The “beat” mentality as I am thinking of it is something much 
more extensive and vague than the hipster life of New York and 
San Francisco. It is a younger generation’s nonparticipation in 
“the American Way of Life,” a revolt which does not seek to 
change the existing order but simply turns away from it to find 


the significance of life in subjective experience rather than 
objective achievement. It contrasts with the “square” and other- 
directed mentality of beguilement by social convention, unaware 
of the correlativity of right and wrong, of the mutual necessity of 
capitalism and communism to each other’s existence, of the inner 
identity of puritanism and lechery, or of, say, the alliance of 
church lobbies and organized crime to maintain laws against 
gambling. 

Beat Zen is a complex phenomenon. It ranges from a use of Zen 
for justifying sheer caprice in art, literature, and life to a very 
forceful social criticism and “digging of the universe” such as one 
may find in the poetry of Ginsberg, Whalen, and Snyder, and, 
rather unevenly, in Kerouac, who is always a shade too self- 
conscious, too subjective, and too strident to have the flavor of 
Zen. 

When Kerouac gives his philosophical final statement, “I don’t 
know. I don’t care. And it doesn’t make any difference”—the cat 
is out of the bag, for there is a hostility in these words which 
clangs with self-defense. But just because Zen truly surpasses 
convention and its values, it has no need to say “To hell with it,” 
nor to underline with violence the fact that anything goes. 

It is indeed the basic intuition of Zen that there is an ultimate 
standpoint from which “anything goes.” In the celebrated words 
of the master Yun-men, “Every day is a good day.” Or as is said in 
the Hsin-hsin Ming: 


If you want to get the plain truth, 

Be not concerned with right and wrong. 
The conflict between right and wrong 
Is the sickness of the mind. 


But this standpoint does not exclude and is not hostile toward the 
distinction between right and wrong at other levels and in more 
limited frames of reference. The world is seen to be beyond right 
and wrong when it is not framed: that is to say, when we are not 
looking at a particular situation by itself—out of relation to the 
rest of the universe. Within this room there is a clear difference 
between up and down; out in interstellar space there is not. 
Within the conventional limits of a human community there are 
clear distinctions between good and evil. But these disappear 


when human affairs are seen as part and parcel of the whole 
realm of nature. Every framework sets up a restricted field of 
relationships, and restriction is law or rule. 

Now a skilled photographer can point his camera at almost any 
scene or object and create a marvellous composition by the way 
in which he frames and lights it. An unskilled photographer 
attempting the same thing creates only messes, for he does not 
know how to place the frame, the border of the picture, where it 
will be in relation to the contents. How eloquently this 
demonstrates that as soon as we introduce a frame anything does 
not go. But every work of art involves a frame. A frame of some 
kind is precisely what distinguishes a painting, a poem, a musical 
composition, a play, a dance, or a piece of sculpture from the rest 
of the world. Some artists may argue that they do not want their 
works to be distinguishable from the total universe, but if this be 
so they should not frame them in galleries and concert halls. 
Above all they should not sign them nor sell them. This is as 
immoral as selling the moon or signing one’s name to a 
mountain. (Such an artist may perhaps be forgiven if he knows 
what he is doing, and prides himself inwardly, not on being a 
poet or painter, but a competent crook.) Only destructive little 
boys and vulgar excursionists go around initialling the trees. 

Today there are Western artists avowedly using Zen to justify 
the indiscriminate framing of simply anything—blank canvases, 
totally silent music, torn-up bits of paper dropped on a board and 
stuck where they fall, or dense masses of mangled wire. The work 
of the composer John Cage is rather typical of this tendency. In 
the name of Zen, he has forsaken his earlier and promising work 
with the “prepared piano,” to confront audiences with eight 
Ampex tape recorders simultaneously bellowing forth random 
noises. Or he has presented silent piano recitals where the 
performer has a score consisting of nothing but rests, plus an 
assistant to turn the pages, to jolt the audience into becoming 
aware of the multiplicity of sounds that fill the musical void—the 
shifting of feet and rustling of programs, the titters of 
embarrassment, the coughing, and the rumble of traffic outside. 

There is, indeed, a considerable therapeutic value in allowing 
oneself to be deeply aware of any sight or sound that may arise. 
For one thing, it brings to mind the marvel of seeing and hearing 
as such. For another, the profound willingness to listen to or gaze 


upon anything at all frees the mind from fixed preconceptions of 
beauty, creating, as it were, a free space in which altogether new 
forms and relationships may emerge. But this is therapy; it is not 
yet art. It is on the level of the random ramblings of a patient on 
the analyst’s couch: very important indeed as therapy, though it 
is by no means the aim of psychoanalysis to substitute such 
ramblings for conversation and literature. Cage’s work would be 
redeemed if he framed and presented it as a kind of group session 
in audiotherapy, but as a concert it is simply absurd. One may 
hope, however, that after Cage has, by such listening, set his own 
mind free from the composer’s almost inevitable plagiarism of the 
forms of the past, he will present us with the new musical 
patterns and relationships which he has not yet uttered. 

Just as the skilled photographer often amazes us with his 
lighting and framing of the most unlikely subjects, so there are 
painters and writers in the West, as well as in modern Japan, who 
have mastered the authentically Zen art of controlling accidents. 
Historically this first arose in the Far East in the appreciation of 
the rough texture of brush-strokes in calligraphy and painting, 
and in the accidental running of the glaze on bowls made for the 
tea ceremony. One of the classical instances of this kind of thing 
came about through the shattering of a fine ceramic tea caddy, 
belonging to one of the old Japanese tea masters. The fragments 
were cemented together with gold, and its owner was amazed at 
the way in which the random network of thin gold lines 
enhanced its beauty. It must be remembered, however, that this 
was an objet trouvé—an accidental effect selected by a man of 
exquisite taste, and treasured as one might treasure and exhibit a 
marvellous rock or a piece of driftwood. For in the Zen-inspired 
art of bonseki, or rock gardening, the stones are selected with 
infinite care, and though the hand of man may never have 
changed them it is far from true that any old stone will do. 
Furthermore, in calligraphy, painting, and ceramics, the 
accidental effects of running glaze or of flying hair-lines of the 
brush were accepted and presented by the artist only when he felt 
them to be fortuitous and unexpected marvels within the context 
of the work as a whole. 

What governed his judgment? What gives certain accidental 
effects in painting the same beauty as the accidental outlines of 
clouds? According to Zen feeling there is no precise rule, no rule, 


that is to say, which can be formulated in words and taught 
systematically. On the other hand, there is in all these things a 
principle of order which in Chinese philosophy is termed li, and 
which Joseph Needham has translated “organic pattern.” Li 
originally meant the markings in jade, the grain in wood, and the 
fiber in muscle. It designates a type of order which is too 
multidimensional, too subtly interrelated, and too squirmingly 
vital to be represented in words or mechanical images. The artist 
has to know it as he knows how to grow his hair. He can do it 
again and again, but can never explain how. In Taoist philosophy 
this power is called te, or “magical virtue.” It is the element of the 
miraculous which we feel both at the stars in heaven and at our 
own ability to be conscious. 

It is the possession of te, then, which makes all the difference 
between mere scrawls and the “white writing” of Mark Tobey, 
which admittedly derived its inspiration from Chinese 
calligraphy, or the multidimensional spontaneities of Gordon 
Onslow-Ford, who is, by the way, a considerable master of formal 
Chinese writing. It is by no means a purely haphazard drooling of 
paint or uncontrolled wandering of the brush, for the character 
and taste of such artists is visible in the grace (a possible 
equivalent of te) with which their strokes are formed even when 
they are not trying to represent anything except strokes. It is also 
what makes the difference between mere patches, smudges, and 
trails of black ink and the work of such Japanese moderns as 
Sabro Hasegawa and Onchi, which is after all in the haboku or 
“rough style” tradition of Sesshu. Anyone can write absolutely 
illegible Japanese, but who so enchantingly as Ryokwan? If it is 
true that “when the wrong man uses the right means, the right 
means work in the wrong way,” it is often also true that when the 
right man uses the wrong means, the wrong means work in the 
right way. 

The real genius of Chinese and Japanese Zen artists in their use 
of controlled accidents goes beyond the discovery of fortuitous 
beauty. It lies in being able to express, at the level of artistry, the 
realization of that ultimate standpoint from which “anything 
goes” and at which “all things are of one suchness.” The mere 
selection of any random shape to stick in a frame simply confuses 
the metaphysical and the artistic domains; it does not express the 
one in terms of the other. Set in a frame, any old mess is at once 


cut off from the totality of its natural context, and for this very 
reason its manifestation of the Tao is concealed. The formless 
murmur of night noises in a great city has an enchantment which 
immediately disappears when formally presented as music in a 
concert hall. A frame outlines a universe, a microcosm, and if the 
contents of the frame are to rank as art they must have the same 
quality of relationship to the whole and to each other as events in 
the great universe, the macrocosm of nature. In nature the 
accidental is always recognized in relation to what is ordered and 
controlled. The dark yin is never without the bright yang. Thus 
the painting of Sesshu, the calligraphy of Ryokwan, and the 
ceramic bowls of the Hagi and Karatsu schools reveal the wonder 
of accidents in nature through accidents in a context of highly 
disciplined art. 

The realization of the unswerving “rightness” of whatever 
happens is no more manifested by utter lawlessness in social 
conduct than by sheer caprice in art. As Zen has been used as a 
pretext for the latter in our times, its use as a pretext for the 
former is ancient history. Many a rogue has justified himself with 
the Buddhist formula, “Birth-and-death (samsara) is Nirvana; 
worldly passions are Enlightenment.” This danger is implicit in 
Zen because it is implicit in freedom. Power and freedom can 
never be safe. They are dangerous in the same way that fire and 
electricity are dangerous. But it is quite pitiful to see Zen used as 
a pretext for license when the Zen in question is no more than an 
idea in the head, a simple rationalization. To some extent “Zen” is 
so used in the underworld which often attaches itself to artistic 
and intellectual communities. After all, the Bohemian way of life 
is primarily the natural consequence of artists and writers being 
so absorbed in their work that they have no interest in keeping 
up with the Joneses. It is also a symptom of creative changes in 
manners and morals which at first seem as reprehensible to 
conservatives as new forms in art. But every such community 
attracts a number of weak imitators and hangers-on, especially in 
the great cities, and it is mostly in this class that one now finds 
the stereotype of the “beatnik” with his phony Zen. Yet if Zen 
were not the pretext for this shiftless existence, it would be 
something else. 

Is it, then, this underworld which is described in Kerouac’s 
Dharma Bums? It is generally known that The Dharma Bums is not 


a novel but a flimsily fictionized account of the author’s 
experiences in California in 1958. To anyone who knows the 
milieu described, the identity of each character is plain and it is 
no secret that Japhy Ryder, the hero of the story, is Gary Snyder. 1 
Whatever may be said of Kerouac himself and of a few other 
characters in the story, it would be difficult indeed to fit Snyder 
into any stereotype of the Bohemian underworld. He has spent a 
year of Zen study in Kyoto, and has recently (1959) returned for 
another session, perhaps for two years this time. He is also a 
serious student of Chinese, having studied with Shih-hsiang Chen 
at the University of California, and superbly translated a number 
of the poems of the Zen hermit Han-shan.2 His own work, 
scattered through many periodicals, entitles him to be regarded 
as one of the finest poets of the San Francisco renaissance. 

But Snyder is, in the best sense, a bum. His manner of life is a 
quietly individualistic deviation from everything expected of a 
“good consumer.” His temporary home is a little shack without 
utilities on a hillside in Mill Valley, at the top of a steep trail. 
When he needs money he goes to sea, or works as a fire watcher 
or logger. Otherwise, he stays at home or goes mountain 
climbing, most of the time writing, studying, or practicing Zen 
meditation. Part of his shack is set aside as a formal “meditation 
hall,” and the whole place is in the best Zen tradition of clean and 
uncluttered simplicity. But this is not a Christian or Hinayana 
Buddhist style of asceticism. As The Dharma Bums made plain, it 
combines a voluntary and rather joyous poverty with a rich love- 
life, and for Western, and much Eastern, religiosity this is the 
touchstone of deviltry. This is not the place to argue the complex 
problem of spirituality and sexuality,; but one can only say, “So 
much the worse for such religiosity.” This attitude has seldom 
been a part of Zen, new or old, beat or square. 

In The Dharma Bums, however, we are seeing Snyder through 
Kerouac’s eyes, and some distortions arise because Kerouac’s own 
Buddhism is a true beat Zen which confuses “anything goes” at 
the existential level with “anything goes” on the artistic and 
social levels. Nevertheless, there is something endearing about 
Kerouac’s personality as a writer, something which comes out in 
the warmth of his admiration for Gary, and in the lusty, generous 
enthusiasm for life which wells up at every point in his colorful 
and undisciplined prose. This exuberant warmth makes it 


impossible to put Kerouac in the class of the beat mentality 
described by John Clelland-Holmes—the cool, fake-intellectual 
hipster searching for kicks, name-dropping bits of Zen and jazz 
jargon to justify a disaffiliation from society which is in fact just 
ordinary, callous exploitation of other people. In the North Beach, 
Greenwich Village, and elsewhere such characters may 
occasionally be found, but no one has ever heard of any of them, 
and their identification with the active artists and poets of these 
communities is pure journalistic imagination. They are, however, 
the shadow of a substance, the low-level caricature which always 
attends spiritual and cultural movements, carrying them to 
extremes which their authors never intended. To this extent beat 
Zen is sowing confusion in idealizing as art and life what is better 
kept to oneself as therapy. 

One of the most problematic characteristics of beat Zen, shared 
to some extent both by the creative artists and by their imitators, 
is the fascination of marijuana and peyote. That many of these 
people “take drugs” naturally lays them wide open to the most 
extreme forms of righteous indignation, despite the fact that 
marijuana and peyote (or its synthetic derivative, mescaline) are 
far less harmful and habit-forming than whiskey or tobacco. In 
these circles the smoking of marijuana is to some extent a 
sacramental point of honor, a religious defiance of square 
authority, equivalent to the refusal of the early Christians to burn 
incense to the Roman gods. Conversely, it is a matter of symbolic 
principle, as distinct from the enforcement of rational law, for the 
police to condemn marijuana, and sensational arrests of those 
who use it always provide a convenient diversion of public 
attention from serious crimes that continue to be overlooked. 

The claim that these substances induce states of consciousness 
equivalent to satori or mystical experience must be treated with 
some reserve. They certainly do not do so automatically, and 
some of their effects are quite unlike anything found in genuine 
mysticism. However, it is certainly true that for some people, 
perhaps with the requisite gift or ability, peyote, mescaline, or 
lysergic acid induces states which are distinctly favorable to 
mystical experience. As to marijuana, I have my doubts, though it 
appears to reduce the speed of subjective time.4 

Now the underlying protestant lawlessness of beat Zen disturbs 
the square Zennists very seriously. For square Zen is the Zen of 


established tradition in Japan with its clearly defined hierarchy, 
its rigid discipline, and its specific tests of satori. More 
particularly, it is the kind of Zen adopted by Westerners studying 
in Japan, who will before long be bringing it back home. But 
there is an obvious difference between square Zen and the 
common or garden squareness of the Rotary Club or the 
Presbyterian Church. It is infinitely more imaginative, sensitive, 
and interesting. But it is still square because it is a quest for the 
right spiritual experience, for a satori which will receive the stamp 
(inka) of approval and established authority. There will even be 
certificates to hang on the wall. 

If square Zen falls into any serious excess it is in the direction 
of spiritual snobbism and artistic preciousness, though I have 
never known an orthodox Zen teacher who could be accused of 
either. These gentlemen seem to take their exalted office rather 
lightly, respecting its dignity without standing on it. The faults of 
square Zen are the faults of any spiritual in-group with an 
esoteric discipline and degrees of initiation. Students in the lower 
ranks can get unpleasantly uppity about inside knowledge which 
they are not at liberty to divulge—“and you wouldn’t understand 
even if I could tell you”—and are apt to dwell rather sickeningly 
on the immense difficulties and iron disciplines of their task. 
There are times, however, when this is understandable, especially 
when someone who is just goofing off claims that he is following 
the Zen ideal of “naturalness.” 

The student of square Zen is also inclined at times to be 
niggling in his recognition of parallels to Zen in other spiritual 
traditions. Because the essentials of Zen can never be accurately 
and fully formulated, being an experience and not a set of ideas, 
it is always possible to be critical of anything anyone says about 
it, neither putting up nor shutting up. Any statement about Zen, 
or about spiritual experience of any kind, will always leave some 
aspect, some subtlety, unexpressed. No one’s mouth is big enough 
to utter the whole thing. The Western follower of Zen should also 
resist the temptation to associate himself with an even worse 
form of snobbery, the intellectual snobbery so _ largely 
characteristic of Far Eastern studies in American universities. In 
this particular field the fad for making humanistic studies 
“scientific” has gone to such wild extremes that even Suzuki is 
accused of being a “popularizer” instead of a serious scholar— 


presumably because he is a little unsystematic about footnotes 
and covers a vast area instead of confining himself with rigor to a 
single problem, e.g., “An Analysis of Some Illegible and Archaic 
Character-forms in the Tun-huang Manuscript of the Sutra of the 
Sixth Patriarch.” There is a proper and honorable place in 
scholarship for the meticulous drudge, but when he is on top 
instead of on tap his dangerous envy of real intelligence drives all 
creative scholars from the field.s 

In its artistic expression square Zen is often rather tediously 
studied and precious, a fate which all too easily befalls a 
venerable aesthetic tradition when its techniques are so highly 
developed that it takes a life-time to master any one of them. No 
one has then the time to go beyond the achievements of the old 
masters, so that new generations are condemned to endless 
repetition and imitation of their refinements. The student of sumi 
painting, calligraphy, haiku poetry, or tea ceremony can therefore 
get trapped in a tiresomely repetitious affectation of styles, varied 
only with increasingly esoteric allusions to the work of the past. 
When this comes to the point of imitating the old masters’ happy 
accidents in such a way that “primitive” and “rough” effects are 
produced by the utmost practice and deliberation, the whole 
thing becomes so painful that even the wildest excesses of beat 
Zen art look refreshing. Indeed, it is possible that beat Zen and 
square Zen will so complement and rub against one another that 
an amazingly pure and lively Zen will arise from the hassle. 

For this reason I see no really serious quarrel with either 
extreme. There was never a spiritual movement without its 
excesses and distortions. The experience of awakening which 
truly constitutes Zen is too timeless and universal to be injured. 
The extremes of beat Zen need alarm no one since, as Blake said, 
“the fool who persists in his folly will become wise.” As for 
square Zen, “authoritative” spiritual experiences have always had 
a way of wearing thin, and thus of generating the demand for 
something genuine and unique which needs no stamp. 

I have known followers of both extremes to come up with 
perfectly clear satori experiences, for since there is no real “way” 
to satori the way you are following makes very little difference. 

But the quarrel between the extremes is of great philosophical 
interest, being a contemporary form of the ancient dispute 
between salvation by works and salvation by faith, or between 


what the Hindus called the ways of the monkey and of the cat. 
The cat—appropriately enough—follows the effortless way, since 
the mother cat carries her kittens. The monkey follows the hard 
way, since the baby monkey has to hang on to its mother’s hair. 
Thus for beat Zen there must be no effort, no discipline, no 
artificial striving to attain satori or to be anything but what one 
is. But for square Zen there can be no true satori without years of 
meditation-practice under the stern supervision of a qualified 
master. In seventeenth-century Japan these two attitudes were 
approximately typified by the great masters Bankei and Hakuin, 
and it so happens that the followers of the latter “won out” and 
determined the present-day character of Rinzai Zen.6 

Satori can lie along both roads. It is the concomitant of a 
“nongrasping” attitude of the senses to experience, and grasping 
can be exhausted by the discipline of directing its utmost 
intensity to a single, ever-elusive objective. But what makes the 
way of effort and will power suspect to many Westerners is not so 
much an inherent laziness as a thorough familiarity with the 
wisdom of our own culture. The square Western Zennists are 
often quite naive when it comes to an understanding of Christian 
theology or of all that has been discovered in modern psychiatry, 
for both have long been concerned with the fallibility and 
unconscious ambivalence of the will. Both have posed problems 
as to the vicious circle of seeking self-surrender or of “free- 
associating on purpose” or of accepting one’s conflicts to escape 
from them, and to anyone who knows anything about either 
Christianity or psychotherapy these are very real problems. The 
interest of Chinese Zen and of people like Bankei is that they deal 
with these problems in a most direct and stimulating way, and 
begin to suggest some answers. But when Herrigel’s Japanese 
archery master was asked, “How can I give up purpose on 
purpose?” he replied that no one had ever asked him that before. 
He had no answer except to go on trying blindly, for five years. 

Foreign religions can be immensely attractive and highly 
overrated by those who know little of their own, and especially 
by those who have not worked through and grown out of their 
own. This is why the displaced or unconscious Christian can so 
easily use either beat or square Zen to justify himself. The one 
wants a philosophy to justify him in doing what he pleases. The 
other wants a more plausible authoritative salvation than the 


Church or the psychiatrists seem to be able to provide. 
Furthermore the atmosphere of Japanese Zen is free from all 
one’s unpleasant childhood associations with God the Father and 
Jesus Christ—though I know many young Japanese who feel just 
the same way about their early training in Buddhism. But the true 
character of Zen remains almost incomprehensible to those who 
have not surpassed the immaturity of needing to be justified, 
whether before the Lord God or before a paternalistic society. 

The old Chinese Zen masters were steeped in Taoism. They saw 
nature in its total interrelatedness, and saw that every creature 
and every experience is in accord with the Tao of nature just as it 
is. This enabled them to accept themselves as they were, moment 
by moment, without the least need to justify anything. They 
didn’t do it to defend themselves or to find an excuse for getting 
away with murder. They didn’t brag about it and set themselves 
apart as rather special. On the contrary, their Zen was wu-shih, 
which means approximately “nothing special” or “no fuss.” But 
Zen is “fuss” when it is mixed up with Bohemian affectations, and 
“fuss” when it is imagined that the only proper way to find it is to 
run off to a monastery in Japan or to do special exercises in the 
lotus posture for five hours a day. And I will admit that the very 
hullabaloo about Zen, even in such an essay as this, is also fuss— 
but a little less so. 

Having said that, I would like to say something for all Zen 
fussers, beat or square. Fuss is all right, too. If you are hung on 
Zen, there’s no need to try to pretend that you are not. If you 
really want to spend some years in a Japanese monastery, there is 
no earthly reason why you shouldn’t. Or if you want to spend 
your me hopping freight cars and digging Charlie Parker, it’s a 
free country. 


In the landscape of Spring there is neither better nor worse; 
The flowering branches grow naturally, some long, some short. 


1 The names were changed at the last minute, and at one point “Gary” remains 
instead of “Japhy.” The excerpt published in the Summer, 1958, Chicago Review 
under the title “Meditation in the Woods” keeps the original names. 


2 “Cold Mountain Poems,” Evergreen Review, Vol. 2, no. 6, 1958. 
3 For which see Part II of my Nature, Man, and Woman. New York, 1958. 
4 As a result of experiments with lysergic acid conducted since the original 


version of this essay was written, I have been compelled to change the opinion 
then expressed as to the complete dissimilarity between some of these states of 
consciousness and mystical experience. The problem is discussed at length in 
the final essay in this volume, “The New Alchemy.” 


5 Suzuki, incidentally, is a very rare bird among contemporary Asians—an 
original thinker. He is no mere mouthpiece for any fixed tradition, and has 
come forth with some ideas about comparative religion and the psychology of 
religion which are of enormous importance, quite aside from what he has done 
to translate and interpret the literature of Zen. But it is just for this reason that 
people in square Zen, and academic Sinology have their qualms about 
accepting him. 

6 Rinzai Zen is the form most widely known in the West. There is also Soto 
Zen, which differs somewhat in technique, but is still closer to Hakuin than to 
Bankei. However, Bankei should not exactly be identified with beat Zen as I 
have described it, for he was certainly no advocate of the life of undisciplined 
whimsy despite all that he said about the importance of the uncalculated life 
and the folly of seeking satori. 


rs) 


SPIRITUALITY AND SENSUALITY 


L, has often been said that the human being is a 


combination of angel and animal, a spirit imprisoned in flesh, a 
descent of divinity into materiality, charged with the duty of 
transforming the gross elements of the lower world into the 
image of God. Ordinarily this has been taken to mean that the 
animal and fleshly aspect of man is to be changed out of all 
recognition. Religious ideals of both East and West have 
envisaged the transformed human animal as something which has 
surpassed almost every aspect of the material body except 
perhaps shape, projecting the perfected man as a humanoid form 
without sensitivity to pain or passion, shrivelled and inert in 
sexuality, free from death and corruption, immune to disease, and 
even without weight or solidity. At least, something of this kind 
appears to be the nature of the resurrected and spiritualized body 
in traditional Christianity, foreshadowed already in the 
miraculous lives of the saints. Something of the same kind seems 
in certain forms of Hinduism to be expected of the jivan-mukta, 
the fully accomplished yogi delivered from material limitations 
while still manifesting his existence in the world. 

It is possible that this is also the physical ideal of our own 
technological civilization, with its fixed intent of overcoming the 
limitations of time and space. Skeptical as we may be of 
achieving such material miracles by the power of prayer, 
meditation, and sanctity, we are perhaps some distance on the 
way to attaining them by medical and psychological techniques, 
bolstered by all the other powers of science. For we seem to look 
forward as ever to the total subjugation of hard and heavy 
substance to the airy rapidity of thought, and to the instant 
obedience of our weak and tender flesh to the bodiless flight of 
imagination. If science-fiction is any anticipation of the general 
direction of science, if the scientist here discloses (perhaps under 
a pseudonym) his secret intentions and dreams, it is obvious that 
technological man will not be content with exploring the universe 
at the insufferable crawl of the speed of light. His machines must 
eventually respond to the infinitely faster speed of thought if we 
are ever to get much farther out in space than our solar system, 


not to mention our single little galaxy. 

Over against these spiritual and cerebral dreamers there are, 
and always have been, unashamedly earth-bound souls who 
deplore this discontent with materiality. One thinks of the 
perennial pagan, the delightfully animal human who is not 
ashamed of his body, the sort of person who—at least in his 
healthier moments—is the natural conservative, the person who 
wants to say “Yes” to the physical world with all its limitations of 
time and mortality, space and distance, weight and solidity. 

For centuries these two human types have been at war with 
each other, and one is constantly being pressed—so as to avoid 
mere mediocrity—to commit oneself to one side or the other, 
since “he who is not with us is against us, and whosoever does 
not gather with us scatters.” We seem to like our human types to 
be black or white, and to despise the kind of person who cannot 
make up his mind between what seem to be absolutely 
demanding alternatives, but who vacillates indecisively, now to 
the ideals of spirit and now to the seductions of matter. 
Presumably this is just what the average and ordinary human 
being does. Neither the angel in him nor the animal in him can be 
repressed, and the strength of the two is so evenly balanced that 
they tend to cancel one another out to produce the common or 
garden mugwump, who, as the saying goes, has his mug on one 
side of the fence and his wump on the other. In the presence of 
those who have thoroughly committed themselves the average 
mugwump feels uncomfortable and vaguely guilty. Indecision is 
such an obvious and easily deplored weakness, such a sure butt 
for contempt by saint and satanist alike. So the poor mugwump 
simultaneously admires and is horrified by those who seem to 
have the strength of will to go one way or the other—those who 
decide to stand at all costs by the domineering and rational spirit, 
and those who abandon themselves with glee to the intense 
pleasure-pain of sensuality. 

Especially deplorable is the kind of person who might be called 
the extreme mugwump—the one who has his extremities very far 
out on both sides of the fence. There is, for example, the common 
scandal of the saint-sinner, the individual who appears in public 
as the champion of the spirit, but who is in private some sort of 
rake. Very often his case is not so simple as that of the mere 
hypocrite. He is genuinely attracted to both extremes. Not only 


does social convention compel him to publish one and suppress 
the other, but most often he is himself horribly torn between the 
two. He veers between moods of intense holiness and of 
outrageous licentiousness, suffering between times the most 
appalling pangs of conscience. The type is, indeed, especially 
common in clerical and academic circles, just because these 
vocations attract highly sensitive human beings who feel the lure 
of both extremes more strongly than others. Only in the artist is 
this duplicity more or less accepted, perhaps because beauty is 
the one attribute shared in common by God and the Devil, 
because devotion to the beautiful, as distinct from the good and 
the true, seems to make one a human being who is not altogether 
serious—neither man nor devil but some kind of elf, consigned in 
the Day of Judgment neither to heaven nor to hell but to the 
limbo of souls without moral sense. It is thus that for our society 
the artist is a kind of harmless clown, an entertainer from whom 
nothing is expected save proficiency in the realm of the 
irrelevant, since his function is taken to be no more than the 
decoration of surfaces. For this reason the artist can get away 
with a private life that would be scandalous for the priest or the 
professor. 

Now all of this raises the question as to whether the proper 
outcome of man’s dual nature ought to be a victory for one side 
or the other. Catholic theology, for example, stands at least in 
theory for a marriage of the spirit and the flesh, for, as St. 
Thomas Aquinas held, divine grace does not obliterate nature but 
perfects it. But in practice the perfection of nature has always 
meant its total submission to the spirit, and it is only quite 
recently that Catholic Christians like Eric Gill and G. K. 
Chesterton have been able to carry off a rollicking spiritual 
materialism. This made them excellent decoys for prospective 
converts, but note that one was an artist and the other a writer, 
and neither is in danger of being canonized. For the fact remains 
that traditional Christianity will put up with the flesh only so 
long as its demands are extremely moderate and demure, just so 
long as the cloven hoof of Pan never puts in an appearance. One 
suspects that this gesture toward nature and materiality is the 
same sort of “come-on” as the regular-guy priest, admired out of 
all proportion for little human traits that would be unnoticed in a 
layman. 


It is high time to ask whether it is really any scandal, any 
deplorable inconsistency, for a human being to be both angel and 
animal with equal devotion. Is it not possible, in other words, to 
be the extreme mugwump without inner conflict, to be mystic 
and sensualist without actual contradiction? It is hard to see how 
a human being can be anything but a mediocrity on the one hand 
or a fanatic on the other unless he can give rein to both sides of 
his nature, avoiding, however, the deceit and degradation which 
attach themselves to the animal side of our life when it is 
associated with shame. The philosophy of the out-and-out pagan, 
the romanticist of nature and the flesh, is by itself enormously 
superficial—lacking in wonder at disease and death, which are 
quite as normal as good health, and deficient in that combination 
of awe and curiosity which urges on the mystic to marvel at the 
overwhelmingly odd fact of simple is-ness, to stretch his 
imagination to the furthest limits of time and space, and to 
explore the inward mystery of his own consciousness. The logical 
grammarian’s opinion that such inquiries are simply meaningless 
appears to be nothing more than a new variation on the old 
psychological type that gets the words but never understands the 
music. On the other hand, the mystic who has no part in the 
earthiness and allure of nature is sterile rather than pure, an 
extreme type of cerebrotonic ectomorph, ie., skinny 
abstractionist, who lives in a world of ideas without concrete 
meanings. Furthermore, the philosophy of the pure spiritist, even 
when he allows that God created nature, can never explain how 
the good Lord so forgot himself as to make anything so allegedly 
impure. 

It has often been noted that mysticism expresses itself in the 
language of natural love and that mystics of the Christian 
tradition have made particular use of the Bible’s great love poem, 
the Song of Songs. Psychologists with a slant to materialism 
therefore argue that mysticism is nothing but sublimated 
sexuality and frustrated fleshliness, whereas the spiritists 
maintain that the love-imagery is nothing but allegory and 
symbolism never to be taken in its gross and animal sense. But is 
it not possible that both parties are right and wrong, and that the 
love of nature and the love of spirit are paths upon a circle which 
meet at their extremes? Perhaps the meeting is discovered only 
by those who follow both at once. Such a course seems 


impossible and inconsistent only if it can be held that love is a 
matter of choosing between alternatives, if, in other words, love 
is an exclusive attitude of mind which cleaves to one object and 
rejects all others. If so, it must be quite other than what is said to 
be God’s own love, “who maketh his sun to shine upon the evil 
and the good, and sendeth his rain upon the just and the unjust.” 
Love is surely a disposition of the heart which radiates on all 
sides like light. At the same time, love may choose one object 
rather than others, not because that object is innately and 
absolutely preferable, but because the limitations of human 
energy require concentration for depth of experience. Polygamy, 
for example, would be all very well if one had unlimited time to 
devote to each spouse. 

But are God and nature, spirit and flesh—like individual 
persons—mutually exclusive? “He that is unmarried,” said St. 
Paul, “careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may 
please the Lord. But he that is married careth for the things that 
are of the world, how he may please his wife.” Yet this is to say 
that the divine cannot be loved in and through the things of this 
world, and to deny the saying that “Inasmuch as you have done it 
unto one of the least of these my brethren, you have done in unto 
me.” If the love of God and the love of the world are mutually 
exclusive, then, on the very premises of theology, God is a finite 
thing among things—for only finite things exclude one another. 
God is dethroned and un-godded by being put in opposition to 
nature and the world, becoming an object instead of the 
continuum in which we “live and move and have our being.” 

Not to cherish both the angel and the animal, both the spirit 
and the flesh, is to renounce the whole interest and greatness of 
being human, and it is really tragic that those in whom the two 
natures are equally strong should be made to feel in conflict with 
themselves. For the saint-sinner and the mystic-sensualist is 
always the most interesting type of human being because he is 
the most complete. When the two aspects are seen to be 
consistent with each other, there is a real sense in which spirit 
transforms nature: that is to say, the animality of the mystic is 
always richer, more refined, and more subtly sensuous than the 
animality of the merely animal man. For to say that man is both 
god and devil is not to say that spiritually minded people should 
spend some of their time robbing banks and torturing children. 


Such violent excesses of passion are bred from the frustration of 
pursuing either aspect of our nature to the exclusion of the other. 
They arise when the ruthless idealism of the spirit is 
unhumanized by the weakness of the flesh, or when the blind 
desire of the flesh is unenlightened by the wisdom of the spirit— 
which knows that the exclusive pursuit of pleasure is as 
frustrating and absurd as the old quest for perpetual motion. The 
violent, ultrasatanic devil in man is either the repressed Christ or 
the repressed Pan, the right and the left hands of God, who said 
to the prophet Isaiah, “I am the Lord, and there is none else. I 
form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil; 
I the Lord do all these things.” 

We noted that our society tolerates the full life, the love of both 
spirit and nature, only in the artist, but just because it does not 
take him seriously, because it regards him as an entertaining 
irrelevance. The man of deep spiritual wisdom is also irrelevant 
to this society, whether entertaining or otherwise. This has not 
just recently come to be so; it has been so for centuries, because 
—for centuries—society has consisted precisely of those human 
beings who are so deluded by the conventions of words and ideas 
as to believe that there is a real choice between the great 
opposites of life—between pleasure and pain, good and evil, God 
and Lucifer, spirit and nature. But what is separable in terms, in 
words, is not separable in reality—in the solid relationship 
between the terms. Whoever sees that there is no ultimate choice 
between these opposites is irrelevant because he cannot really 
participate in the politician’s and the ad-man’s illusion that there 
can be better and better without worse and worse, and that 
matter can yield indefinitely to the desires of mind without 
becoming utterly undesirable. It is not so much that there are 
fixed limits to our skill and technological power as that there are 
limits to our own perception: that we cannot see the figure 
without the background, the solid without the space, motion 
without time, action without resistance, joy without sorrow. 

We have only to imagine what would happen if thought and 
spirit had their way without hindrance, with God’s supposed 
omnipotence to have every wish granted instantaneously. 
Nothing would any longer be worth wishing for. There is an old 
fairy tale of a fisherman who once caught a marvellous golden 
fish. For the fish spoke, promising him that if he would return it 


to the water he would be granted three wishes. Having released 
the fish, he went home to his wife to talk over what the wishes 
should be, on the assurance that the fish would be waiting for 
him at the same place the following day. The old lady sent him 
back with the request that their broken-down cottage be 
transformed into a mansion with servants and spacious lands. 
That night, the fisherman came home to find that all had 
happened as requested. But in the course of only a few days the 
rapacious wife was hankering to be an archduchess with a vast 
palace equipped with guards and retainers, with terraces and 
formal gardens, situated in the midst of a great feudal domain. 
And again the wish was granted. Yet with one wish remaining the 
wife’s greed increased and increased so that she made up her 
mind to wish for all that could be wished—to be ruler of the sun 
and moon and stars, of the earth and mountains and oceans, of all 
birds in the air, fishes in the sea, and of all men in the world. But 
when the fisherman repeated her desire to the golden fish it 
replied, “Such a wish is not mine to grant, and, for her arrogance, 
she shall be returned to the state from which she started.” 
Returning that night, the fisherman found once again the broken- 
down cottage, and his wife again in rags. And yet, in a way, her 
wish was granted. 


6 


THE NEW ALCHEMY 


Bess the philosopher’s stone that would turn base 


metal into gold, one of the great quests of alchemy in both 
Europe and Asia was the elixir of immortality. In gullible 
enthusiasm for this quest, more than one Chinese emperor died of 
the fabulous concoctions of powdered jade, tea, ginseng, and 
precious metals prepared by Taoist priests. But just as the work of 
transforming lead into gold was in many cases a chemical 
symbolism for a spiritual transformation of man himself, so the 
immortality to be conferred by the elixir was not always the 
literally everlasting life but rather the transportation of 
consciousness into a state beyond time. Modern physicists have 
solved the problem of changing lead into gold, though the process 
is somewhat more expensive than digging gold from the earth. 
But in the last few years modern chemists have prepared one or 
two substances for which it may be claimed that in some cases 
they induce states of mind remarkably similar to cosmic 
consciousness. 

To many people such claims are deeply disturbing. For one 
thing, mystical experience seems altogether too easy when it 
simply comes out of a bottle, and is thus available to people who 
have done nothing to deserve it, who have neither fasted nor 
prayed nor practiced yoga. For another, the claim seems to imply 
that spiritual insight is after all only a matter of body chemistry 
involving a total reduction of the spiritual to the material. These 
are serious considerations, even though one may be convinced 
that in the long run the difficulty is found to rest upon semantic 
confusion as to the definitions of “spiritual” and “material.” 

However, it should be pointed out that there is nothing new or 
disreputable in the idea that spiritual insight is an undeserved gift 
of divine grace, often conveyed through such material or 
sacramental means as the water of baptism and the bread and 
wine of the mass. The priest who by virtue of his office 
transforms bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ, ex 
opere operato, by the simple repetition of the formula of the Last 
Supper, is in a situation not radically different from that of the 
scientist who, by repeating the right formula of an experiment, 


may effect a transformation in the brain. The comparative worth 
of the two operations must be judged by their effects. There were 
always those upon whom the sacraments of baptism and 
communion did not seem to “take,” whose lives remained 
effectively unregenerate. Likewise, none of these consciousness- 
changing chemicals are literally mystical experience in a bottle. 
Many who receive them experience only ecstasies without 
insight, or just an unpleasant confusion of sensation and 
imagination. States akin to mystical experience arise only in 
certain individuals and then often depend upon considerable 
concentration and effort to use the change of consciousness in 
certain ways. It is important here, too, to stress the point that 
ecstasy is only incidental to the authentic mystical experience, 
the essence of which might best be described as insight, as the 
word is now used in psychiatry. 

A chemical of this kind might perhaps be said to be an aid to 
perception in the same way as the telescope, microscope, or 
spectroscope, save in this case that the instrument is not an 
external object but an internal state of the nervous system. All 
such instruments are relatively useless without proper training 
and preparation not only in their handling, but also in the 
particular field of investigation. 

These considerations alone are already almost enough to show 
that the use of such chemicals does not reduce spiritual insight to 
a mere matter of body chemistry. But it should be added that 
even when we can describe certain events in terms of chemistry 
this does not mean that such events are merely chemical. A 
chemical description of spiritual experience has somewhat the 
same use and the same limits as the chemical description of a 
great painting. It is simple enough to make a chemical analysis of 
the paint, and for artists and connoisseurs alike there is some 
point in doing so. It might also be possible to work out a 
chemical description of all the processes that go on in the artist 
while he is painting. But it would be incredibly complicated, and 
in the meantime the same processes could be described and 
communicated far more effectively in some other language than 
the chemical. We should probably say that a process is chemical 
only when chemical language is the most effective means of 
describing it. Analogously, some of the chemicals known as 
psychodelics provide opportunities for mystical insight in much 


the same way that well-prepared paints and brushes provide 
opportunities for fine painting, or a beautifully constructed piano 
for great music. They make it easier, but they do not accomplish 
the work all by themselves. 

The two chemicals which are of most use in creating a change 
of consciousness conducive to spiritual experience are mescaline 
and lysergic acid diethylamide (known, for short, as LSD). The 
former is a synthetic formulation of the active ingredients of the 
peyote cactus, and the latter a purely synthetic chemical of the 
indole group which produces its effects even in such minute 
amounts as twenty-five micrograms. The specific effects of these 
chemicals are hard to identify with any clarity, and so far as is 
known at present they seem to operate upon the nervous system 
by reducing some of the inhibitory mechanisms which ordinarily 
have a screening effect upon our consciousness. Certain 
psychiatrists who seem overly anxious to hang on to the socially 
approved sensation of reality—more or less the world as 
perceived on a bleak Monday morning—classify these chemicals 
as hallucinogens producing toxic effects of a schizoid or psychotic 
character. I am afraid this is psychiatric gobbledygook: a sort of 
authoritative rumble of disapproval. Neither substance is an 
addictive drug, like heroin or opium, and it has never been 
demonstrated that they have harmful effects upon people who 
were not otherwise seriously disturbed. It is begging the question 
to call the changes of consciousness which they educe 
hallucinations, for some of the unusual things felt and seen may 
be no more unreal than the unfamiliar forms perceived through a 
microscope. We do not know. It is also begging the question to 
call their effects toxic, which might mean poisonous, unless this 
word can also be used for the effects of vitamins or proteins. Such 
language is evaluative, not descriptive in any scientific sense. 

Somewhat more than two years ago (1958) I was asked by a 
psychiatric research group to take 100 micrograms of lysergic 
acid, to see whether it would reproduce anything resembling a 
mystical experience. It did not do so, and so far as I know the 
reason was that I had not then learned how to direct my inquiries 
when under its influence. It seemed instead that my senses had 
been given a kaleidoscopic character (and this is no more than a 
metaphor) which made the whole world _ entrancingly 
complicated, as if I were involved in a multidimensional 


arabesque. Colors became so vivid that flowers, leaves, and 
fabrics seemed to be illumined from inside. The random patterns 
of blades of grass in a lawn appeared to be exquisitely organized 
without, however, any actual distortion of vision. Black ink or 
sumi paintings by Chinese and Japanese artists appeared almost 
to be three-dimensional photographs, and what are ordinarily 
dismissed as irrelevant details of speech, behavior, appearance, 
and form seemed in some indefinable way to be highly 
significant. Listening to music with closed eyes, I beheld the most 
fascinating patterns of dancing jewelry, mosaic, tracery, and 
abstract images. At one point everything appeared to be 
uproariously funny, especially the gestures and actions of people 
going about their everyday business. Ordinary remarks seemed to 
reverberate with double and quadruple meanings, and the role- 
playing behavior of those around me not only became unusually 
evident but also implied concealed attitudes contrary or 
complementary to its overt intention. In short, the screening or 
selective apparatus of our normal interpretative evaluation of 
experience had been partially suspended, with the result that I 
was presumably projecting the sensation of meaning or 
significance upon just about everything. The whole experience 
was vastly entertaining and interesting, but as yet nothing like 
any mystical experience that I had had before. 

It was not until a year later that I tried LSD again, this time at 
the request of another research team. Since then I have repeated 
the experiment five times, with dosages varying from 75 to 100 
micrograms. My impression has been that such experiments are 
profound and rewarding to the extent that I do my utmost to 
observe perceptual and evaluative changes and to describe them 
as clearly and completely as possible, usually with the help of a 
tape recorder. To give a play-by-play description of each 
experiment might be clinically interesting, but what I am 
concerned with here is a philosophical discussion of some of the 
high points and recurrent themes of my experiences. Psychiatrists 
have not yet made up their minds as to whether LSD is useful in 
therapy, but at present I am strongly inclined to feel that its 
major use may turn out to be only secondarily as a therapeutic 
and primarily as an instrumental aid to the creative artist, 
thinker, or scientist. I should observe, in passing, that the human 
and natural environment in which these experiments are 


conducted is of great importance, and that its use in hospital 
wards with groups of doctors firing off clinical questions at the 
subject is most undesirable. The supervising physician should 
take a human attitude, and drop all defensive dramatizations of 
scientific objectivity and medical authority, conducting the 
experiment in surroundings of some natural or artistic beauty. 

I have said that my general impression of the first experiment 
was that the “mechanism” by which we screen our sense-data and 
select only some of them as significant had been partially 
suspended. Consequently, I felt that the particular feeling which 
we associate with “the meaningful” was projected 
indiscriminately upon everything, and then rationalized in ways 
that might strike an independent observer as ridiculous—unless, 
perhaps, the subject were unusually clever at rationalizing. 
However, the philosopher cannot pass up the point that our 
selection of some sense-data as significant and others as 
insignificant is always with relation to particular purposes— 
survival, the quest for certain pleasures, finding one’s way to 
some destination, or whatever it may be. But in every experiment 
with LSD one of the first effects I have noticed is a profound 
relaxation combined with an abandonment of purposes and goals, 
reminding me of the Taoist saying that “when purpose has been 
used to achieve purposelessness, the thing has been grasped.” I 
have felt, in other words, endowed with all the time in the world, 
free to look about me as if I were living in eternity without a 
single problem to be solved. It is just for this reason that the busy 
and purposeful actions of other people seem at this time to be so 
comic, for it becomes obvious that by setting themselves goals 
which are always in the future, in the “tomorrow which never 
comes,” they are missing entirely the point of being alive. 

When, therefore, our selection of sense-impressions is not 
organized with respect to any particular purpose, all the 
surrounding details of the world must appear to be equally 
meaningful or equally meaningless. Logically, these are two ways 
of saying the same thing, but the overwhelming feeling of my 
own LSD experiences is that all aspects of the world become 
meaningful rather than meaningless. This is not to say that they 
acquire meaning in the sense of signs, by virtue of pointing to 
something else, but that all things appear to be their own point. 
Their simple existence, or better, their present formation, seems 


to be perfect, to be an end or fulfillment without any need for 
justification. Flowers do not bloom in order to produce seeds, nor 
are seeds germinated in order to bring forth flowers. Each stage 
of the process—seed, sprout, bud, flower, and fruit—may be 
regarded as the goal. A chicken is one egg’s way of producing 
others. In our normal experience something of the same kind 
takes place in music and the dance, where the point of the action 
is each moment of its unfolding and not just the temporal end of 
the performance. 

Such a translation of everyday experience into something of the 
same nature as music has been the beginning and the prevailing 
undertone of all my experiments. But LSD does not simply 
suspend the selective process by cutting it out. It would be more 
exact to say that it shows the relativity of our ordinary evaluation 
of sense-data by suggesting others. It permits the mind to 
organize its sensory impressions in new patterns. In my second 
experiment I noticed, for example, that all repeated forms— 
leaves on a stem, books on shelves, mullions in windows—gave 
me the sensation of seeing double or even multiple, as if the 
second, third, and fourth leaves on the stem were reflections of 
the first, seen, as it were, in several thicknesses of window glass. 
When I mentioned this, the attending physician held up his finger 
to see if it would give me a double image. For a moment it 
seemed to do so, but all at once I saw that the second image had 
its basis in a wisp of cigar smoke passing close to his finger and 
upon which my consciousness had projected the highlights and 
outline of a second finger. As I then concentrated upon this 
sensation of doubling or repeating images, it seemed suddenly as 
if the whole field of sight were a transparent liquid rippled in 
concentric circles as in dropping a stone into a pool. The normal 
images of things around me were not distorted by this pattern. 
They remained just as usual, but my attention directed itself to 
highlights, lines, and shadows upon them that fitted the pattern, 
letting those that did not fall into relative insignificance. As soon, 
however, as I noticed this projection and became aware of details 
that did not fit the pattern, it seemed as if whole handfuls of 
pebbles had been thrown into the optical space, rippling it with 
concentric circles that overlapped in all directions, so that every 
visible point became an intersection of circles. The optical field 
seemed, in fact, to have a structured grain like a photograph 


screened for reproduction, save that the organization of the 
grains was not rectilinear but circular. In this way every detail 
fitted the pattern and the field of vision became pointillist, like a 
painting by Seurat. 

This sensation raised a number of questions. Was my mind 
imperiously projecting its own geometrical designs upon the 
world, thus “hallucinating” a structure in things which is not 
actually there? Or is what we call the “real” structure of things 
simply a learned projection or hallucination which we hold in 
common? Or was I somehow becoming aware of the actual grain 
of the rods and cones in my retina, for even a hallucination must 
have some actual basis in the nervous system? On another 
occasion I was looking closely at a handful of sand, and in 
becoming aware that I could not get it into clear focus I became 
conscious of every detail and articulation of the way in which my 
eyes were fuzzing the image—and this was certainly perception 
of a grain or distortion in the eyes themselves. 

The general impression of these optical sensations is that the 
eyes, without losing the normal area of vision, have become 
microscopes, and that the texture of the visual field is infinitely 
rich and complex. I do not know whether this is actual awareness 
of the multiplicity of nerve-endings in the retina, or, for that 
matter, in the fingers, for the same grainy feeling arose in the 
sense of touch. But the effect of feeling that this is or may be so 
is, as it were, to turn the senses back upon themselves, and so to 
realize that seeing the external world is also seeing the eyes. In 
other words, I became vividly aware of the fact that what I call 
shapes, colors, and textures in the outside world are also states of 
my nervous system, that is, of me. In knowing them I also know 
myself. But the strange part of this apparent sensation of my own 
senses was that I did not appear to be inspecting them from 
outside or from a distance, as if they were objects. I can say only 
that the awareness of grain or structure in the senses seemed to 
be awareness of awareness, of myself from inside myself. Because 
of this, it followed that the distance or separation between myself 
and my senses, on the one hand, and the external world, on the 
other, seemed to disappear. I was no longer a detached observer, 
a little man inside my own head, having sensations. I was the 
sensations, so much so that there was nothing left of me, the 
observing ego, except the series of sensations which happened— 


not to me, but just happened—moment by moment, one after 
another. 

To become the sensations, as distinct from having them, 
engenders the most astonishing sense of freedom and release. For 
it implies that experience is not something in which one is 
trapped or by which one is pushed around, or against which one 
must fight. The conventional duality of subject and object, 
knower and known, feeler and feeling, is changed into a polarity: 
the knower and the known become the poles, terms, or phases of 
a single event which happens, not to me or from me, but of itself. 
The experiencer and the experience become a single, ever- 
changing, self-forming process, complete and fulfilled at every 
moment of its unfolding, and of infinite complexity and subtlety. 
It is like, not watching, but being, a coiling arabesque of smoke 
patterns in the air, or of ink dropped in water, or of a dancing 
snake which seems to move from every part of its body at once. 
This may be a “drug-induced hallucination,” but it corresponds 
exactly to what Dewey and Bentley have called the transactional 
relationship of the organism to its environment. This is to say that 
all our actions and experiences arise mutually from the organism 
and from the environment at the same time. The eyes can see 
light because of the sun, but the sun is light because of the eyes. 
Ordinarily, under the hypnosis of social conditioning, we feel 
quite distinct from our physical surroundings, facing them rather 
than belonging in them. Yet in this way we ignore and screen out 
the physical fact of our total interdependence with the natural 
world. We are as embodied in it as our own cells and molecules 
are embodied in us. Our neglect and repression of this 
interrelationship gives special urgency to all the new sciences of 
ecology, studying the interplay of organisms with their 
environments, and warning us against ignorant interference with 
the balances of nature. 

The sensation that events are happening of themselves, and 
that nothing is making them happen and that they are not 
happening to anything, has always been a major feature of my 
experiences with LSD. It is possible that the chemical is simply 
giving me a vivid realization of my own philosophy, though there 
have been times when the experience has suggested modifications 
of my previous thinking.1 But just as the sensation of subject- 
object polarity is confirmed by the transactional psychology of 


Dewey and Bentley, so the sensation of events happening “of 
themselves” is just how one would expect to perceive a world 
consisting entirely of process. Now the language of science is 
increasingly a language of process—a description of events, 
relations, operations, and forms rather than of things and 
substances. The world so described is a world of actions rather 
than agents, verbs rather than nouns, going against the common- 
sense idea that an action is the behavior of some thing, some solid 
entity of “stuff.” But the commonsense idea that action is always 
the function of an agent is so deeply rooted, so bound up with 
our sense of order and security, that seeing the world to be 
otherwise can be seriously disturbing. Without agents, actions do 
not seem to come from anywhere, to have any dependable origin, 
and at first sight this spontaneity can be alarming. In one 
experiment it seemed that whenever I tried to put my 
(metaphorical) foot upon some solid ground, the ground 
collapsed into empty space. I could find no substantial basis from 
which to act: my will was a whim, and my past, as a causal 
conditioning force, had simply vanished. There was only the 
present conformation of events, happening. For a while I felt lost 
in a void, frightened, baseless, insecure through and through. Yet 
soon I became accustomed to the feeling, strange as it was. There 
was simply a pattern of action, of process, and this was at one 
and the same time the universe and myself with nothing outside 
it either to trust or mistrust. And there seemed to be no meaning 
in the idea of its trusting or mistrusting itself, just as there is no 
possibility of a finger’s touching its own tip. 

Upon reflection, there seems to be nothing unreasonable in 
seeing the world in this way. The agent behind every action is 
itself action. If a mat can be called matting, a cat can be called 
catting. We do not actually need to ask who or what “cats,” just 
as we do not need to ask what is the basic stuff or substance out 
of which the world is formed—for there is no way of describing 
this substance except in terms of form, of structure, order, and 
operation. The world is not formed as if it were inert clay 
responding to the touch of a potter’s hand; the world is form, or 
better, formation, for upon examination every substance turns out 
to be closely knit pattern. The fixed notion that every pattern or 
form must be made of some basic material which is in itself 
formless is based on a superficial analogy between natural 


formation and manufacture, as if the stars and rocks had been 
made out of something as a carpenter makes tables out of wood. 
Thus what we call the agent behind the action is simply the prior 
or relatively more constant state of the same action: when a man 
runs we have a “manning-running” over and above a simple 
“manning.” Furthermore, it is only a somewhat clumsy 
convenience to say that present events are moved or caused by 
past events, for we are actually talking about earlier and later 
stages of the same event. We can establish regularities of rhythm 
and pattern in the course of an event, and so predict its future 
configurations, but its past states do not “push” its present and 
future states as if they were a row of dominoes stood on end so 
that knocking over the first collapses all the others in series. The 
fallen dominoes lie where they fall, but past events vanish into 
the present, which is just another way of saying that the world is 
a self-moving pattern which, when its successive states are 
remembered, can be shown to have a certain order. Its motion, its 
energy, issues from itself now, not from the past, which simply 
falls behind it in memory like the wake from a ship. 

When we ask the “why” of this moving pattern, we usually try 
to answer the question in terms of its original, past impulse or of 
its future goal. I had realized for a long time that if there is in any 
sense a reason for the world’s existence it must be sought in the 
present, as the reason for the wake must be sought in the engine 
of the moving ship. I have already mentioned that LSD makes me 
peculiarly aware of the musical or dancelike character of the 
world, bringing my attention to rest upon its present flowing and 
seeing this as its ultimate point. Yet I have also been able to see 
that this point has depths, that the present wells up from within 
itself with an energy which is something much richer than simple 
exuberance. 

One of these experiments was conducted late at night. Some 
five or six hours from its start the doctor had to go home, and I 
was left alone in the garden. For me, this stage of the experiment 
is always the most rewarding in terms of insight, after some of its 
more unusual and bizarre sensory effects have worn off. The 
garden was a lawn surrounded by shrubs and high trees—pine 
and eucalyptus—and floodlit from the house which enclosed it on 
one side. As I stood on the lawn I noticed that the rough patches 
where the grass was thin or mottled with weeds no longer seemed 


to be blemishes. Scattered at random as they were, they appeared 
to constitute an ordered design, giving the whole area the texture 
of velvet damask, the rough patches being the parts where the 
pile of the velvet is cut. In sheer delight I began to dance on this 
enchanted carpet, and through the thin soles of my moccasins I 
could feel the ground becoming alive under my feet, connecting 
me with the earth and the trees and the sky in such a way that I 
seemed to become one body with my whole surroundings. 
Looking up, I saw that the stars were colored with the same 
reds, greens, and blues that one sees in iridescent glass, and 
passing across them was the single light of a jet plane taking 
forever to streak over the sky. At the same time, the trees, shrubs, 
and flowers seemed to be living jewelry, inwardly luminous like 
intricate structures of jade, alabaster, or coral, and yet breathing 
and flowing with the same life that was in me. Every plant 
became a kind of musical utterance, a play of variations on a 
theme repeated from the main branches, through the stalks and 
twigs, to the leaves, the veins in the leaves, and to the fine 
capillary network between the veins. Each new bursting of 
growth from a center repeated or amplified the basic design with 
increasing complexity and delight, finally exulting in a flower. 
From my description it will seem that the garden acquired an 
atmosphere that was distinctly exotic, like the gardens of precious 
stones in the Arabian Nights, or like scenes in a Persian miniature. 
This struck me at the time, and I began to wonder just why it is 
that the glowingly articulated landscapes of those miniatures 
seem exotic, as do also many Chinese and Japanese paintings. 
Were the artists recording what they, too, had seen under the 
influence of drugs? I knew enough of the lives and techniques of 
Far Eastern painters to doubt this. I asked, too, whether what I 
was seeing was “drugged.” In other words, was the effect of the 
LSD in my nervous system the addition to my senses of some 
chemical screen which distorted all that I saw to preternatural 
loveliness? Or was its effect rather to remove certain habitual and 
normal inhibitions of the mind and senses, enabling us to see 
things as they would appear to us if we were not so chronically 
repressed? Little is known of the exact neurological effects of 
LSD, but what is known suggests the latter possibility. If this be 
so, it is possible that the art forms of other cultures appear exotic 
—that is, unfamiliarly enchanting—because we are seeing the 


world through the eyes of artists whose repressions are not the 
same as ours. The blocks in their view of the world may not 
coincide with ours, so that in their representations of life we see 
areas that we normally ignore. I am inclined to some such 
solution because there have been times when I have seen the 
world in this magical aspect without benefit of LSD, and they 
were times when I was profoundly relaxed within, my senses 
unguardedly open to their surroundings. 

Feeling, then, not that I was drugged but that I was in an 
unusual degree open to reality, I tried to discern the meaning, the 
inner character of the dancing pattern which constituted both 
myself and the garden, and the whole dome of the night with its 
colored stars. All at once it became obvious that the whole thing 
was loveplay, where love means everything that the word can 
mean, a spectrum ranging from the red of erotic delight, through 
the green of human endearment, to the violet of divine charity, 
from Freud’s libido to Dante’s “love that moves the sun and other 
stars.” All were so many colors issuing from a single white light, 
and, what was more, this single source was not just love as we 
ordinarily understand it: it was also intelligence, not only Eros 
and Agape but also Logos. I could see that the intricate 
organization both of the plants and of my own nervous system, 
alike symphonies of branching complexity, were not just 
manifestations of intelligence—as if things like intelligence and 
love were in themselves substances or formless forces. It was 
rather that the pattern itself is intelligence and is love, and this 
somehow in spite of all its outwardly stupid and cruel distortions. 

There is probably no way of finding objective verification for 
insights such as this. The world is love to him who treats it as 
such, even when it torments and destroys him, and in states of 
consciousness where there is no basic separation between the ego 
and the world suffering cannot be felt as malice inflicted upon 
oneself by another. By the same logic it might seem that without 
the separation of self and other there can be no love. This might 
be true if individuality and universality were formal opposites, 
mutually exclusive of one another, if, that is, the inseparability of 
self and other meant that all individual differentiations were 
simply unreal. But in the unitary, or nondualistic, view of the 
world I have been describing this is not so. Individual differences 
express the unity, as branches, leaves, and flowers from the same 


plant, and the love between the members is the realization of 
their basic interdependence. 

I have not yet been able to use LSD in circumstances of great 
physical or moral pain, and therefore my explorations of the 
problem of evil under its influence may appear to be shallow. 
Only once in these experiments have I felt acute fear, but I know 
of several cases in which LSD has touched off psychic states of the 
most alarming and unpleasant kind. More than once I have 
invited such states under LSD by looking at images ordinarily 
suggestive of “the creeps’—the mandibles of spiders, and the 
barbs and spines of dangerous fish and insects. Yet they evoked 
only a sense of beauty and exuberance, for our normal projection 
of malice into these creatures was entirely withdrawn, so that 
their organs of destruction became no more evil than the teeth of 
a beautiful woman. On another occasion I looked for a long time 
at a colored reproduction of Van Eyck’s Last Judgment, which is 
surely one of the most horrendous products of human 
imagination. The scene of hell is dominated by the figure of 
Death, a skeleton beneath whose batlike wings lies a writhing 
mass of screaming bodies gnawed by snakes which penetrate 
them like maggots in fruit. One of the curious effects of LSD is to 
impart an illusion of movement in still images, so that here the 
picture came to life and the whole entanglement of limbs and 
serpents began to squirm before my eyes.2 Ordinarily such a sight 
should have been hideous, but now I watched it with intense and 
puzzled interest until the thought came to me, “Demon est deus 
inversus—the Devil is God inverted—so let’s turn the picture 
upside down.” I did so, and thereupon burst into laughter for it 
became apparent at once that the scene was an empty drama, a 
sort of spiritual scarecrow, designed to guard some mystery from 
profanation by the ignorant. The agonized expressions of the 
damned seemed quite evidently “put on,” and as for the death’s- 
head, the great skull in the center of the painting, it became just 
what a skull is—an empty shell—and why the horror when there 
is nothing in it? 

I was, of course, seeing ecclesiastical hells for what they are. 
On the one hand, they are the pretension that social authority is 
ultimately inescapable since there are post-mortem police who 
will catch every criminal. On the other hand, they are “no 
trespassing” signs to discourage the insincere and the immature 


from attaining insights which they might abuse. A baby is put in 
a play pen to keep it from getting at the matches or falling 
downstairs, and though the intention of the pen is to keep the 
baby closed in, parents are naturally proud when the child grows 
strong enough to climb out. Likewise, a man can perform actions 
which are truly moral only when he is no longer motivated by the 
fear of hell, that is, when he grows into union with the Good that 
is beyond good and evil, which, in other words, does not act from 
the love of rewards or the fear of punishments. This is precisely 
the nature of the world when it is considered as self-moving 
action, giving out a past instead of being motivated by a past. 

Beyond this, the perception of the empty threat of the death’s- 
head was certainly a recognition of the fact that the fear of death, 
as distinct from the fear of dying, is one of the most baseless 
mirages that trouble us. Because it is completely impossible to 
imagine one’s own personal absence, we fill the void in our minds 
with images of being buried alive in perpetual darkness. If death 
is the simple termination of a stream of consciousness, it is 
certainly nothing to fear. At the same time, I realize that there is 
some apparent evidence for survival of death in a few 
extraordinarily unexplainable mediumistic communications and 
remembrances of past lives. These I attribute, vaguely enough, to 
subtler networks of communication and interrelationship in the 
pattern of life than we ordinarily perceive. For if forms repeat 
themselves, if the structure of branching trees is reverberated in 
the design of watercourses in the desert, it would not be so 
strange if a pattern so intricate as the human nervous system 
were to repeat configurations that arise in consciousness as 
veritable memories of the most distant times. My own feeling, 
and of course it is nothing more than an opinion, is that we 
transcend death, not as individual memory-systems, but only in 
so far as our true identity is the total process of the world as 
distinct from the apparently separate organism. 

As I have said, this sense of being the whole process is 
frequently experienced with LSD, and, for me, it has often arisen 
out of a strong feeling of the mutuality of opposites. Line and 
plane, concept and percept, solid and space, figure and ground, 
subject and object appear to be so completely correlative as to be 
convertible into each other. At one moment it seems that there 
are, for example, no lines in nature: there are only the boundaries 


of planes, boundaries which are, after all, the planes themselves. 
But at the next moment, looking carefully into the texture of 
these planes, one discovers them to be nothing but a dense 
network of patterned lines. Looking at the form of a tree against 
the sky, I have felt at one moment that its outline “belongs” to 
the tree, exploding into space. But the next moment I feel that the 
same form is the “inline” of the sky, of space imploding the tree. 
Every pull is felt as a push, and every push as a pull, as in 
rotating the rim of a wheel with one’s hand. Is one pushing or 
pulling? 

The sense that forms are also properties of the space in which 
they expand is not in the least fantastic when one considers the 
nature of magnetic fields, or, say, the dynamics of swirling ink 
dropped into water. The concepts of verbal thought are so clumsy 
that we tend to think only of one aspect of a relationship at a 
time. We alternate between seeing a given form as a property of 
the figure and as a property of the ground, as in the Gestalt image 
of two profiles in black silhouette, about to kiss. The white space 
between them appears as a chalice, but it is intensely difficult to 
see the kissing faces and the chalice simultaneously. Yet with LSD 
one appears to be able to feel this simultaneity quite vividly, and 
thus to become aware of the mutuality of one’s own form and 
action and that of the surrounding world. The two seem to shape 
and determine each other at the same moment, explosion and 
implosion concurring in perfect harmony, so giving rise to the 
feeling that one’s actual self is both. This inner identity is felt 
with every level of the environment—the physical world of stars 
and space, rocks and plants, the social world of human beings, 
and the ideational world of art and literature, music and 
conversation. All are grounds or fields operating in the most 
intimate mutuality with one’s own existence and behavior so that 
the “origin” of action lies in both at once, fusing them into a 
single act. It is certainly for this reason that LSD taken in 
common with a small group can be a profoundly eucharistic 
experience, drawing the members together into an extremely 
warm and intimate bond of friendship. 

All in all, I have felt that my experiments with this astonishing 
chemical have been most worth while, creative, stimulating, and, 
above all, an intimation that “there is more in heaven and earth 
than is dreamed of in your philosophy.” Only once have I felt 


terror, the sense of being close to madness, and even here the 
insight gained was well worth the pain. Yet this was enough to 
convince me that indiscriminate use of this alchemy might be 
exceedingly dangerous, and to make me ask who, in our society, 
is competent to control its use. Obviously, this applies even more 
to such other powers of science as atomic energy, but once 
something is known there is really no way of locking it up. At the 
present time, 1960, LSD is in the control of pharmacologists and a 
few research groups of psychiatrists, and though there are 
unscrupulous and frankly psychotic psychiatrists, this seems to 
me a far more reliable form of control than that exercised by the 
police and the Bureau of Narcotics—which is not control at all, 
but ineffective repression, handing over actual control to the 
forces of organized crime. 

On the whole, we feel justified in using dangerous powers 
when we can establish that there is a relatively low probability of 
disaster. Life organized so as to be completely foolproof and 
secure is simply not worth living, since it requires the final 
abolition of freedom. It is on this perfectly rational principle of 
gambling that we justify the use of travel by air and automobile, 
electric appliances in the home, and all the other dangerous 
instruments of civilization. Thus far, the record of catastrophes 
from the use of LSD is extremely low, and there is no evidence at 
all that it is either habit-forming or physically deleterious. It is, of 
course, possible to become psychically dependent on stimuli 
which do not establish any craving that can be identified in 
physiological terms. Personally, I am no example of phenomenal 
will power, but I find that I have no inclination to use LSD in the 
same way as tobacco or wines and liquors. On the contrary, the 
experience is always so fruitful that I feel I must digest it for some 
months before entering into it again. Furthermore, I find that I 
am quite instinctively disinclined to use it without the same sense 
of readiness and dedication with which one approaches a 
sacrament, and also that the experience is worth while to the 
precise degree that I keep my critical and intellectual faculties 
alert. 

It is generally felt that there is a radical incompatibility 
between intuition and intellect, poetry and logic, spirituality and 
rationality. To me, the most impressive thing about LSD 
experiences is that these formally opposed realms seem instead to 


complement and fructify one another, suggesting, therefore, a 
mode of life in which man is no longer an embodied paradox of 
angel and animal, of reason fighting instinct, but a marvellous 
coincidence in whom Eros and Logos are one. 


1 I have often made the point, as in The Way of Zen, that the “real” world is 
concrete rather than abstract, and thus that the conceptual patterns of order, 
categorization, and logic which the human mind projects upon nature are in 
some way less real. But upon several occasions LSD has suggested a 
fundamental identity of percept and concept, concrete and abstract. After all, 
our brains and the patterns in them are themselves members of the concrete, 
physical universe, and thus our abstractions are as much forms of nature as the 
structure of crystals or the organization of ferns. 


2 Later, with the aid of a sea urchin’s shell, I was able to find out something of 
the reasons for this effect. All the small purple protrusions on the shell seemed 
to be wiggling, not only to sight but also to touch. Watching this phenomenon 
closely, I realized that as my eyes moved across the shell they seemed to 
change the intensity of coloring, amounting to an increase or decrease in the 
depth of shadow. This did not happen when the eyes were held still. Now 
motion, or apparent motion, of the shadow will often seem to be motion of the 
object casting it, in this case the protrusions on the shell. In the Van Eyck 
painting there was likewise an alteration, a lightening or darkening, of actual 
shadows which the artist had painted, and thus the same illusion of movement. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE WORKS 
OF ALAN W. WATTS 


BOOKS: 


1 The Spirit of Zen. John Murray, London, 1936. 2nd ed., 1955. 
3rd ed., 1958. (Paper) Grove Press, New York, 1960. 
(German) Vom Geist des Zen. Benno Schwabe, Basel and 
Stuttgart, 1956. 

(Italian) Lo Zen. Bompiani, Milan, 1959. 


2 The Legacy of Asia and Western Man. John Murray, London, 
1937. University of Chicago, 1939. 
(Dutch) Azié en het Avondland. Kluwer, Deventer, 1938. 


3 The Meaning of Happiness. Harper, New York, 1940. 2nd ed., 
Delkin, Stanford, 1953. 


4 Behold the Spirit. Pantheon, New York, 1947. Murray, London, 
1948. 


5 Easter—Its Story and Meaning. Henry Schuman (Abelard- 
Schuman), New York, 1950. 


6 The Supreme Identity. Pantheon, New York, and Faber & 
Faber, London, 1950. (Paper) Noonday, New York, 1958. 


7 The Wisdom of Insecurity. Pantheon, New York, 1951. Rider, 
London, 1952. 
(German) Weisheit des Ungesicherten Lebens. Otto-Wilhelm- 
Barth, Munich, 1955. 


8 Myth and Ritual in Christianity Thames & Hudson, London, 
and Vanguard, New York, 1953. (Paper) Grove Press, New 
York, 1960. 

(German) Mythos und Ritus im Christentum. Otto-Wilhelm- 
Barth, Munich, 1956. 


9 The Way of Zen. Pantheon, New York, and Thames & Hudson, 
London, 1957. (Paper) Mentor Books, New York, 1959. 
10 Nature, Man, and Woman. Pantheon, New York, and Thames 
& Hudson, London, 1958. (Paper) Mentor Books, New York, 
1960. 


MONOGRAPHS & PAMPHLETS: 


11 An Outline of Zen Buddhism. Golden Vista Press, London, 
1932. 

12 Seven Symbols of Life. Buddhist Society, London, 1936. 

13 The Psychology of Acceptance. Analytical Psychology Club of 
New York, 1939. 


14 The Theologia Mystica of St. Dionysius. Trs. from the Greek 
with an introduction. Holy Cross Press, West Park, New York, 
1944. 

15 The Meaning of Priesthood. Advent Papers, Boston, 1946. 


16 Zen Buddhism. The Buddhist Society, London, 1947. 
(Dutch) Zen Buddhisme. H. Buys, Lochem, 1949. 

17 Zen. (Expanded version of 16.) Delkin, Stanford, 1948. 

18 The Way of Liberation in Zen Buddhism. American Academy of 
Asian Studies, San Francisco, 1955. 

19 Beat Zen, Square Zen, and Zen. (Expanded version of 28.) City 
Lights Books, San Francisco, 1959. 


MAJOR ARTICLES: 


20 “The Rusty Swords of Japan.” Asia, May, 1939. New York. 


21 “How Buddhism Came to Life.” Asia, October, 1939. New 
York. 


22 “The Problem of Faith and Works in Buddhism.” Review of 
Religion, vol. 5, 4; May, 1941. Columbia Univ., New York. 


23 “The Negative Way.” Vedanta and the West, vol. 14, 4, 1951. 
Hollywood. Also in Vedanta for Modern Man, ed. Christopher 
Isherwood. Harper, New York, 1951. 


24 “Asian Psychology and Modern Psychiatry.” American Journal 
of Psychoanalysis, vol. 13, 1, 1953. New York. Also in 
Psychopathology, ed. Reed, Alexander, and Tomkins. Harvard, 
Cambridge, 1958. 

25 “The Language of Metaphysical Experience.” Journal of 
Religious Thought, vol. 10, 2, 1953. Howard Univ., 
Washington, D.C. 


26 “Oriental ‘Omnipotence.’ ” Tomorrow, vol. 4, 1, 1955. New 
York. 


27 “Convention, Conflict, and Liberation.” American Journal of 
Psychoanalysis, vol. 16, 63, 1956. 


28 “Beat Zen, Square Zen, and Zen.” Chicago Review, vol. 12, 2, 
1958. 


29 “Zen and the Problem of Control.” Contact, vol. 1, 1, 1958. 
Sausalito, Calif. 


ARTICLES BY OTHERS: 


30 Philip Wheelwright, “The Philosophy of Alan W. Watts.” 
Sewanee Review, vol. 61, 3, 1953. 


Aan Watts, who held both a master’s degree in 
theology and a doctorate of divinity, has earned 
the reputation of being one of the most original 
and “un-rutted” philosophers of the century. He 
was best known as an interpreter of Zen 
Buddhism in particular, and of Indian and 
Chinese philosophy in general. He is the author 
of more than twenty books on the philosophy 
and psychology of religion, including (in 
Vintage Books) Behold the Spirit; The Book; Does 
It Matter; The Joyous Cosmology; Nature, Man 
and Woman; The Supreme Identity; The Way of 
Zen; The Wisdom of Insecurity; Beyond Theology; 
and Cloud Hidden, Whereabouts Unknown. He 
died in 1973. 


Penguin 
Random 
House 


What's next on 
your reading list? 


Discover your next 
great read! 


Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author. 


Sign up now. 


