The Iwo Hands of God 
The Myths of Polarity 
Alan W. Watts 


THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


The Myths of Polarity 


PATTERNS OF MYTH 
Alan W. Watts, General Editor 


I. MYTH AND EXPERIENCE 
ALPHA The Myths of Creation by Charles H. Long 


THE WISDOM OF THE SERPENT The Myths of Death, Rebirth, 
and Resurrection by Joseph L. Henderson and Maud Oakes 


THE TWO HANDS OF GOD The Myths of Polarity by Alan W. Watts 


Il. THE HUMAN IMAGE 
MYTHS OF THE HERO (in preparation) 
MYTHS OF THE ROYAL FATHER (in preparation) 


MYTHS OF THE GODDESS (in preparation) 


Other books by the same author: 


THE SPIRIT OF ZEN 
THE LEGACY OF ASIA AND WESTERN MAN 
THE MEANING OF HAPPINESS 
THE THEOLOGIA MYSTICA OF ST. DIONYSIUS 
BEHOLD THE SPIRIT 
ZEN 
EASTER—ITS STORY AND MEANING 
THE SUPREME IDENTITY 
THE WISDOM OF INSECURITY 
MYTH AND RITUAL IN CHRISTIANITY 
THE WAY OF LIBERATION IN ZEN BUDDHISM 
THE WAY OF ZEN 
NATURE, MAN, AND WOMAN 
THIS IS IT 
PSYCHOTHERAPY EAST AND WEST 


THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 


THE TWO HANDS 
OF GOD 
The Myths of 
Polarity 


BY 


ALAN W. WATTS 
AARIAANILA 
GEORGE BRAZILLER 


NEW YORK 


1963 


Copyright © 1963, by Alan W. Watts 


Published simultaneously in Canada by Ambassador Books, Ltd., 
Toronto 


All rights reserved. 

For information, address the publisher, 
George Braziller, Inc. 

215 Park Avenue South, New York 3 


Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 63-18190 


First Printing 
Printed in the United States of America 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


For permission to reprint excerpts from source materials 
in this volume, the author is indebted to the following: 


George Allen & Unwin Ltd. for selection from The Upanishads 
tr. by S. Radhakrishnan. 

The American-Scandinavian Foundation for selection from Prose 
Edda tr. by A. G. Brodeur. 

The American Scholar for selection from “The Vedanta and 
Western Tradition” by A. K. Coomaraswamy, American 
Scholar, Spring, 1939. 

Ernest Benn Ltd. for selection from Early Zoroastrianism tr. by 
J. H. Moulton. 

Bollingen Foundation—for selections from The King and The 
Corpse by Heinrich Zimmer; Philosophies of India by Heinrich 
Zimmer; and Mircea Eliade for selection from his “La Coin- 
cidentia Oppositorum’” in the Eranos-Jahrbuch, 1959; and 
Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd. for selection from Freud and 
Psychoanalysis, Vol. 4 of Collected Works of C. G. Jung. 

E. J. Brill Ltd. for selections from The Gospel according to 
Thomas tr. by Guillaumont, Puech, Quispel, Till, and ’Abd al 
Masih. 

Cambridge University Press for selections from Science and Civil- 
isation in China by Joseph Needham. 


vit + Acknowledgments 


Clarendon Press, Oxford for selections from—The Apocryphal 
New Testament tr. by M. R. James; The Book of Enoch tr. by 
R. H. Charles; Sacred Books of the East, vol. xlix, tr. by J. 
Takakusu; and Zurvan, tr. by R. C. Zaehner. 

Miss S. E. Collins and J. M. Dent & Sons Ltd. for “The Skeleton” 
from The Wild Knight and Other Poems by G. K. Chesterton. 

Columbia University Press for selection from Sources of the 
Chinese Tradition ed. by De Bary, Chan, and Watson. 

E. P. Dutton & Co. Inc. for selection from Cosmic Consciousness 
by Richard Maurice Bucke. 

Farrar, Straus & Company, Inc. for selection from The Dance of 
Shiva by Ananda K. Coomaraswamy. 

Victor Gollancz Ltd. for selection from A Drug-Taker’s Notes by 
R. H. Ward. 

Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc. for selection from William 
Blake by Mark Schorer. 

The Jewish Publication Society of America for selections from 
The Legends of the Jews by Louis Ginzberg. 

Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.—and The Richards Press Ltd. for “The 
White People” from Tales of Horror and the Supernatural by 
Arthur Machen. Copyright 1948 by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.; and 
Andre Deutsch Ltd. Publishers—for selection from Yesteryear 
by Kurt Marek. © 1961 by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. 

Lili Kohler for selection from Jewish Theology by K. Kohler. 

Luzac & Company Ltd. for selection from Man and His Becoming 
by R. Guénon. 

Oriental Art Magazine for selection “Moudra et hasta ou le lan- 
gage par signes” by J. Auboyer, Oriental Art, 1951. 

Oxford University Press (Bombay) for selections from The Thir- 
teen Principal Upanishads tr. by R. E. Hume. 

Oxford University Press for selections from The Tibetan Book 
of the Dead by W. Y. Evans Wentz. 

Pantheon Books, Inc. for selections from The Divine Comedy, tr. 
by Lawrence G. White. Copyright 1948 by Pantheon Books Inc. 
Reprinted by permission of Pantheon Books, A division of 
Random House, Inc. 

Princeton University Press for selections from Heraclitus by 


Acknowledgments + ix 


Philip Wheelwright. Copyright © 1959 by Princeton University 
Press. 

Arthur Probsthain (London) for selections from World Con- 
ception of the Chinese tr. by A. Forke. 

Ramakrishna-Vivekananda Center for selections from The Gospel 
of Sri Ramakrishna tr. by Swami Nikhilananda. 

Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd. for selections from The Trickster 
by Paul Radin; and The Secret of the Golden Flower tr. by R. 
Wilhelm. 

University College Oxford and Christ’s College Cambridge for 
selections from From Fetish to God in Ancient Egypt by E. A. 
Wallis Budge, actual tr. by Alan Gardiner. By permission of the 
Estates Bursar, University College, Oxford. 

Vedanta Centre (Massachusetts) and Ananda Ashrama, Inc. for 
selections from Bhagavad Gita tr. by Swami Paramananda. 

A. Watkins, Inc. and David Higham Associates, Ltd. for selection 
from The Next Development in Man by L. L. Whyte. © 1948 
Lancelot Law Whyte. 

John M. Watkins Publishers for selection from Fragments of a 
Faith Forgotten by G. R. S. Mead. 


To Donald 
with thanks for bones under the flesh 


PREFACE 


SURVEYS of the world’s mythologies have usually classified 
their materials by regions, describing the myths of the Greeks 
and Romans, of the Norsemen, the Egyptians, or the Hindus 
—as if these racial, nationalistic, and geographical categories 
were the really significant divisions of the subject. But what 
would be the significant divisions in a survey of the world’s 
birds? Would it be of major importance to stress the differ- 
ence between American and European sparrows, or between 
sparrows and thrushes? Birds, plants, minerals, and other nat- 
ural phenomena seem to be discussed more usefully by divi- 
sions of form or behavior than of locality. 

To the extent, however, that a specific region is the 
cradle of a particular culture, and to the extent that myths 
are phenomena of cultures, the regional classification has its 
merits. But it should be supplemented by some other method, 
by a horizontal classification superimposed upon a perpen- 
dicular, and for this reason it has seemed important to discuss 
world mythology in terms of its themes or, to use C. G. Jung’s 
word, its archetypes. Such an approach is therefore naturally 
indebted to Jung, to his provocative idea that myths are nat- 
ural phenomena which grow out of the mind more or less uni- 
formly in all places, just as the human body is of one essential 
pattern in China and Peru. 

Yet in inviting authors to contribute to this series I have 
not restricted myself to those who are formally Jungian. I 


xiii 


xiv + Preface 


have tried to get as wide a variety of opinion as the thematic 
approach to mythology will permit. 

The plan of the series is to publish, first, three volumes 
under the general title of Myth and Experience and having 
to do with mythological themes which treat of the ultimate 
structure and dynamics of the cosmos—the myths of creation, 
the myths of death and resurrection, and the myths of polar- 
ity. These will be followed by three volumes with the general 
title of The Human Image, and dealing with myths in which 
the universe is understood in terms of anthropomorphic 
images, so that the themes here will be the father god, the 
goddess, and the hero. 

Each volume is primarily an anthology of texts and 
images—i.e., photographs of works of art, ritual objects, and 
the like—presented with an introduction and running com- 
mentary. It is not, however, the intention of the series to 
serve as a sort of reference encyclopedia with each volume 
a compendium of all the principal myths of the given type. 
What was desired here was a more imaginative treatment of 
the materials, and thus the contributing authors were selected 
accordingly. 

This particular volume is the by-product of many years’ 
interest in types of relationship which are at once difficult to 
express in language and yet fundamental to the order of life 
itself. I speak of the polar, reciprocal, or mutually sustaining 
relationship of events and forces that are usually considered 
to be opposed to or basically separate from one another. 
These “oppositions” include not only life and death, good 
and evil, light and darkness, but also the organism and its 
environment, the self and the not-self, the solid and the space, 
and the knower and the known. There has always been a cer- 
tain difficulty in explaining the relationship between these 


Preface + xv 


terms as ‘‘transactional’’—like buying and selling—such that 
the one term exists only in conjunction with the other. This 
points to the further insight that what is divided in terms, 
that is, in thought and language, may be united in fact. To 
be specific: the individual’s sense of basic separation from his 
universe may be a perceptual illusion based upon inadequate 
concepts of sensing and knowing. 

I have found, however, that there are many ways in 
which images, and especially mythological images, express 
this type of relationship more adequately than logically de- 
scriptive language. What follows is, then, an anthology of 
myths and mythical images concerned with the polar rela- 
tionship of opposites, together with a running commentary 
and a general introduction to the theme. 

Not believing that mythology has yet reached the status 
of a science, my selection of materials is based chiefly on 
philosophical and literary considerations. With the exception 
of the materials from Milton’s Paradise Lost, I have tried to 
avoid sources that would be familiar to the educated Western 
reader, and thus have almost entirely excluded the oft re- 
peated Greek, Roman, and Nordic myths. For a number of 
most useful suggestions as to sources that I might use, I am 
indebted to my friend Joseph Campbell. My grateful thanks 
are also due to Mary Jane King, Grace Ponch, and Ruth Cos- 
tello for their assistance in typing the manuscript, and to 
Luisa Coomaraswamy and Antoinette Gordon for providing 
some of the photographs for plates. 

ALAN W. WATTS 
Sausalito, California 
December, 1962 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Preface 

List of Plates 

List of Line Drawings 
INTRODUCTION 

THE PRIMORDIAL PAIR 
THE COSMIC DANCE 
THE TWO BROTHERS 
ULTIMATE DUALISM 
DISMEMBERMENT REMEMBERED 
Notes on the Plates 
Bibliographical References 


Index 


147 
189 
239 
249 
255 


LIST OF PLATES 


PLATE 


1. Lingam and yoni. Courtesy of Mrs. A. K. Coomara- 
swamy. 

2. Kali. Courtesy of the Rietberg Museum, Ziirich. 

3. Black Madonna. Courtesy of Louisa Jenkins, Big Sur, 
California. 

4. Yamantaka. Courtesy of the Metropolitan Museum of 
Art, New York, gift of Mrs. Robert W. deForest, 
1931. 

5. St. Michael and the Dragon. From Enzo Carli, Sienese 
Painting (Haut-Rhin, France: Etablissements Braun 
et Cie, 1956; New York; New York Graphic Society 
Publishers Ltd., 1956). 

6. The Descent of Christ into Hell. Courtesy of the Met- 
ropolitan Museum of Art, New York. 

7. The Inferno. From Marucci and Micheletti, Medieval 
Painting (London: Studio Books [Longacre Press 
Ltd.], 1960; New York: The Viking Press, Inc., 
1960). 

8. Details of Temptation of St. Anthony. From Pevsner 
and Meier, Griinewald (London: Thames & Hudson 
Ltd., 1958; New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1958). 

Plates 1-8 follow page 7o. 


xix 


xx 


10. 


- List of Plates 


The Last Judgment. Courtesy of the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art, New York, Fletcher Fund, 1933. 
Lucifer, King of Hell. From Dante Alighieri; The 
Divine Comedy, tr. Lawrence G. White (New York: 

Pantheon Books, Inc., 1948). 

The Saintly Throng in the Form of a Rose. Jbid. 

Vision of the Throne of God. Courtesy of the Bibli- 
othéque Nationale, Parts. 

St. Michael. Courtesy of the Metropolitan Museum of 
Art, New York, Dick Fund, 1960. 

The Cross as the Tree of Life. From Hans Decker. 
Romanesque Art in Italy (London: Thames & Hud- 
son Ltd., 1959; New York: Harty N. Abrams Inc., 
1959). 

Indian Tree of Life. Courtesy of the Nelson-Atkins 
Gallery (Nelson Fund), Kansas City, Missouri. 
Photo: From collection of Maud Oakes. 

Vishnu on a serpent. Courtesy of Mrs. A. K. Coomara- 
swamy. 

Plates 9-16 follow page 13. 

Amphisbaena. Courtesy of the British Museum, Lon- 
don. Photo: From collection of Maud Oakes. 


Symbolic door. Courtesy of Mrs. A. K. Coomaraswamy. 


Brahma. Courtesy of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, 
New York, Eggleston Fund, 1927. 


20a. and 20b. Two forms of the four-faced Brahma. Cour- 


22. 


23. 


tesy of Mrs. A. K. Coomaraswamy. 


Shiva as Nataraja, King of the Dance. Courtesy of the 
Rietberg Museum, Ziirich. 
Indian map of the world. Courtesy of Mrs. A. K. 
Coomaraswamy. 
Amitayus Mandala. Courtesy of the American Museum 
of Natural History, New York. 
Plates 17-23 follow page r9¢ 


LIST OF LINE DRAWINGS 


FIG. PAGE 
1. Figure/ground constellation 22 
2. Hexagram 54 
3. Eight formations of trigrams 55 
4. Yin and yang 59 
5. Diagram of Chou Tun-Yi 60 
6. Horus-Set 122 


THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


The Myths of Polarity 


Let not your left hand know what your right hand doeth. 
MATTHEW 6:3 


Those who would have right without its correlative, wrong; or good 
government without its correlative, misrule,—they do not apprehend 
the great principles of the universe nor the conditions to which all 
creation is subject. One might as well talk of the existence of heaven 
without that of earth, or of the negative principle (yin) without the 
positive (yang), which is clearly absurd. Such people, if they do not 
yield to argument, must be either fools or knaves. 

CHUANG-TZU, XVII. 


In biological development dualism or conflict is always superimposed 
on a prior unity. The existence of an organism capable of survival 
implies integration, and unity is therefore always prior to inner con- 
flict. Conflict may arise as the result of an inappropriate adaptation, 
and it may prove fatal or it may be overcome. But the recovery of 
organic health never involves the synthesis of fundamentally opposed 
principles, since these cannot co-exist in an organism. It only seems to 
do so because the actual condition of the organism has been misin- 
terpreted in using a dualistic language. The historical process does not 
involve the synthesis of pre-existing logical opposites, though it may 
appear to in the confused language of immature dialectical theories. 

L. L. WHYTE, The Next Development in Man. 


INTRODUCTION 


\ V nen the critical intellect looks at anything 
carefully, it vanishes. This is as true of the solid 
substance of bodies as of historical generalizations, of entities 
such as nations, of epochs such as the Middle Ages, and of 
subject matters such as myth. The reason is, of course, that 
“things” exist only relatively—for a point of view or for con- 
venience of description. Thus when we inspect any unit more 
closely we find that its structure is more complex and more 
differentiated than we had supposed. Its variety comes to 
impress us more than its unity. This is why there is something 
of the spirit of debunking in all scholarship and scientific 
inquiry. As a historian of science once put it, “Isn’t it amaz- 
ing how many things there are that aren’t so?” 

It is for this reason that no serious scholar will now pro- 
pose any general definition or comprehensive theory of myth 
—at least, not without making numerous reservations. Never- 
theless, the word ‘‘myth” remains useful. It designates a class 
of things which we all recognize clearly enough, provided we 
do not try to be too exact about it. Under the microscope, 
even the clean edge of a knife becomes ragged. But the 


2 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


stories of Hercules and Odin, the cosmologies of India and 
China, and the symbols of the lotus and the cross have some- 
thing in common that we can call mythological—meaning by 
this word something very much more than the merely 
fanciful. 

Some years ago I ventured to define myth as ‘‘a complex 
of stories—some no doubt fact, and some fantasy—which, for 
various reasons, human beings regard as demonstrations of 
the inner meaning of the universe and of human life.”? 
Vague as this was, I should have made it yet vaguer by adding 
that myth includes not only stories but also symbols and 
images, for the yang-yin symbol of the Chinese and the 
neurological doctrines of Yoga are plainly mythological in 
the sense of my definition without being associated with any 
special narrative. The point is, I think, that myth is to be 
distinguished from religion, science, and philosophy because 
it consists always of concrete images, appealing to imagina- 
tion, and serving in one way or another to reveal or explain 
the mysteries of life. Yet there is a sense in which both the 
poetic and the mythic image at once reveal and conceal. The 
meaning is divined rather than defined, implicit rather than 
explicit, suggested rather than stated. It is in this sense that 
an apocalypse is simultaneously a revelation of hidden things 
and a way of speaking in symbols so as to conceal them. 

Beyond this I do not see how there can be any coherent 
theory of myth and mythogenesis. It is rather that there is 
some truth in almost all theories—as that myth is primitive 
philosophy or science, that its inner meaning is sexual, agri- 
cultural, or astrological, that it is a projection of unconscious 
psychic events, and that it is a consciously constructed system 
of allegories and parables. No one of these theories accounts 
for all myths, and yet I do not doubt that each accounts for 


Introduction + 3 


some. There is, too, the special difficulty that the study of 
living myths is like the study of child psychology: the infant 
is unable to say what he thinks and feels in the terms which 
the psychologist wants to use. The recognition of myth as 
such almost invariably requires a certain sophistication; like 
the rainbow, myth can be seen only from a cultural or 
temporal distance—and as the anthropologist approaches it to 
find his pot of gold, the rainbow recedes and vanishes. 

It is not, however, the purpose of this particular volume 
to explore or apply any general theories of myth beyond the 
rather vague assumption that myth is often a way of thinking 
in concrete images, in terms that are neither abstract ideas 
nor descriptions of tangible facts. Its less ambitious though 
almost paradoxical object is to show, with respect to myths of 
a certain type, that the mythical mode of thought is able to 
convey things which are difficult to express otherwise, and 
that therefore myth still has value for an age of science and 
scientific philosophy. Myth is not, furthermore, an exclusively 
ancient or primitive phenomenon. As Mark Schorer has said, 
“Myths are the instruments by which we continually struggle 
to make our experience intelligible to ourselves. A myth is a 
large controlling image that gives philosophical meaning to 
the facts of ordinary life; that is, which has organizing value 
for experience. . . . Are not ideas, like language itself, 
supported by the ‘submerged metaphor’? In this sense, myth 
is indispensable to any form of belief. And in this sense, one 
may even concur with Hume’s offensive remark that ‘there is 
no such passion in human minds, as the love of mankind, 
merely as such’; for this passion, like all others, must have 
an image, real or ideal, as its correlative.”? But we may say, 
further, not only that the mythological image is an organizer 


4 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


-and energizer of action, but also that it has a way of implying 
things that are difficult to state explicitly. 

This has always been recognized with respect to the 
poetic image. ““The moonlight steeped in silentness the steady 
weathercock.” In “factual” language it is nonsense to say that 
the noise of something which, in any case, is not moving is 
abated by light. Does the image, then, make sense only 
because we read into it a series of ‘“‘as ifs’’—it is as if the posi- 
tive presence of moonlight rather than the negative absence 
of wind were making the weathercock still? To put it that 
way is to lose something much more than elegance of expres- 
sion, and, indeed, the skillful poet tends to avoid such meta- 
phor cues as “‘like,” ‘‘as if,” or “as it were.” The difference 
between poetic and factual Janguage is of course that the 
former is associative and the latter dissociative. The one 
makes an active connection between moonlight and silence 
over and above their temporal concurrence. The other likes 
to keep clear distinctions between things which are not 
causally related. But the poetic language manages to convey 
something which factual language almost invariably screens 
out—the psychophysical involvement of the poet himself with 
his environment. 

Factual description depends upon the convention that 
there can be an independent, detached observer who can 
regard the world objectively. But this is a convention, albeit 
a useful one within certain limits. The physical situation 
which so largely slips through the net of factual language is 
that there is no independent observer. Knowledge is not an 
encounter between two separate things—a knowing subject 
and a known object. Knowledge, or better, knowing isa rela- 
tionship in which knower and known are like the poles in a 
magnetic field. Human beings are aware of a world because, 


Introduction - 5 


and only because, it is the sort of world that breeds knowing 
organisms. Humanity is not one thing and the world another; 
it has always been difficult for us to see that any organism is 
so embedded in its environment that the evolution of so 
complex and intelligent a creature as man could never have 
come to pass without a reciprocal evolution of the environ- 
ment. An intelligent man argues, without any resort to 
supernaturalism, an intelligent universe. 

At this point, I am afraid, both the writer and the reader 
become aware of a certain difficulty in expressing the point. 
Factual language, which is what I am trying to speak, has a 
grammar and structure which fragments the world into quite 
separate things and events. But this is not the way in which 
the world exists physically, for there is no thing, no event, 
save in relation to other things and events—save in what science 
calls a field. True, a given thing can disappear without the dis- 
appearance of its field. The environment continues beyond 
the death of any organism. But the field, the environment, does 
not exist apart from the life-and-death of that organism. This 
world would be a very different world indeed if it were not 
the kind of world in which Socrates, or John Doe, could have 
lived and did in fact live. 

The poet says all this much more vividly through what 
has been miscalied “the pathetic fallacy’—the attribution of 
human qualities to nature. 


The moon doth with delight look round her 


When the heavens are bare. 
| 


‘If we are to understand by this just that the poet looks round 
with delight when the moon is shining in the bare heavens, it 

ere better said that way and let the poetry dissolve into 
indifferent prose. But in an image of this kind the poet 


6 * THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


divines or implies a physical truth for which the language of 
facts is inadequate—not that the moon has eyes of its own, but 
that a man’s eyes are the moon’s eyes, that there is light only 
when there are eyes, and that a world in which there is a 
moon goes together with a world in which there are men— 
inseparably. Associations which form themselves in poetic 
imagination are, after all, associations which exist in nature, 
though not along the lines of connection which factual lan- 
guage ordinarily describes. 

At this point the poet himself may quite properly object 
that I have been trying to steal his thunder, that I am begin- 
ning to say in factual language what he says much better in 
poetry, but that, nonetheless, I have somewhat missed the 
point. There was more in his image than I have explained. All 
this is quite true, for the whole aim of this essay is, as I inti- 
mated, the almost paradoxical one of trying to say, in factual 
language, that poetic and mythological images can express 
things, even physical relationships, which are only most awk- 
wardly expressible in other terms. And there zs more in the 
image than I have explained. This is precisely the force of the 
image: that it is endlessly fecund, that its store of meanings is 
abundant for generation after generation. 

Two different modes of language imply two modes of 
vision. Factual language obviously represents the view of 
nature which is held to be normal, practical, and sane—the 
world of science and industry, business and bureaucracy, of 
hard facts and cold calculations. It is a world that is rather 
flat, dry, and dusty—like a city parking lot—but which many 
of us find enormously reassuring and to which we cling as to 
sanity itself. But one of the most prevalent themes of myth 
is that this is a “fallen” world whose matter-of-fact reality is 
quite spurious. In differing ways the poet, the painter, and 


Introduction - 7 


the mystic try to describe another world, or rather, this same 
world of nature seen in another way. 

Arthur Machen quotes a curious account of this vision 
from Hampole’s A London Walk: Meditations in the Streets 
of the Metropolis, written about the middle of the nineteenth 
century: 


“Has it ever been your fortune, courteous reader, to rise in the earliest 
dawning of a summer day, ere yet the radiant beams of the sun have 
done more than touch with light the domes and spires of the great 
city? ... If this has been your lot, have you not observed that magic 
powers have apparently been at work? The accustomed scene has lost 
its familiar appearance. The houses which you have passed daily, it 
may be for years, as you have issued forth on your business or pleasure, 
now seem as if you beheld them for the first time. They have suffered 
a mysterious change, into something rich and strange. Though they 
may have been designed with no extraordinary exertion of the art of 
architecture ... yet you have been ready to admit that they now ‘stand 
in glory, shine like stars, apparelled in light serene.’ They have become 
magical habitations, supernal dwellings, more desirable to the eye than 
the fabled pleasure dome of the Eastern potentate, or the bejewelled 
hall built by the Genie for Aladdin in the Arabian tale. 

“Some have declared that it lies within our choice to gaze continually 
upon a world of equal or even greater wonder and beauty. It is said 
by these that the experiments of the alchemists in the Dark Ages... 
are, in fact, related, not to the transmutation of metals, but to the 
transmutation of the entire Universe. . . . This method, or art, or 
science, or whatever we choose to call it (supposing it to exist, or to 
have ever existed), is simply concerned to restore the delights of the 

| primal Paradise; to enable men, if they will, to inhabit a world of joy 
' and splendour. It is perhaps possible that there is such an experiment, 
| and that there are some who have made it.””8 


| It has, of course, been supposed that this vision is a brief 
\recapturing of the way in which we saw things in our infancy, 


and in this connection it is worth quoting a celebrated pas- 
lee from Traherne’s Centuries of Meditations: 


8 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


“Is it not strange,” he asks, “that an infant should be heir of the 
whole World, and see those mysteries which the books of the learned 
never unfold? 

“The corn was orient and immortal wheat, which never should be 
reaped, nor was ever sown. I thought it had stood from everlasting to 
everlasting. The dust and stones of the street were as precious as gold: 
the gates were at first the end of the world. The green trees when I 
saw them first through one of the gates transported and ravished me, 
their sweetness and unusual beauty made my heart to leap, and almost 
mad with ecstasy, they were such strange and wonderful things. The 
Men! O what venerable and reverend creatures did the aged seem! 
Immortal Cherubims! And young men glittering and sparkling Angels, 
and maids strange seraphic pieces of life and beauty! Boys and girls 
tumbling in the street, and playing, were moving jewels. I knew not 
that they were born or should die; but all things abided eternally as 
they were in their proper places. 

“Eternity was manifest in the Light of Day, and something infinite 
behind everything appeared: which talked with my expectation and 
moved my desire. The city seemed to stand in Eden, or to be built in 
Heaven. The streets were mine, the temple was mine, the people were 
mine, their clothes and gold and silver were mine, as much as their 
sparkling eyes, fair skins and ruddy faces. The skies were mine, and 
so were the sun and moon and stars, and all the World was mine; and 
I the only spectator and enjoyer of it. I knew no churlish proprieties, 
nor bounds, nor divisions: but all proprieties and divisions were mine: 
all treasures and the possessors of them. So that with much ado I was 
corrupted, and made to learn the dirty devices of this world. Which 
now I unlearn, and become, as it were, a little child again that I may 
enter into the Kingdom of God.’"4 


Here, two hundred years before Freud, is his idea that 
the infant has a sense of omnipotent oneness with all that it 
sees and feels. But from Freud’s viewpoint any return to this 
state 1s regressive—a weak and wishful abandonment of the 
restrictions and responsibilities of civilized, adult manhood, 
despite the fact that mystics have sought and regained this 
consciousness through the most arduous disciplines. It seems 
entirely to have escaped Freud’s thought that there might be 


Introduction + 9 


an adult version of this vision, maturer than the infant’s as 
the grown body to the baby’s. It might thus be that, ordi- 
narily, through the confusions of civilized education, this 
mode of vision is never cultivated and lapses, therefore, into 
atrophy. This way of seeing the world comes too often to 
people of high sensibility and culture for it to be dismissed 
as regression or delusion. 

Furthermore, it becomes clearer and clearer even to the 
austere viewpoints of the physicist and biologist that the 
ways in which we ordinarily interpret the reports of our 
senses are learned and to some extent conventional—products 
of education rather than of the organism itself, biologically 
considered. If in physical fact man-and-his-environment con- 
stitute some sort of unified or polarized field, why do we not 
feel this to be so instead of feeling ourselves to be rather 
alien beings confronting a world? 

Part of the difficulty seems to be that we educate a style 
of consciousness which ignores whatever is a constant sensa- 
tion. Consciousness is ever upon the alert for new conditions 
in the environment so as to keep the rest of the organism 
informed about adaptations that must be made, and this style 
of attention comes to eclipse the more open and total style of 
sensitivity that we have in the beginning. In the Genesis 
myth, Adam and Eve fell from grace because they attained 
“the knowledge of good and evil,’ which is saying in the 
plainest way that they became distracted from Eden through 
concern with what is advantageous and disadvantageous in 
the environment. The Hebrew words for good and evil in 
this context mean precisely the useful and the useless, in 
other words, what is useful for survival and what is not. It 
would seem, then, that the Fall comes about through an obses- 
sive and continuous preoccupation with survival, and thus it 


10 « THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


is logical for the Regainer of paradise to say, ‘“Whosoever 
would save his life shall lose it.” 

Nothing, apparently, could be more contrary to practical 
good sense, especially under the conditions of a high civiliza- 
tion which maintains its entire business by the perpetual 
inculcation of competition and anxiety. But the paradox of 
civilization is that the more one is anxious to survive, the less 
survival is worth the trouble. And it looks as if, in the end, 
the very technology which flows from the knowledge of the 
useful and the useless will be the death of us all. On the other 
hand, there is a considerable and normally unexpected sur- 
vival value in the very absence of anxiety to survive. Popular 
wisdom recognizes that care killed the cat because when the 
cat cares too much, it does not fall limply from the branch 
of a tree. Nothing is stronger than a certain give, or springy 
absence of rigidity, and this is certainly why evolution seems 
to favor the mammals more than the crustaceans—sensitive 
flesh around bone rather than insensitive bone around flesh. 
Without its resilient ease and looseness, the cat would cer- 
tainly not have its nine lives. 

The vision of the world described in factual language is 
therefore dim and dusty because it is a view of life deadened 
by concern to live. The Lord God is reported in the Bible to 
have said to his Chosen People, “I have set before you life 
and death: choose life.” But the commandments of the Lord 
God are sometimes challenges to find out what is impossible, 
though plausible, by attempting to do it. As we shall see, the 
mythological image implies again and again that life and 
death are not so much alternatives as alternations, poles of a 
single process which may be called life-and-death. Not only 
is it obvious that living organisms thrive upon dead organ- 
isms; it is also only a little less obvious that the very living of 


Introduction + 11 


any one organism is a perpetual birth, death, and elimination 
of its own cells. Moreover death provides for the constant 
renewal of life by setting limits to accumulations—of popula- 
tion, of property, of memories—which, beyond a certain 
point, tend to become static and to clog the flow of life—that 
is, to die! It is thus that accumulation, the building up of 
some relatively permanent pattern or system, is both life and 
death. 

But in the other, paradisal, vision the individual organ- 
ism has a different sense of identity. It is not merely itself, 
bounded rigidly by its own skin. Its identity is also its whole 
field, which, in mystical terms, is to say that it is one with 
the universe, with the system of immortal life-and-death. In 
the light of this awareness the overplus of concer for indi- 
vidual survival fades away; the dust of busy anxiety settles, 
and the world becomes visible in its primal, or actual, 
splendor. 

Now this is the world of mythology, of the marvelous, 
for, as Aristotle said, myths are ‘‘a compact of wonders.”’ It is 
not, however, a world which is good in the specifically moral 
sense: it is a world of gods and demons, magnificent in its 
wrath as in its beauty, and only the person who knows that 
all this is his veritable and fundamental Self can overcome the 
fear of it. As the Eskimo shaman Najagneq told the anthro- 
pologist Rasmussen, this Self is ‘the inhabitant or soul 
(tnua) of the universe. ... All we know is that it has a gentle 
voice like a woman, a voice ‘so fine and gentle that even 
children cannot become afraid.’ What it says is: sila ersinar- 
sinivdluge, ‘be not afraid of the universe.’ ’’> This is likewise 
the counsel of the Bardo Thédol, or the Tibetan Book of the 
Dead. “‘At this time when the Fifty-eight Blood-Drinking 
Deities emanating from thine own brain come to shine upon 


12 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


thee, if thou knowest them to be the radiances of thine own 
intellect, thou wilt merge, in the state of at-one-ment, into 
the body of the Blood-Drinking Ones there and then, and 
obtain Buddhahood. O nobly-born, by not recognizing now, 
and by fleeing from the deities out of fear, again sufferings 
will come to overpower thee.’’® 

The intellectual attitude of our own time, so pre- 
ponderantly antimythological, expresses our fear of the 
marvelous, for we have been trying to persuade ourselves that 
the universe is not a mystery but a somewhat stupid machine. 
Poetry has been regarded as a pursuit fit only for weak young 
men with long hair, mysticism as a refuge for the credulous 
and woolly-minded, and mythology as the relic of a barbarous 
past. Consequently the very science of mythology is, for the 
most part, an antiquarianism or, insofar as it is a study of 
existing primitive cultures, a sort of scientific game whose 
results will be filed in libraries and museums. The majority 
of works on mythology claiming any scholarly and scientific 
competence are thus purely historical in their approach. They 
are preoccupied with ferreting out the original sources of 
mythic themes, with archeological, philological, and literary 
evidences for their creation and dissemination, and with 
explanations of their symbolism which shall show them to be 
merely primitive forms of thought. There is, indeed, merit in 
this work because it does provide some sound evidence as to 
the ways in which myth is formed. Yet it is an approach 
which has been greatly overemphasized. 

Whatever may be said against the psychological theories 
of Freud and, more particularly, of Jung, their work has the 
outstanding virtue of taking mythology seriously, of studying 
it as something still powerfully operative in the modern 
world, and, at least in Jung’s case, of regarding it with all 


Introduction + 13 


the respect due to a source of wisdom. To put it in Jung’s own 
words, “I can only stand in deepest awe and admiration 
before the depths and heights of the soul whose world beyond 
space hides an immeasurable richness of images, which mil- 
lions of years of living have stored up and condensed into 
organic material. My conscious mind is like an eye which 
perceives the furthermost spaces; but the psychic non-ego is 
that which fills this space in a sense beyond space. These 
images are not pale shadows, but powerful and effective con- 
ditions of the soul which we can only misunderstand but can 
never rob of their power by denying them.” 

My own approach will not be formally Jungian. I think 
the hypothesis of a “collective unconscious,” of a storehouse 
of archaic images and memories somehow embedded in and 
inherited with the structure of the brain, is plausible but 
quite insufficiently proven. I do not feel that such an uncon- 
scious is necessarily the main reason why similar types of myth 
have arisen in the most widely dispersed times and places, for 
evidences of their transmission by physical contacts keep 
coming to light. I feel, too, that so much emphasis upon the 
force of an inherited, psycho-neurological unconscious gives 
too little weight to the influence, also unconscious, of man’s 
social context—a matrix in which the individual is as deeply 
involved as in the field of his natural surroundings of light, 
air, water, and earth. Jung’s psychology carries over too much 
of the notion that the mind or soul is inside the skin as some 
sort of dimension of the individual organism. Mind is also a 
vast network of social intercommunication wherein the indi- 
vidual is something like a transformer in an electric power 
grid. 

But none of this invalidates Jung’s point that the mythic 
image, the archetype, whether submerged in the collective 


14¢ + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


unconscious or the social matrix or both, is a powerful and 
indispensable organizer of action and experience. Yet I do 
not remember any passage in which Jung suggests that, 
beyond this, the archetypal images reveal a vision not of the 
psyche alone but of the whole natural world. For Jung, the 
external world seems to be a somewhat indifferent screen 
which receives our psychic projections. He is overcareful to 
avoid the pathetic fallacy. For my part, I believe that these 
images—mythic, poetic, and artistic—reveal the outer world 
as well as the inner. For it is only when translated into the 
somewhat specialized and limited instrument of factual lan- 
guage that the outer world appears to be this prosaic assembly 
of “nobody here but just us objects.” To survey and control 
the earth we must reduce its formations to the formal abstrac- 
tions of geometry, and translate it into the flat and dry 
symbolism of maps. But, as Korzybski so often repeated, the 
map is not the territory. 

Myth, too, is a symbolism and mythologies are likewise 
maps, and for this reason they, in their turn, are not to be 
taken_literally. It is rather that when the dust falls from 
before our eyes, human beings are themselves the gods and 
demons, acting out, not the piddling business of worldly life, 
but the great archetypal situations and dramas of the myths. 
The gods are the archetypes, but they exist as perpetually 
incarnate in ourselves. In the mythic vision men appear as 
incarnations of the archetypal gods because the full and 
eternal significance of what they are doing appears. They are 
not just earning livings and raising families and pursuing 
hobbies: they are playing out, with innumerable variations, 
the cosmic drama of hide-and-seek, lost-and-found, which, as 
I shall try to show later, is the mono-plot behind all plots. In 
the light of this vision, the whole world of man and nature 


Introduction +» 15 


acquires an atmosphere that we may call variously divine, 
luminous, enchanted, timeless, archetypal, because, on the 
one hand, the senses—undistracted by too much concern to 
survive—are made available for the world as it is. On the 
other, every role that is played—divine or demonic—by being 
seen in terms of the cosmic drama is also seen as having its 
fit and essential place. It is this assumption into a universal 
wholeness which gives the individual a significance in the 
mythic vision far beyond anything that he may have in the 
factual vision. This is why the lives, the occupations, and the 
artifacts of so-called primitive peoples are so deeply perme- 
ated with ritual. This is not just formal politeness or good 
taste, just as the symbols upon their artifacts are not decora- 
tion. It is the recognition. that all which happens here is a 
reflection, or dramatization, of what happens in divints.* 

Schorer has said that the mythological image is what 
gives sense and organization to experience. A. K. Coomara- 
swamy went so far as to say that “myth embodies the nearest 
approach to absolute truth that can be stated in words.”* All 
this is because the poetic, mythical, or mystical mode of vision 
perceives orders and relationships which, as J have tried to 
show, escape factual description. The factual language dis- 
sects and disintegrates experience into categories and opposi- 
tions that cannot be resolved. It is the language of either/or, 
and from its standpoint all that is on the dark side of life— 
death, evil, and suffering—cannot be assimilated. There is 
nothing for it but to get rid of it. But, 


“If seven maids with seven mops 
Swept it for half a year, 


* Perhaps this is why, if our vision should ever have been transformed in 
the manner described by Hampole and Traheme, the artifacts of such peoples 
appear to be amazingly natural and even “realistic.” 


16 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


Do you suppose,” the Walrus said, 
‘That they could sweep it clear?” 

“I doubt it,” said the Carpenter, 
And shed a bitter tear. 


By contrast, the language of myth and poetry is integrative, 
for the language of the image is organic language. Thus it 
expresses a point of view in which the dark side of things has 
its place, or rather, in which the light and the dark are 
transcended through being seen in the terms of a dramatic 
unity. This is the catharsis, or soul-cleansing function, of the 
tragic drama. ; 

It is for this reason that I am taking as the theme of this 
volume the myths of polarity, myths which deal with the 
conflicting dualities of life and their reconciliation. And as 
a subordinate and logically connected motif I shall consider 
some representative myths of the function of the Demon, of 
the principle of darkness and evil. As already indicated, the 
polar vision or, as it is often called, the ambivalence of the 
mythological image implies a coincidence or reconciliation of 
opposites which, in the factual and practical world, would 
seem impossible or immoral. It is thus a theme which can 
hardly be introduced without some preliminary philosophical 
considerations. 

For some reason profound and sensitive people are never 
content with such clear and drastic solutions to the problem 
of duality as that which is proposed in popular Christian 
orthodoxy: that the final goal of existence is the everlasting 
reward and perpetuation of goodness to the total exclusion of 
evil, and the everlasting punishment or annihilation of its 
perpetrators. This solution arouses the same sort of intuitive 
disquiet as all other forms of metaphysical dualism in that it 
leaves us with a picture of the world which, because it con- 


Introduction - 17 


tains an element which is not integrated, fails to make sense 
as a whole. On the other hand, there is as much disquiet with 
the idea of a simple monism. We cannot quite swallow the 
second Isaiah’s reaction to Zoroastrian dualism: “I am the 
Lord and there is none else. I form the light and create the 
darkness; I make peace and create evil. I, the Lord, do all 
these things.”” The thought is morally and practically confus- 
ing. It is just the kind of sophistry which the Devil himself 
would employ to blind the conscience of his victims and to 
spread the confusion of the witches’ spell, ‘Fair is foul and 
foul is fair.” 

A problem which has for centuries occupied the most 
subtle philosophers and theologians will not, of course, be 
settled here. But much of this discussion may be by-passed if 
we realize that the problem is not answerable in the terms in 
which it is proposed, simply because they confuse the map 
with the territory. Good and evil are abstract categories like 
up and down, and categories do not perform their function 
unless they are kept distinct. It is thus perfectly proper that 
the concepts of good and evil be distinct, dualistic, and irrec- 
oncilable, that they be as firm and clear as any other measure. 
The “problem of duality’ arises only when the abstract is 
confused with the concrete, when it is thought that there are 
as clearly distinguishable entities in the natural universe. 
As we have seen, factual language, in which categories of this 
kind belong, is never more than a strictly limited symbolism 
for what is happening in nature. The image, poetic or mythic, 
is closer than linguistic categories to events themselves, or to 
what I would rather call natural patterning. We pay for the 
exactitude of factual language with the price of being able 
to speak from only one point of view at a time. But the image 


18 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


is many-sided and many-dimensioned, and yet at the same 
time imprecise; here again, it is like nature itself. 

The same must be said of such other duality problems as 
those of freedom and determinism, randomness and order, 
multiplicity and unity. By changing the point of view, what is 
actually happening may be seen as having now one aspect 
and now the other, and though this may be contradictory for 
the categories of formal thought, it is not so in actual exist- 
ence. It is thus that in Christian theology Christ and Satan 
are irreconcilably opposed; but in the imagery of Christian 
mythology the Serpent does duty for both—‘for as Moses 
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so also shall the Son 
of Man be lifted up.” 

What this means for practical action is that we accept 
the standards of logic and morals, not exactly with reserva- 
tions, but with a certain humor. We will try to keep them, 
knowing that we shall not altogether succeed. We shall com- 
mit ourselves to positions and promises as best we may, know- 
ing always that there must be a hintergedanke—a thought far 
in the back of the mind which, like crossed fingers, gives us 
an “out” when pressed too far. We shall realize that behind 
our devotion to duty there is always a strong element of self- 
admiration, and that even in the most passionate love of 
others there is inevitably the aspect of personal gratification. 

This attitude of gentle cynicism has always been charac- 
teristic of highly cultured and humane people, and in the 
fellowship of those who can “‘let their hair down” with each 
other and express the warmest friendship in such terms as, 
“Well, you old rascal!” The whole possibility of loving 
affection between human beings depends upon the recogni- 
tion and acceptance of an element of irreducible rascality 
in oneself and others—though to parade it is just as much 


Introduction - 19 


hypocrisy as the advertisement of one’s virtues. The power of 
fanaticism, “‘effective’’ as it may be, is always bought at the 
price of unconsciousness, and whether its cause be good or 
evil it is invariably destructive because it works against life: 
it denies the ambivalence of the natural world. 

But the very fact that the name of the angel of evil is 
Lucifer, the light-bearer, suggests that there might be some- 
thing formative and creative in becoming conscious of one’s 
own evil principle, or dark side, or innate rascality. Is it 
entirely a question of coming in with a bright light and a 
scrubbing brush to clean the darkness out? All contemporary 
work in psychotherapy suggests a very different attitude: to 
become so conscious of one’s own selfishness that one begins 
to know what it is actually seeking, to penetrate the central 
core of self-love. It is the advice of the Arabian gnostic 
Monoimus: “Learn whence is sorrow and joy, and love and 
hate, and waking though one would not, and sleeping though 
one would not, and getting angry though one would not, and 
falling in love though one would not. And if thou shouldst 
closely investigate all these things, thou wilt find God in 
thyself, one and many, just as the atom; thus finding from 
thyself a way out of thyself.’’® For by the principle of polarity 
we should find far down at the roots of the love of self the 
love of the other. Not to see that the two are inseparable is 
ignorance and unconsciousness, but in seeing this the opposi- 
tion is transcended. Then it becomes clear that self and other 
are the terms in which love plays hide-and-seek with itself, 
and the wheel is set in motion of which Dante says: 


My will and my desire were both revolved, 
As is a wheel in even motion driven, 
By Love, which moves the sun and other stars.10 


20 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


I have said that the historical approach to mythology has 
been overemphasized. Furthermore, it seems that there are 
overwhelming difficulties in the way of learning very much 
about mythogenesis by means of this approach—simply 
because the peoples and cultures we are trying to study are 
no longer with us, and we have therefore no direct way of 
studying the motivations and meanings behind their images. 
Nor is it safe to assume that existing ‘‘primitive’’ cultures are 
truly representative of human life in its earlier beginnings, 
plausible as the idea may be. Nor, alas, can we be quite sure 
that ontogeny repeats the patterns of phylogeny, that as the 
foetus seems to rehearse the stages of man’s biological evolu- 
tion, the growth of the child’s mind rehearses the intellectual 
maturation of the race. 

But the problem of mythogenesis is not simply a prob- 
lem of the past. Today as yesterday men are still eating and 
breeding, and our study of digestion and reproduction is 
based on materials that are with us in the present. Likewise, 
men are still poetizing and creating myths. Perhaps, then, the 
most fruitful way for us to approach mythogenesis is through 
such disciplines as psychology, sociology, and literary and 
artistic criticism—keeping, however, an open mind toward all 
that historical evidence has to offer. As Aldous Huxley once 
remarked, no one would think of talking about a specifically 
mediaeval stomach-ache because stomach-aches are in a class 
of non-historical experiences. And if this is true of stomach- 
aches, may we not assume that the psychophysical proc- 
esses of perception have undergone relatively little change 
throughout the past three thousand years, and that what we 
know about them might thus provide a point of departure 
for thinking about the genesis of myth? It provides a founda- 


Introduction + 21 


tion, on top of which sociological and thus historical factors 
come into play. 

According to the Gestalt theory of perception, we are not 
aware of any figure—be it an image, sound, or tactile impres- 
sion—except in relation to a background. No sound or form 
is recognizable save in contrast with relative silence or form- 
lessness. The reverse is also true. In experiments which 
attempt to expose perception to nothing but background, 
experiments in “sensory deprivation,” the individual is com- 
pelled to supply the missing figuration by fantasy. What we 
perceive, then, is never a figure alone but a figure/ground 
relationship. The primary “unit” of perception is therefore. 
neither the thing (figure) nor the space (ground) in which it 
appears: it is the field or relationship of the two. Thus it is 
simply impossible to conceive of a square, or other enclosed 
area, with nothing whatsoever outside its border. 

Translating these observations into a kinesthetic lan- 
guage, we see that there is no awareness of motion except in 
relation to stillness, or of the freedom of motion except in 
relation to a degree of resistance. Our consciousness of the 
movement of the arm is precisely the sensation of muscular 
energy overcoming weight. Furthermore, the manifestation 
of any natural form whatsoever is a relationship of arrest and 
movement, of limited energy, and thus it might be said that 
consciousness is nothing other than the sensation of frustra- 
tion and strife. As Heraclitus said at the dawn of Western 
thought, ““War is both father and king of all... . It should 
be understood that war is the common condition, that strife 
is justice, and that all things come to pass through the com- 
pulsion of strife. Homer was wrong in saying, ‘Would that 
strife might perish from amongst gods and men.’ For if that 
were to occur, then all things would cease to exist.’’!! 


22 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


Once stated, all this seems to be completely obvious. 
Yet the Gestalt theory of perception was at its inception a 
revelation or discovery, and the experimental images with 
which the Gestalt psychologists prove their points are peren- 
nially fascinating because they never fail to convey this 
obvious relationship without inducing in us a certain sense 
of shock or surprise. Consider this familiar image of a 
figure/ground constellation: 


Fic. 1. 


If we attend to the enclosed white area, we see a chalice. But 
if we attend to the surrounding black area, we see two faces 


Introduction + 23 


in profile, about to kiss. The point of the experiment is that 
we cannot see both at once—or perhaps that we find it 
intensely difficult to do so. Nevertheless, a single glance at 
the image reveals all that is there: the black and white areas 
are perceived simultaneously. The difficulty is that we cannot 
entertain the two interpretations of the image simultaneously. 
For our linear, one-thing-at-a-time thinking process, the 
image is either a chalice or kissing faces; for the logic of 
thought the two images are mutually exclusive. (Though 
what happens if one thinks of the image as a loving cup?) 

In other words, we think by ignoring—or by attending 
to one term of a relationship (the figure) and neglecting the 
other (the ground). Thus in the sensation of ‘free’ move- 
ment what captures attention is the motion of the limb as 
distinct from the resisting weight. In looking at trees against 
the sky, what strikes us as significant is the area contained 
by the outline of the trees rather than the shape of the space 
containing them. Yet for the artist, whether painter or 
photographer, the shape of the ground is as important as 
that of the figure. He cannot ignore the ground without 
producing some unpleasing disproportion in his work. For 
the same reason the astronomer cannot for long study the 
stars without becoming preoccupied with the “properties” 
of space. 

Surely it is now clear that this contrast between the 
figure/ground image, on the one hand, and our exclusive 
conceptual interpretations, on the other, is of the same kind 
which holds between the mythic image and factual language. 
Surely, too, our conscious ignoring of the ground is related 
to the psychological mechanism of repression. May not this 
be why myth and dream alike seem to proffer a kind of com- 
pensatory vision to that of conscious thought? They are 


24 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


intimations of the ignored and repressed aspects of the 
perceptual field—aspects to which we respond organically but 
not consciously. 

It is not surprising, therefore, that all forms of “‘depth 
psychology” seem in some way to “‘take sides with the Devil” 
by calling attention to the aspect of things which the con- 
scious orientation of a society ignores and devalues. For there 
is a point, not at all easy to determine, at which inattention 
and opposition to the essential ambivalence of nature 
becomes neurotic, becomes, in other words, an attitude 
against life—or life-and-death. Up to that point the selective 
function of consciousness, separating what is significant from 
what is not, is the creative and formative principle of all 
culture. But, needless to say, one must not go too far. If 
motion completely annihilates resistance, all form dissolves. 
If discipline altogether controls spontaneity, grace is entirely 
lost. This only goes to show that significant form in art and 
nature is not an encounter of two separate principles—motion 
on the one hand and resistance on the other. Form is 
motion/resistance. In nature they are never found apart; only 
in thought can they be distinguished. Hence the wisdom of 
the proverb, ‘‘Give the Devil his due.” For the dark side of 
life, the principle of evil or of man’s irreducible rascality, is 
to be “reckoned with’’ not merely because it may overwhelm 
the light, but rather because it is the condition of there 
being any light at all. 

This recognition of the two-sidedness of the One is what 
makes the difference between the exoteric and esoteric aspects 
of a religion, and the latter is always guarded and is always 
mystical or “‘closed’’ (from the Greek pvev) because of the 
danger that the opposites will be confused if their unity is 
made explicit. It is thus that mysticism is never quite ortho- 


Introduction - 25 


dox, never wholly respectable. ‘‘Inside knowledge” of this 
kind is taboo in somewhat the same way as the exposure of 
the sexual organs. For as the latter is reserved for special 
occasions between special people, the former is reserved to 
an elite minority—to those who can be trusted not to spoil 
a game through the knowledge that it is, after all, just a game. 
“Don’t give the show away” because “‘the show must go on.” 
And “‘the show” here is all manifestation—the cosmic game 
of hide-and-seek, of God not letting his right hand know what 
his left is doing. ‘Thus superb accomplishment in any art 
comes at the point where the beholder and the artist himself 
have the impression that the work is happening naturally, of 
itself. Though Voltaire said that if God did not exist it 
would be necessary to invent him, only those myths are 
convincing which “come to us’ and are not consciously 
devised. For a skill is mastered to the degree that it is 
“othered,” that is, to the extent that it is handed over to 
unconscious functioning and does not appear to be some- 
thing that “I” am doing. So also, in mystical traditions, God 
“others” himself in creating the world, in creating the 
appearance of innumerable creatures acting on their own. 
Yet in his own “secret counsels” the Lord knows very well 
that there are no others, for “I am the Lord, and there is 
none beside me.” Brahma, too, is ‘‘“one without a second” 
and the appearance of the world of multiplicity is maya, 
which, among its numerous meanings, denotes art or skill. 

Initiation into the mysteries always represents an expan- 
sion of consciousness and an overcoming of ignorance, of 
the maya-illusion into which the Godhead plunges to give 
the appearance of otherness and multiplicity. The initiate 
thus transcends himself, as the ego-subject, by becoming 
conscious of the ignored aspect of his own nature: the whole 


26 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


world of others which had seemed to confront him as an 
alien object, including also the disowned or unconscious 
aspects of his own organism. At this moment he sees through 
the game and is, one might almost say, tempted to stop 
playing because the possibility of desiring or choosing the 
good rather than the bad appears to be quite unreal. As the 
Buddha is reported to have exclaimed in the moment of 
his Awakening: 


Through birth and rebirth’s endless round, 
Seeking in vain, I hastened on 

To find who framed this edifice... . 

O builder, I have discovered thee! 

Never shalt thou rebuild this fabric! 

Now the rafters are all shattered, 

And the ridge-pole lies broken! 

The mind has attained Nirvana, 

Knowing the end of all desirel!!2 


This moment corresponds to the pralaya of Hindu cosmology, 
to Brahma’s periodic withdrawal of the manifested world 
into his own undifferentiated essence. Correspondingly, the 
illuminated or awakened sage withdraws into silent contem- 
plation. 


“In the space within the heart lies the controller of all, the lord of all, 
the ruler of all. He does not become greater by good works nor smaller 
by evil works. He is the bridge that serves as the boundary to keep the 
different worlds apart. . . . Verily, because they know this, the ancient 
(sages) did not wish for offspring. What shall we do with offspring 
(they said) , we who have attained this Self, this world. They, having 
risen above the desire for sons, the desire for wealth, the desire for 
worlds, led the life of a mendicant. . . . This Self is (that which has 
been described as) not this, not this.* He is incomprehensible for He 


* The formula neti, neti, indicating that because the supreme Self is beyond 
all duality, no “this” can be predicated of it, for every “this” is a defining class 
which must have an outside as well as an inside, i.e., an opposite. 


Introduction + 27 


is never comprehended. He is indestructible for He cannot be 
destroyed. He is unattached for He does not attach Himself. He is 
unfettered, He does not suffer, He is not injured. These two thoughts 
do not overcome him who knows this: for some reason he has done 
evil or for some reason he has done good. He overcomes both. What he 
has done or what he has not done does not burn him."13 


But the Indian mind grasped a deeper solution to the 
problem of life than mere withdrawal. On the one hand, to 
withdraw is a separative and thus essentially selfish position. 
On the other, to choose not to play rather than to play is 
still to choose, and thus to remain in duality. Therefore the 
most truly awakened sages are represented as coming back to 
participate in the life of the world out of “compassion for 
all sentient beings,” playing the game of good against evil, 
success against failure, in the full knowledge that it is a 
game (lila). In this sense the sage is “two-faced” like Brahma 
himself, for there is the saguna aspect of Brahma which is 
involved in the world and the nirguna aspect which remains 
uninvolved, the face looking outward toward the world of 
duality and multiplicity, and the face looking inward to the 
undifferentiated center. 

It is not surprising, then, that various mythologies 
recognize a curious analogy between the divine ambivalence 
of God or of the savior-sage and the less respectable ambiv- 
alence of the Trickster, Joker, Conjurer, and Player. The 
analogy was by no means repugnant to so devout a Christian 
as G. K. Chesterton, who used it in his poem, “The Skeleton.” 


Chattering finch and water-fly 
Are not merrier than J; 

Here among the flowers I lie 
Laughing everlastingly. 

No: I may not tell the best; 


28 +» THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


Surely, friends, I might have guessed 
Death was but the good King’s jest, 
It was hid so carefully.14 


Writing of the role of the Trickster in Amerindian and Greek 
mythology, Karl Kerényi says, ‘‘Archaic social hierarchies are 
exceedingly strict. To be archaic does not mean to be chaotic. 
Quite the contrary: nothing demonstrates the meaning of the 
all-controlling social order more impressively than the reli- 
gious recognition of that which evades this order, in a figure 
who is the exponent and personification of the life of the 
body: never wholly subdued, ruled by lust and hunger, for- 
ever running into pain and injury, cunning and stupid in 
action. Disorder belongs to the totality of life, and the spirit 
of this disorder is the trickster. His function in archaic soci- 
ety, or rather the function of his mythology, of the tales told 
about him, is to add disorder to order and so make a whole, 
to render possible, within the fixed bounds of what is 
permitted, an experience of what is not permitted.’’!> 

In this connection one thinks, too, of the ambivalence 
of the carnival and the holiday, the one a carnem levare, a 
putting off of the flesh (as food) as on Shrove Tuesday, the 
Mardi Gras, which precedes the Lenten fast, and the other 
a holy day. Both are occasions for a spree, for play instead of 
work, licence instead of law. So also the institutions of the 
Sabbath, the day on which God rested from creation, and the 
Year of Jubilee, in which all debts are canceled, are types of 
the pralaya wherein the cosmic game and the rules of the 
game are temporarily suspended. These are the conventional 
hints or cues, corresponding to the proscenium arch of the 
theater, that the world-order is a drama and is not to be taken 
with final and absolute seriousness. In their differing dimen- 
sions, aristocrat and peasant, sage and primitive, seem to 


Introduction + 29 


have an awareness of this which is seldom characteristic of 
those in the middle—the unhappy bourgeoisie. 

To the extent that myth is primitive philosophy, such 
philosophy would have a sharper intuition of the world’s 
ambivalence than the either/or style of more logical thinking. 
There are thus numerous folk tales having to do with the 
fundamental partnership of God and the Devil. Eliade?® 
cites a Bulgarian legend according to which God was one 
day walking all alone when he perceived his shadow and 
exclaimed, “‘Get up, friend!” Thereupon Satan rose up from 
the shadow of God and asked that the universe be divided 
between them, the earth for himself and the heavens for 
God, the living for God and the dead for himself. The two 
then signed a contract to this effect. The Mordvins of Central 
Asia say that one day when God was sitting alone upon a rock, 
he said to himself, “If I had a brother, I would create the 
world!” At this he spat upon the waters and from the spittle 
arose a mountain. God clove the mountain with his sword 
and out stepped the Devil, who at once proposed that they 
should be brothers. ‘‘We shall not be brothers,” answered 
God, ‘‘but companions.” And together they set about the 
creation of the world. 

Citing many such examples, Eliade goes on to say, “It 
is enough for us to have established that, at the level of 
religious folklore among central Asian and European peoples 
long since converted to Islam or Christianity, there is still 
felt the necessity of making a place for the Devil; not only in 
the creation of the world—which would be understandable 
by the need to explain the origin of evil—but also in the 
presence of God, as a companion born of God’s desire to 
come out of his solitude. .. . What is significant for us is that 
the popular soul should have been compelled to imagine the 


30 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


solitude of the Creator and his companionship with the 
Devil, the role of the latter as servant, of collaborator, and 
even as supreme counsellor of God; to imagine, again, the 
divine origin of the Devil, for at root the spittle of God is 
nonetheless divine spittle; and finally to imagine a certain 
‘sympathy’ between God and the Devil which is not without 
reminder of the ‘sympathy’ between the Creator and 
Mephistopheles.” 

At this same primitive, imagistic level of thought, lan- 
guage itself is sometimes as ambivalent as the image. In a 
celebrated essay on “The Antithetical Sense of Primal 
Words’? Freud quotes extensively from the work of the 
nineteenth-century German philologist Carl Abel, who 
pointed out that “man has not been able to acquire even his 
oldest and simplest conceptions otherwise than in contrast 
with their opposite; he only gradually learnt to separate the 
two sides of the antithesis and think of the one without 
conscious comparison with the other.” Abel then cites a 
number of words from the earliest known fomns of Egyptian 
which have such meanings as “‘strongweak,” “‘oldyoung,’ 
“farnear,” “‘bindloose,” and “outsideinside.”” And there are 
many more recent examples: 


Altus (Latin) = “high” and “deep.” 

Sacer (Latin) = “holy” and “accursed.” 

Boden (German) = “attic” and “ground floor.” 

Cleave (English) = “hold to” and “divide.” 

Compare clamare (Latin) “to cry” with clam (Latin) “softly.” 
Siccus (Latin) “dry” with succus (Latin) ‘‘juice.” 

Bos (German) “bad” with bass (German) “good.” 

Bat (Old Saxon) “good” with English bad. 


The hypothesis is suggestive, but I am not aware of any more 
recent research that has carried it further. 


Introduction + 31 


The import of what has been said thus far is that, how- 
ever immersed in the pursuit of success, pleasure, survival, 
and the good life, man retains in the back of his mind an 
apprehension of the figure/ground structure of all his percep- 
tions. This apprehension expresses itself in mythic and poetic 
images rather than factual statement. And this “back” of the 
mind refers alike to what is back in time, as primitive intui- 
tion, to what is repressed to emerge only in the symbolism 
of ‘‘the unconscious,” and to what is “‘recovered” in mystical 
wisdom by deep insight. The apprehension is simultaneously 
holy, or esoteric, and obscene, or unmentionable, because it 
subverts in one way or another the conscious ideals of the 
social order, intent, as they are, on achieving the victory of 
light over darkness. The higher subversion is the way of the 
monk or ascetic who sets himself apart from the life of the 
world. The lower subversion is the way of the libertine who 
defies the order of the world. But transcending both is the 
way of what in Buddhism is called the Bodhisattva, and in 
Chinese philosophy, the King-Without-and-Sage-Within: the 
way, that is, of the liberated soul who takes on in the spirit 
of play the task which others view as a matter of life or death. 
In another role he is the Fool or Jester, representing what 
Gerald Heard has called “‘meta-comedy” and Chesterton ‘‘the 
good King’s jest,” the laughter at oneself and with one’s Self 
upon discovering play instead of battle behind the contest 
of Heaven and Hell. But, as Cervantes said, “The most 
difficult character in comedy is that of the fool, and he must 
be no simpleton that plays the part.” 


I have suggested that behind almost all myth lies the 
mono-plot of the game of hide-and-seek. Naturally there are 
exceptions, but for the most part this theme is so obvious 


32 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


that it hardly needs demonstration. For, generally speaking, 
the very structure of a plot has the threefold form of (a) a 
status quo, (b) its upsetting, and (c) its restoration or 
transformation. Tragedy alone lacks the third stage, though 
one might say that it lies in the catharsis of the audience. 
Although this plot forrn might be taken from the cyclic 
rhythm of sun, seasons, and vegetation, its eternal fascination 
seems to be at the very roots of human nature. Any baby 
will burble with delight at the game of making one’s face 
disappear and then appear again from behind a book. As 
we have seen, normal human consciousness aiways depends 
on contrasts, whether in space or in time, and tends to ignore 
what is constant even though it provides the necessary back- 
ground for the perception of change. If, then, a pleasurable 
state is to be conscious, it cannot be constant, for there will 
be no contrasting ground against which to feel it. Pleasure is 
thus in fact the configuration pleasure/non-pleasure (e.g., 
pleasure/pain, pleasure/anxiety, pleasure/boredom, pleas- 
ure/hunger, etc.) in which the first term is the figure and the 
second the ground. Therefore to find or seek pleasure in the 
figure, it must be lost or hidden in the ground. 

The truth of this does not depend on the meaningless 
assertion that men naturally seek pleasure. Pleasure is an 
abstraction from specific situations, and, as such, does not 
operate as the motivating cause for regarding those situations 
as goals. (This is, no doubt, why extraneous rewards and 
punishments have so little effect upon the positive growth of 
character.) The point is that no specific situation is a con- 
stantly pleasurable figure, for whatever is constant tends to 
become ground. 

Now in watching a drama or reading a story we know, 


at least in the back of our minds, that the situation is “in 


Introduction + 33 


play.” We have therefore not the least objection to there 
being a “villain of the piece’’ or other agency which upsets 
the initial status quo. On the contrary, this is just what we 
expect to see, and, at the end of the show, hero and villain 
alike are applauded. For the hero is the hero just because of 
the villain. To put it in another way, the convention of the 
stage or the proscenium arch enables us to see that the deeds 
of the villain are grounds for the heroism of the hero, and 
we recognize the necessity of the relationship. By “framing” 
the ground the proscenium arch makes it mutually significant 
with the figure. 

In life, however, the situation is different. We tend to 
ignore the significance of the ground, as well as its necessity. 
Hence the restless pursuit of pleasure as if it could be a 
constant figure, ignoring and making no allowance for its 
non-pleasurable ground. But there is no way of getting rid 
of the ground. It impinges upon our senses however much 
our conscious attention may attempt to avoid it. 

The ground-sensations that we try to avoid are such 
things as disorder, emptiness, non-pleasure, boredom, monot- 
ony, anxiety, darkness, and death. In terms of most value 
systems all these are meaningless. But myth, as we have seen, 
is a complex of images which give significance to life as a 
whole. It dramatizes the order/disorder of the world in such 
a way as to make disorder relative to order, to give the villain 
his part and the Devil his due. To reject the wisdom of myth 
we should therefore have to abandon the whole philosophy 
of relativity—to assert that space has no properties, that 
environment is a meaningless idea, and that wholes and fields 
are no more than empty concepts. Strange, then, as it may 
seem, the devaluation of myth would require a reversal of 
the main direction of scientific thought at the present time. 


34 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


We forget that a world intelligible to man is an anthropomor- 
phic world, and that as science succeeds in making the world 
intelligible it moves toward myth in making it anthro- 
pomorphic. This does not mean that all ancient myths must 
be restored to the status of scientific fact, for the form of 
man, in the very act of making the universe intelligible, is 
changing. Man makes God in his own image, and as he comes 
to a clearer and more intelligible view of his own image— 
changing it in the process—he comes to a more intelligible 
view of God. 

Yet as the world becomes more intelligible, it also 
becomes more mysterious—not, perhaps, in the sense of being 
problematic and baffling, but of being immeasurably grander, 
vaster, more complex, and, indeed, more imaginative than 
we had supposed. The world becomes intelligible through 
amazing reversals of common sense, and, as Whitehead saw, 
the notions most worth questioning are just those which are 
most taken for granted. Science, too, is the game of hide-and- 
seek, for the scientist most skillful in basic research has the 
peculiar flair for realizing that the best hiding places are 
those where no one would think of looking: they are usually 
right out in the open. How often an important discovery 
floors us with its simplicity, with the feeling of, “Well, why 
didn’t J see that; it was right under my nose!” And in due 
course this develops the odd sensation that comprehension is 
near rather than far, and that what has to be kept in mind is 
not so much the answer as the form of the question. The 
hidden lies in the very process of seeking. 

I cannot resist the intuition that, in some quite unex- 
pected way, the scientist is going to find himself coming back 
to the truth of the ancient Hindu aphorism tat tvam asi— 
That art thou! For where, indeed, could ‘‘the Mystery” be 


Introduction - 35 


more cleverly hidden than right in the seeking and the seeker 
—‘nearer .. . than breathing, closer than hands and feet.” If 
so, the basic mythology of the Hindu world-view may attain 
a new dignity; to some extent it has already done so. For this 
is the dramatic image of Brahma playing hide-and-seek with 
himself through all the ages of time, concealing himself with 
infinite ingenuity in the endless variety of apparently separate 
forms and beings, throwing himself away to recover himself 
with ever renewed surprise, plunging into ever more fantas- 
tically lost situations so that the finding again is all the more 
astounding. The image is obviously anthropomorphic, but it 
grows in depth and suggestiveness as one realizes that the 
‘form of man extends far, far beyond the limits of the skin 
and very much deeper than the conscious ego. 

The image has, of course, a certain disquiet for the 
Christian West with its strong insistence on the otherness of 
God, upon the real separateness of persons, and upon the 
eternal gulf which is fixed between good and evil. But there 
is a sense in which the image includes these values, for it is 
all part of the game of “othering’’ that these distinctions 
should acquire intense reality. If, at root, they are a maya— 
a divine and cosmic fantasy—this does not make the fantasy 
any the less remarkable as a work of art. 

Such images are likewise distasteful to the current 
temper of Western philosophy because they seem to be 
pseudoscientific propositions—statements of fact of the same 
kind as that the earth revolves around the sun, but actually 
bereft of all meaning. But I have tried to show that state- 
ments of fact and mythological images belong to two quite 
different languages, and that the logic of one does not apply 
to the logic of the other. Atomic facts are a weft that lies 
upon the warp of their essential relativity. Strangely, this 


36 +» THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


word which implies relatedness and unity has come to mean 
a kind of undependable miasma. But this is how water seems 
to a person who cannot swim. 


One of the principal difficulties which the Westerner, 
and more especially the Christian, encounters in trying to 
understand polarity is, as we have just seen, the absolute gulf 
which our tradition has set between good and evil. It is incon- 
ceivable that there should be any common ground, let alone 
common cause, between God and Satan. The conflict here is 
seen to be ultimately real and serious, so much so that the 
suggestion that there is some profound, inner level at which 
God and Satan are at one seems to be the height of blasphemy. 
Our study of polarity can therefore profit from a special con- 
sideration of the mythology of the Devil, of the images of 
evil, and of the attitudes which they evoke. This must 
include, too, what might be called the ‘‘non-images” of evil, 
far more potent in their suggestion of supernatural horror 
than comparably abstract images of God in suggestion of 
divine glory. For every really sophisticated conception of the 
Devil is allusive: nothing is specified, but there is just the 
intimation that the real design and nature of evil is something 
so ghastly that ordinary people are quite unable even to 
imagine it. 

Few writers have been able to evoke the horror of evil 
more imaginatively than Arthur Machen, and I am including 
a passage from one of his stories in which the raconteur insists 
that the essence of evil is not to be found in the crudities of 
common vice but in a kind of genius for the subtly unnatural. 
“If the roses and the lilies suddenly sang on this coming 
morning; if the furniture began to move in procession, as in 
De Maupassant’s tale!” Evil is sensed, ultimately, in the goose 


Introduction + 37 


flesh and chills which arise in the presence of sorcery, of magic 
subverting the laws of nature. I remember the way I felt 
many years ago when someone gave me serious reasons for 
believing that a very attractive young woman was in fact an 
old lady of eighty. Or think of someone removing a glove to 
reveal, not a hand, but a bird’s claw. Comic or fanciful 
descriptions of such things are all very well, but one has to 
imagine coming upon them in sober reality. We feel intima- 
tions of that pure panic which arises in absolutely unpredicta- 
ble situations, the terror of believing that nature or oneself 
is the victim of a sinister insanity. It is sinister because these 
subversions of the natural are always felt to be the work of a 
powerful malignance whose capabilities and intentions are 
never precisely known. 

Evil is sensed pre-eminently, then, in what is strangely 
alien—not in sheer chaos and nonsense, but in profoundly odd 
and unnerving disturbances of the normal. This is certainly 
the formula of the best horror stories. It is significant, how- 
ever, that we read such tales for entertainment and find an 
extraordinary fascination in them—as well as in all the cruder 
manifestations of darkness from crime reports to public 
executions. Generally speaking, the fascination depends upon 
the experience being vicarious, but nonetheless there is a long 
tradition supporting the idea that the Evil One is above all 
alluring. The allure may be exercised in two ways: through 
overt beauty—notably through the charms of the opposite 
sex—or through the direct fascination of horror itself. On the 
one hand there is the baited trap or the poisoned fruit of fair 
and luscious form; on the other there is the vertiginous attrac- 
tion of the dreadful, fascinating its victim as a snake seems to 
hypnotize a bird. 

Only rather seldom is the good, or God, represented with 


38 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


allure, for of the trinity of goodness, truth, and beauty, the 
latter has very largely been annexed by the Devil. It is thus 
that literary and artistic representations of the divine rarely 
have the same verve and aesthetic allure as of the diabolic. 
Perhaps the painters of Chinese landscapes and Persian minia- 
tures have come nearer than anyone to a persuasive vision of 
paradise, and the West has approached it in stained glass, in 
illuminated manuscripts, and in the jewelry of enamels and 
mosaics. All of this is, however, rather static and glistering as 
compared with the riots of imagination which have gone into 
the depiction of the Inferno. For all its splendor of detail, 
van Eyck’s “Adoration of the Lamb” is emotionally tame in 
comparison with his vision of Hell in ‘The Last Judgment.” 
Is it unfair to take as representative of this point Gustave 
Doré’s remarkable illustrations for the Divina Commedia? 
The engravings for the Inferno and the Purgatorio are rich 
with imagination. In contrast, those for the Paradiso are 
merely insipid—female angels in white nighties tripping 
through the skies. Reproduced here for comparison (plates 10 
and 11) are his opposed visions of the central depth of Hell 
and the angelic choirs in the form of a rose about the light 
of the Godhead. Here there can be no doubt, in Dante’s own 
words, that ‘‘vision failed the lofty fantasy.” The vast icy 
cavern in which Satan broods with everlasting malignance is 
distinctly more impressive. Were it not for the dark silhouette 
of Beatrice and Dante upon the foreground cloud, the 
heavenly vision would have no character at all. 

In general it seems that, in artistic representation, hell is 
exuberant and heaven is not. To put it in very contemporary 
and expressive terms, heaven does not “‘swing.”” Coming right 
down to the mythological images of modern times, we have 
but to compare the last two phases of Walt Disney's Fantasva. 


Introduction + 39 


The representation of Walpurgis Night to Moussorgsky’s 
Night on Bald Mountain, supervised by that splendid fantast, 
Kay Nielsen, was so powerfully erotic and sinister that, when 
I first saw it, one or two people screamed for the show to be 
stopped. But at the midnight bell the forces of Light took 
over with incomparable sentimentality. Schubert’s Ave 
Maria, and a procession of shadowy figures—monks, perhaps 
—carrying candles through a cathedral-like forest! 

(It should be noted in passing that the situation is rather 
different in music. There is little diabolical music of any 
artistic merit as compared with the magnificent tradition of 
sacred music from Gregorian chant, through Palestrina, Bach, 
and Handel, to Walton and Fauré. Nevertheless, it used to be 
said in early mediaeval times that “the Devil has all the good 
tunes.” For the melodies of many of our traditional hymns 
and carols are taken from popular ballads.) 

The problem of the allure of the image of evil does not 
permit easy generalizations. In the West, at least, the realm 
of the Devil has been more favorable than the divine for the 
projection of erotic and orgiastic themes, largely of a sado- 
masochistic type, since vicarious agony is suggestive of the 
orgasmic convulsion. Perhaps we may be helped in this puzzle 
by the little that we know of erotic history in the Western 
world. G. R. Taylor’ has pointed out that a truly sinister and 
malignant image of the Devil does not appear in Christian 
imagery until early in the fourteenth century. Prior to that 
time the Devil is, in popular representation, somewhat of a 
buffoon, and, in theology, “a pure spirit, dangerous and 
tempting but not the direct enemy of man.’’°* He goes on 


* This remark must be qualified, for in both New Testament and patristic 
writings the Devil has become the “adversary” of God and man. But imagina- 
tion had not yet filled his image with the sinister and horrendous overtones 
of later times. 


40 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


to associate the emergence of this abysmally evil image of the 
Devil with that epidemic of insanity which expressed itself in 
the persecution of witches and heretics by the Holy Inquisi- 
tion. Since these tortures were quite obviously a pretext for 
sadistic lust, the atmosphere of this particular passion natu- 
rally transfers itself into images of the realm of darkness. The 
Devil’s form is, after all, that of Pan, and attendant demons 
are satyrs; and, as the ministers of punishment in Hell, their 
images reflect the motivations of their creators. The allure 
of demonographic literature and painting is, to a considerable 
extent, pornographic. 

But since the demonographer is very often the same 
person as the preacher, the pornographic motivation must 
usually be unconscious or unadmitted. It is concealed under 
the pretext of righteous wrath and the fear of Hell, and so, 
at the same time, it is concealed that the Devil is made in the 
image of those who imagine him. The lustful Pan or the 
devouring monster are aspects of man that cannot be denied. 
How must we seem to the animals upon whom we prey for 
food? The sensation of being threatened, spiritually, by a 
weirdly alien and incalculable power of malice is, above all, a 
symptom of unconsciousness—of man’s alienation from him- 
self. Furthermore, inasmuch as he is unconscious of the Devil 
as his own image, he is the more apt to vent upon his fellows 
his fear of and fury at this disowned aspect of himself. This 
is why the acceptance of the Devil in and as oneself is a moral 
obligation. 

May not this, then, be why the figure of the Evil One is 
simultaneously horrendous and alluring: he represents the 
extreme of “‘self-othering,” where, on the human level, man 
is most ashamed of his own organism, and, on the mythologi- 
cal level, Brahma has lost himself most completely in the 


Introduction «+ 41 


maya of separateness. The horrendous element of the experi- 
ence belongs to the motion of hiding, and the alluring to the 
motion of seeking—to the dawning recognition of oneself in 
its most unfamiliar form. At times when any sort of puritan- 
ism is dominant, or any fanatical, one-sided view of man, the 
ignored aspect of our nature appears as an external devil, 
sometimes an angel or fallen spirit, and sometimes in the 
form of other people, as, say, in anti-Semitism. In a culture 
dominated by puritan forms of Christianity, the Devil will 
therefore be an external caricature of our erotic, animal, and 
self-seeking aspects. 

As we shall see, the Christian Devil is unique. No other 
demonic figure has ever been conceived to be so purely mali- 
cious, sO sinister, and so totally opposed to the universal 
design. And even in Christianity this image was not conceived 
in its full horror until the late Middle Ages. The formation 
of this image is perhaps a by-product of the growth of the 
peculiarly Western view of personality and its values, that is, 
of personality as grounded and centered upon consciousness 
and will, of man’s essence as the individual and immortal 
soul. This view gains an intense sharpening of consciousness 
at the price of ignoring a great deal that is also human person- 
ality. It is a unique growth of consciousness in one way and 
loss of consciousness in another, and what is lost appears in 
the image of this implacable enemy of man and all his values. 

To secure this growth of consciousness we must recover 
the lost or hidden dimensions of our nature; we must, as 
Jung would say, “integrate the Evil One.” But whereas much 
has been done to rescue the erotic sphere of life from the 
Devil, we are still amazingly unaware of the social and 
ecological dimensions of the person. We therefore treat other 


42 +» THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


societies or nations as the Devil, and speak of our technical 
progress as the war against nature. 

In other cultures man’s consciousness has been more 
diffuse, though less brilliantly concentrated—no microscopes, 
no telescopes, no scientific analysis, nor anything like the 
same degree of the feeling of individual responsibility and 
freedom. In the mythologies of India and China demons are 
never devils in our later Western sense. Hideous as their 
forms and functions may be, they are always aspects or agents 
of universal nature, and, almost invariably, the wrathful 
figures of Hindu-Buddhist iconography have one hand in the 
gesture (mudra) of ‘‘Fear not,” to indicate that the appari- 
tion is another form of maya, another of the million masks of 
God. Even the Biblical Satan is far from being the Devil of 
later Christian doctrine, for in The Book of Job he appears 
simply as a sort of counsel for the prosecution in the Court of 
Heaven, the Lord’s attorney general. For in the Hebrew 
matrix of Christianity, today as yesterday, there is no place 
for so dangerous a brush with the insanity of ultimate dualism 
as is involved in the full development of Christian demon- 
ology. As Kohler has put it, “There is no evil before God, 
since a good purpose is served even by that which appears 
bad. In the life of the human body pleasure and pain, the 
impetus to life and its restraint and inhibition form a neces- 
sary contrast, making for health; so, in the moral order of the 
universe, each being who battles with evil receives new 
strength for the unfolding of the good. The principle of holi- 
ness . . . transforms and ennobles every evil.’’?° 

Nature appears to be a hierarchy of many grades, 
corresponding to what the scientist calls “levels of magnifica- 
tion.” Thus when we adjust our lenses to watch the indi- 
vidual cells of an organism we see only particular successes 


Introduction + 43 


and failures, victories and defeats in what appears to be a 
ruthless “‘dog-eat-dog”’ battle. But when we change the level 
of magnification to observe the organism as a whole, we see 
that what was conflict at the lower level is harmony at the 
higher: that the health, the ongoing life of the organism is 
precisely the outcome of this microscopic turmoil. Now the 
expansion of consciousness is no other than extending our 
vision to comprehend many levels at once, and, above all, 
to grasp those higher levels in which the discords of the lower 
levels are resolved. This is the greatness of human conscious- 
ness, but at the same time it is always posing the practical 
problem of how to live upon the lower level when one’s 
understanding reaches to the higher. For if we discover that 
there is some supcrior order harmonizing what seem to be 
conflicts at the level of our normal, individual consciousness, 
may not this new understanding upset our standards and 
weaken the will to fight? If we see that the Good of the world 
is not the victory of good over evil but, on the contrary, the 
tense polarity of good-and-evil in perpetual conflict, is it not 
possible that this will lead us to a recognition of the function 
of evil making it difficult for us to fight and hate it? 
Continuing sanity demands a successful answer to this 
problem. We must be able to live simultaneously upon several 
levels without getting them confused. We know, for example. 
that the earth revolves about the sun, but in our everyday 
mundane life there are still many purposes for which we 
retain the old geocentric view of the sun rising and setting 
and moving daily across the sky. So, too, the mundane 
distinction between up and down remains unconfused by 
the knowledge that these directions are reversed at the antip- 
odes and do not exist at all in outer space. Similarly, the 
physicist can treat light either as waves or as a stream of 


44 +» THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


particles without the layman’s sense of flat contradiction 
between the two concepts. As Kurt Marek has put it, the 
change of consciousness which is necessary for containing 
these apparent contradictions 


“is vividly exemplified for us by the failure of our attempts, hitherto, 
to make relativity comprehensible by means of mathematical demon- 
strations on the blackboard. Such efforts fail, not because the relativity 
theory is, as we thought, the product of an extravagantly heightened 
intellect, but that of an already transformed intellect. ‘Understanding’ 
relativity presupposes not only a rather special intelligence, but new 
sense perceptions. This is demonstrated by every young physicist or 
mathematician who is already living (not merely thinking) in the 
new realms of space and time, and who simply cannot understand what 
is supposed to make relativity so hard to ‘explain.’ . . . Such a sudden 
intuitive grasp is illustrated by the rapidity with which the theory of 
antipodes, utterly inconceivable at the time of its appearance (because 
it contradicted sensory experience), came to be universally under- 
stood. Since Magellan, the earth has been not only known but also 
experienced as round so that the theory no longer requires a labored 
explanation."21 


But the transformation of man’s understanding does not 
always or necessarily imply an abandonment of the past. It 
is not the kind of intellectual change in which old ideas 
become automatically obsolete or foolish—just because they 
are old. On the contrary, intellectual growth often shows 
that we were wiser than we knew, especially in the sense 
that mythological images foreshadowed ideas which, at the 
time of their origin, could not be expressed in some more 
exact or scientific symbolism. Therefore in the panorama of 
images which follows I am presenting man’s perennial intui- 
tion of the implicit concord and harmony which underlies 
the explicit discord and conflict of life as he finds it with 
the naked eye, at the “normal” level of magnification. 


Introduction + 45 


It remains now to outline the plan which the rest of 
this book will follow, and the reader may find it convenient 
to refer back to this outline as he passes from chapter to 
chapter. 

Chapters I and II, “The Primordial Pair’ and “The 
Cosmic Dance,” are based on Chinese and Indian sources, on 
Taoist, Buddhist, and Hindu myths and images in which 
the principle of polarity, of the inner unity of opposites, is 
explicitly recognized. I begin with these, not only-to clarify 
the principle, but also to see what will happen if we take it as 
a hidden background for myths which do not appear to 
recognize it at all. 

Chapter III, ‘“The Two Brothers,” introduces us to 
myths—mostly from the Middle East—having to do with the 
conflict of good and evil, light and darkness. The fact that 
the pair, e.g., Horus and Set, Ohrmazd and Ahriman, are 
brothers intimates that there is still some recognition of the 
basic unity of the opposed forces. But, in general, as we move 
Westward from the Indus basin, the common ground between 
the two drops out of sight, and the conflict begins to be a 
struggle to the death, fought in absolute seriousness. 

Chapter IV, “Ultimate Dualism,”’ follows the disappear- 
ance of this inner unity to its extreme: the Christian mythol- 
ogy of Satan and of the Hell of everlasting damnation. We 
see that this absolute separation of good from evil renders 
our choice between the two an ultimately perilous adventure. 
While this enriches life with a dimension of earnestness and 
momentousness hitherto unknown, it deprives the Divinity 
of all humor and playfulness. However, we see that the 
positive values of the contest between God and Satan are 
preserved, and the total insanity of ultimate dualism avoided, 
by the assumption of a ‘“‘hidden conspiracy” between the two 


46 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


to conceal their unity. This is related to the Hindu concept 
of maya—the dramatic self-deception whereby the One plays 
at being the Many, and the Godhead lets itself be forgotten 
in pretending to be each individual being. 

Chapter V, ‘Dismemberment Remembered,” brings us 
back—through the separation of the opposites—to their 
eternally implicit union. There are myths of the creation of 
the world through the cutting up of some primordial being, 
of its division into heaven and earth, into the multiplicity of 
things, or into the two sexes—from which follows the genera- 
tion of offspring. Thus many mythologies envisage the goal 
of life as the ‘‘rememberment”’ of this original ‘‘dismember- 
ment.”” The human ideal becomes, then, the hermaphroditic 
or androgynous sage or ‘‘divine-man,’” whose consciousness 
transcends the opposites and who, therefore, knows himself 
to be one with the cosmos. We conclude with visions of the 
universe seen from this point of view. 


= 
< 
A 
= 
= 
a) 
Rc 
© 
= 
ae 
A. 
[x] 
a7 
an 


\ \ hat, exactly, is polarity? It is something much 

more than simple duality or opposition. For to say 

that opposites are polar is to say much more than that they 
are far apart: it is to say that they are related and joined— 
that they are the terms, ends, or extremities of a single whole. 
Polar opposites are therefore inseparable opposites, like the 
poles of the earth or of a magnet, or the ends of a stick or the 
faces of a coin. Though what lies between the poles is more 
substantial than the poles themselves—since they are the 
abstract ‘‘terms” rather than the concrete body—nevertheless 
man thinks in terms and therefore divides in thought what is 
undivided in nature. To think is to categorize, to sort experi- 
ence into classes and intellectual pigeonholes. It is thus that, 
from the standpoint of thought, the all-important question 
is ever, “Is it this, or is it that?’ Is the experience inside this 
class, or is it outside? By answering such questions we describe 
and explain the world; we make it explicit. But implicitly, in 
nature herself, there are no classes. We drop these intellectual 
nets and boxes upon the world as we weave the imaginary 
lines of latitude and longitude upon the face of the earth and 


49 


50 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


the, likewise imaginary, firmament of the stars. It is thus 
the imaginary, abstract, and conceptual character of these 
divisions which renders them polar. The importance of a 
box for thought is that the inside is different from the outside. 
But in nature the walls of a box are what the inside and the 
outside have in common. 

It is thus that when anyone draws attention to the 
implicit unity of polar opposites we feel something of a 
shock. For the foundations of thought are shaken by the 
suspicion that experiences and values which we had believed 
to be contrary and distinct are, after all, aspects of the same 
thing. At the dawn of sophisticated thought in both China 
and the West this ever bewildering unity of opposites was 
pointed out by two almost mythical sages: Heraclitus, living 
in Greece about 500 B.C., and Lao-tzu, supposedly a con- 
temporary of Confucius (d. 479 B.C.), though probably living 
a century or more later. 

In the fragments of Heraclitus’ writing that have come 
down to us are a set of aphorisms which, if the polarity of 
opposites is overlooked, seem to be shocking paradoxes: 


— 24. Time is a child moving counters in a game; the royal 
power is a child’s. 

25. War is both father and king of all; some he has shown 
forth as gods and others as men, some he has made slaves and 
others free. 

26. It should be understood that war is the common con- 
dition, that strife is justice, and that all things come to pass 
through the compulsion of strife. 

27. Homer was wrong in saying, “Would that strife might 
perish from amongst gods and men.” For if that were to occur, 
then all things would cease to exist. 


The Primordial Pair - 51 


98. Opposition brings concord. Out of discord comes the 
fairest harmony. 

gg. It is by disease that health is pleasant; by evil that good 
is pleasant; by hunger, satiety; by weariness, rest. 

100. Men would not have known the name of justice if these 
things had not occurred. 

101. Sea water is at once very pure and very foul: it is drink- 
able and healthful for fishes, but undrinkable and deadly for men. 

106. To God all things are beautiful, good, and right; men, 
on the other hand, deem some things right and others wrong. 

107. Doctors cut, burn, and torture the sick, and then 
demand of them an undeserved fee for such services. 

108. The way up and the way down are one and the same. 

109. In the circle the beginning and the end are common. 

111. For wool-carders the straight way and the winding way 
are one and the same. 

112. The bones connected by joints are at once a unitary 
whole and not a unitary whole. To be in agreement is to differ; 
the concordant is the discordant. From out of all the many par- 
ticulars comes oneness, and out of oneness come all the many 
particulars. 

113. It is one and the same thing to be living or dead, awake 
or asleep, young or old. The former aspect in each case becomes 
the latter, and the latter again the former, by sudden unexpected 
reversal. 

114. Hesiod, whom so many accept as their wise teacher, did 
not even understand the nature of day and night; for they are one. 
115. The name of the bow is life, but its work is death.* 

117. People do not understand how that which is at variance 
with itself agrees with itself. There is a harmony in the bending 
back, as in the case of the bow and the lyre. 


* The pun disappears in translation, but in the original the word for bow 
is Bids, with the accent on the last syllable, and the word for life Bos, with 
the accent on the first. 


52 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


118. Listening not to me but to the Logos, it is wise to 
acknowledge that all things are one. 

121. God is day and night, winter and summer, war and 
peace, satiety and want. But he undergoes transformations, just 
as [a neutral base], when it is mixed with a fragrance, is named 
according to the particular savor [that is introduced]. 

124. Even sleepers are workers and collaborators in what 
goes on in the universe.?? 


In the history and climate of Western thought Heraclitus 
stands somewhat alone, for a philosophy in which “‘it is one 
and the same thing to be living or dead, awake or asleep, 
young or old” does not seem to offer any directives for action, 
that is, for making choices. For us, the master philosopher is 
not Heraclitus but Aristotle, who insists that all action is 
choice and that the will never moves into action save to choose 
some good in preference to some evil—even if the choice be 
mistaken. By and large Western culture is a celebration of 
the illusion that good may exist without evil, light without 
darkness, and pleasure without pain, and this is true of both 
its Christian and secular, technological phases. Here, or here- 
after, our ideal is a world in which “there shall be no more 
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any 
more pain; for the former things are passed away.’’*% 

To give credit where credit is due, it has been a grand 
illusion. Yet for those whose common sense is still based on 
the logic of Aristotle it is difficult to appreciate that the 
foundations of Chinese culture rest upon the polar view of 
light and darkness. Compare, then, with Heraclitus the words 
of Lao-tzu: 


When everyone recognizes beauty as beautiful, 
there is already ugliness; 


The Primordial Pair + 53 


When everyone recognizes goodness as good, 
there is already evil. 

“To be” and “not to be” arise mutually; 

Difficult and easy are mutually realized; 

Long and short are mutually contrasted; 

High and low are mutually posited; ... 

Before and after are in mutual sequence.*4 


A culture based on such premises was not likely to produce 
a heroic technology. On the other hand, the polar view of 
good and evil by no means led to mere stultification, to a 
way of life without directives for action or capacity to realize 
order and grace. There is no question that, prior to the 
Industrial Revolution, the Chinese had in several periods 
of their history created the most commodious and sophisti- 
cated civilization that we have known anywhere in the world. 

Unlike Heraclitus, Lao-tzu did not stand alone in his 
culture. His view of the world had roots in a mythological 
tradition already ancient in his time, a tradition absolutely 
basic to Chinese ways of thinking and feeling. This tradition 
is embodied in the IJ Ching or Book of Changes. Although a 
fabulous antiquity has been claimed for this classic, dating 
it back anywhere from B.C. 2000 to 1900, there is no clear 
evidence for its existence as a written document until about 
B.C. 400. Nevertheless, the system of symbolism upon which 
it is based is certainly most ancient, though the work as it 
now Stands is the compilation of centuries. Generation after 
generation of Chinese scholars and thinkers commented upon 
it and projected back into its primary forms ideas and mean- 
ings which are, historically, quite late developments. 

Basically, the Book of Changes is a sequence of sixty-four 
symbols or hexagrams of this type: 


54 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


; > 


+ 


Fic. 2. 


Each hexagram, as the term implies, consists of six lines which 
may be either broken or unbroken, negative or positive, and 
the sixty-four symbols constitute every possible arrangement 
of the two types of line in the chosen pattern. Unbroken lines 
represent yang, the male or positive aspect of nature, and 
broken lines yin, the female or negative aspect. These terms 
are said to have been first applied to the south and north 
sides of mountains, the former sunny and the latter shady. As 
the two sides of a mountain are an inseparable polarity, yang 
and yin came to signify the archetypal poles of nature—plus 
and minus, strong and yielding, man and woman, light and 
darkness, rising and falling. Consequently the sequence of 
sixty-four sixfold combinations of the two is understood as a 
symbolic epitome of the basic situations of life and nature. 
According to the arrangement and relative strength of posi- 
tive and negative forces, each hexagram represents the funda- 
mental, skeletal structure of the disposition of nature at any 
given moment. 

Each hexagram may, furthermore, be seen as composed 


The Primordial Pair + 55 


of two trigrams, and the eight possible formations of trigrams 
are usually set out as follows: 


The names assigned to each trigram, heaven, earth, water, 
fire, etc., stand for elemental principles in the changing pat- 


é 7 aa 
tern of nature, and thus a hexagram having, say gay gop 


(earth) above = (mountain) designates a situation 
a 
wherein it is propitious for greatness or power to be hidden, 
and for rulers and men of affairs to act with modesty. 
The primary use of these symbols was for divination, and 
the actual text of the book is a set of oracles describing the 
situations represented and giving advice for appropriate 


56 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


action. While there are several methods for consulting the 
oracle, the most usual is to make random divisions of a bun- 
dle of fifty yarrow stalks which are then counted out accord- 
ing to a system which gives the hexagram corresponding to 
the present situation of the questioner. The assumption seems 
to be that random division of the stalks will in fact follow 
the order of the time at which it happens, giving a hexagram 
revealing the balance and disposition of natural forces oper- 
ating at that particular time and place. 

Tradition attributes the invention of the hexagrams to 
the sage-emperor Fu Hsi, reigning at the very beginnings of 
Chinese history. 


»— Anciently, when Fu Hsi had come to the rule of all under 
Heaven, he looked up and contemplated the forms exhibited in 
the sky (the constellations), and he looked down, contemplating 
the processes taking place on the earth. He contemplated the 
patterns of birds and beasts, and the properties of the various 
habitats and places. Near at hand, in his own body, he found 
things for consideration, and the same at a distance, in events in 
general. Thus he devised the eight trigrams, in order to enter 
into relations with the virtues of the Bright Spirits, and to classify 
the relations of the ten thousand things.?5 


The Great Appendix to the Book of Changes explains its 
general principles as follows: 


»— Heaven is high, earth is low; thus the ch’ten (heaven trigram) 
and k’un (earth trigram) are fixed. As high and low are thus 
ordered, honorable and humble have their places. Movement 
and rest have their constancy; according to these strong and 
weak are differentiated. Ways coincide according to their species 
and things fall into classes. Hence good fortune and bad fortune 


The Primordial Pair + 57 


s 


come about. In the heavens phenomena appear; on earth shapes 
occur. Through these, change and transformation become mani- 
fest. Therefore the strong and the weak (lines in the trigrams) 
interplay, and the eight trigrams act and react upon each other. 
Things are roused by thunder and lightning; they are fertilized 
by wind and rain. Sun and moon revolve on their courses with a 
season of cold and then a season of heat. The way of the ch’ten 
constitutes the male, the way of the k’un constitutes the female. 
The ch’ien knows the great beginning; the k’un gives things their 
completion. The ch’ien knows through the easy; the k’un accom- 
plishes through the simple. ... 

Therefore the gentleman dwells securely in the emblems of 
the Book of Changes and delights in studying its explanations of 
the lines. When the gentleman is living quietly he observes the 
emblems and studies the explanations, and when he is about to 
act he observes their changes and studies their predictions. There- 
fore help comes to him from Heaven: good fortune and nothing 
that is not beneficial. ... 

The successive movement of yin and yang constitutes what 
is called the Way (Tao). What issues from it is good, and that 
which brings it to completion is the individual nature. The man 
of humanity recognizes it and calls it humanity; the wise man 
recognizes it and calls it wisdom. The people use it daily and are 
not aware of it, for the Way of the gentleman is but rarely recog- 
nized. It manifests itself as humanity but conceals its workings. 
It rouses all things, but is free from the anxieties of the sage. Its 
glorious power and great reserve are perfect indeed! It possesses 
everything in abundance: this is its great reserve. It renews every- 
thing daily: this is its glorious power. It produces and reproduces, 
and hence it is called the Changes. As creator of the primal images, 
it is called ch’ten. As giver of forms in imitation of the images, 
it is called k’un. Because it enables one to explore the laws of 
number and know the future it is called divination. Because it 
affords the element of coherence in change it is called the course 


58 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


of affairs. That aspect of it which cannot be fathomed in terms 
of the yin and yang is called spirit.*... 


Therefore in the Changes there is the Supreme Ultimate. 
This generates the two primary forms (the 1m and the yang). The 
two primary forms generate the four modes.t The four modes 
generate the eight trigrams. The eight trigrams determine good 


and bad fortune.*6 
The symbolism of the Book of Changes exhibits, there- 


fore, a view of the dynamic pattern of nature constituted by 
the perpetual interplay of the primordial pair, yin and yang, 
in varying degrees of force and direction. Although the dis- 
position of these forces is said to determine good and bad 
fortune, there is no hexagram in the whole book which is 
fundamentally bad, for wherever the negative force is in the 
ascendant it always contains, by implication, the seed of the 
positive. In Chinese thought the essential goodness of nature 
and human nature is precisely their good-and-bad. The two 
do not cancel each other out so as to make action futile: they 
play eternally in a certain order, and wisdom consists in the 
discernment of this order and acting in harmony with it. The 
sage no more seeks to obliterate the negative—darkness, death, 
etc.—than to get rid of autumn and winter from the cycle of 
the seasons. There emerges, then, a view of life which sees its 
worth and point not as a struggle for constant ascent but asa 
dance. Virtue and harmony consist, not in accentuating the 
positive, but in maintaining a dynamic balance. 

The familiar Chinese symbol of the primordial pair is 


* That is, the implicit unity of the opposites, the t’ai chi or Supreme Ulti- 
mate—a term deriving from the ridgepole of a roof. 

+ The four modes are digrams two-line symbols, called the major and 
minor yin and the major and minor yang. 


The Primordial Pair + 59 


the circle composed of what seem to be two stylized fishes, one 
black and one white, each with an “eye” of the opposite color: 


Fic. 4. 


The design obviously suggests rotation, and in this respect is 


cognate to the swastika re and the fylfot Ody: and 


perhaps also to the zodiacal sign of Pisces, of the ending- 
beginning of the year. The symbol is known as the t’at-chi 
(Supreme Ultimate) or simply as the yin-yang, though the 
Supreme Ultimate is often designated by an empty circle. The 
significance of the circle, of the rotary character of the yin- 
yang symbol, is of course that the world is not seen as created, 
as having a temporal beginning or end. There is rather end- 
less beginning and ending, and the hierarchy of principles— 
the Supreme Ultimate (or the Tao), the yang and yin, the 
four modes, the eight trigrams, the sixty-four hexagrams, and 
at last the “‘ten thousand things’’—is a sequence of rank rather 
than a sequence in time. 

One of the most notable forms of this hierarchy is found 
in a diagram drawn and explained by the Neo-Confucian 
thinker Chou Tun-yi (1017-1073). 


A AL tn % 


Fic. 5—The top circle represents the Supreme Ultimate (or Pole). The sec- 
ond has, to the left, the words “Yang, motion,” and, to the right, “Yin, 
quiescence.” The third is marked, to the left, “The Tao (Way) of ch’ien 
perfecting the male,” and, to the right, ‘““The Tao of k’un perfecting the 
female.” The fourth circle is marked, below, “The ten thousand things 
transforming and growing.” 


The Primordial Pair + 61 


Chow thus describes the diagram: 


»— That which has no Pole! And yet (itself) the Supreme Polel 
The Supreme Pole moves and produces the yang. When the 
movement has reached its limit, rest (ensues). Resting, the 
Supreme Pole produces the yin. When the rest has reached its 
limit, there is a return to motion. Motion and rest alternate, each 
being the root of the other. The yim and the yang take up their 
appointed functions, and so the Two Forces are established. The 
yang is transformed by reacting with the yin, and so water, fire, 
wood, metal, and earth are produced. (Designated by the five 
characters under the second circle.) Then the five ch’: (matter- 
energies) diffuse harmoniously, and the Four Seasons proceed on 
their course.... 

The true (principle) of that which has no Pole, and the 
essences of the Two (Forces) and the Five (Elements), unite 
(react) with one another in marvellous ways, and consolidations 
ensue. The Tao of the heavens perfects maleness and the Tao 
of the earth perfects femaleness. The two ch’t of maleness and 
femaleness, reacting with and influencing each other, change and 
bring the myriad things into being. Generation follows genera- 
tion, and there is no end to their changes and transformations.27 


The use of the empty circle, and of such expressions as 
“the non-Pole” or “the Void,” for the Supreme Ultimate is a 
way of saying, not that the basis of reality is mere emptiness, 
but that it defies all description and delineation except in 
terms of yang and yin. Founded, then, upon this indescrib- 
able unity the primordial pair generate a world by playful 
intercourse because they are implicitly one. Almost invari- 
ably, Chinese thought sees the conflicts of nature as rooted in 
an underlying harmony. There is thus no serious conflict, no 
ultimate threat to the universal order, no possibility of final 
annihilation or non-being because, as Lao-tzu said, ‘“To be 
and not to be arise mutually.” 


62 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


The perennial influence of the Book of Changes and its 
dynamic, bipolar model of the course of nature led Chinese 
savants of all times to think of the natural elements, of sea- 
sonal changes, of geological features, of plants and animals, 
in terms of differing arrangements and interactions of yin and 
yang. According to the Huat-nan tzu: 


»— Tao begins in the Great Void, which engenders the universe, 
which produces the fluid. In this a separation takes place. The 
purer and brighter particles are thinner and finer and form 
heaven. The coarser and more turbid accumulate and become 
earth. The blending of the purer and finer parts is easy, the con- 
densation of the heavier and turbid parts more troublesome and 
difficult, therefore heaven is created prior to earth. The combined 
essence of heaven and earth is Yin and Yang, the activity of Yin 
and Yang produces the four seasons, and the dispersion of the 
essence of the four seasons produces the ten thousand things. 
From the hot Yang fluid comes fire, and the essence of fire becomes 
the sun. From the cold Yin fluid comes water, and the essence of 
water forms the moon. The sexual intercourse between the sun 
and the moon gives birth to the stars. Heaven harbours the sun, 
the moon and the stars; earth comprises water, the rivers, the soil 
and dust.?8 


In the Wu-neng tzu is described the generation of animals 
from the yang and yin “fluids,” though the word (ch’t) thus 
translated has also the sense of a breath, a vital force, or 
material energy: 


»— Anterior to the separation of heaven and earth there was a 
single, chaotic fluid. This ran over and was divided into two 
modes, there were pure and muddy, light and heavy parts. The 
light and pure ones went up and formed Yang and heaven, the 
heavy and muddy ones sank down and became Yin and earth. 


The Primordial Pair + 63 


yielding and in repose. This was the natural state of the fluids. 
After heaven and earth had taken up their positions, the Yin and 
Yang fluids mixed, and all animals with skin, scales, fur, feathers 
and shells were created thereby.2° 


It is not surprising that the generation of the world by yang 
and yin should have had a sexual connotation. This is 
brought out clearly in the following extract from the Ch’eng- 
tzu, though, as we shall see, the Chinese did not develop this 
symbolism to anything like the same degree as the Indians. 


b— One Yin and one Yang, that is the fundamental principle. 
The passionate union of Yin and Yang and the copulation of 
husband and wife is the eternal rule of the universe. If heaven 
and earth did not mingle, whence would all the things receive 
life? When the wife comes to the man, she bears children. Bearing 
children is the way of propagation. Man and wife cohabit and 
produce offspring.®° 


Observing the habits of animals, birds, and insects, 
Chinese naturalists again correlated them with yin and yang 
influences, as in the following passages from the Ching-chi 
wen-chi: 


»— Birds, beasts, plants and trees obtain the Yin and the Yang 
fluid and are determined by them. The eagle plans murder and 
in autumn pounces upon its prey. The mouse is full of greed and 
goes out at night. In the fourth and the fifth months they can 
transform themselves into a turtle-dove and a quail, for in the 
fourth and fifth months Yang is powerful and Yin can be trans- 
muted by Yang. The sparrows brood on their eggs and congre- 
gate in spring; the pheasant searches for its mate and cries in 
the morning. In the 11th and izgth months they can transform 
themselves into frogs and shells, for in these months the Yin 
reaches its climax, and the Yang then can be changed by the Yin. 


64 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


In spring the wild geese fly to and the swallows come from 
the north, the former travelling from the south to the north and 
the latter from the north to the south. Both fly with the Yang 
fluid, which is to their advantage. In autumn, on the contrary, 
the wild geese arrive and the swallows depart, the geese going 
from north to south, the swallows in the opposite direction, but 
both make use of the convenient Yin fluid to fly upon.3! 


The text also contains this curious description of the genera- 
tion of worms and other creatures from rotten plants, which, 
mistaken as it may be, typifies the feeling that the yang force 
of life is always latent in the yin situation of death and de- 
cay. 


»— When rotten, plants become glowworms, plants are changed 
into animals and inanimate things into animate things. Is that 
not because the brightness of Yang has reached its acme, so that 
also things of the dark Yin adhere to and change into it? Gen- 
erally, the two fluids Yin and Yang are immaterial and move 
quietly in the interior, whereas wind, rain, dew, thunder, insects 
and plants have form and change outwardly.?? 


Fundamental to the yang-yin symbolism is the sense of 
the world as a system of transformation, and this is really the 
importance of the passage just quoted. Yin and yang are 
respectively like the troughs and peaks of a wave system. The 
S curve dividing the yin-yang circle suggests a kind of whip- 
lash or peristaltic motion, a continuous undulation not only 
of life and death, day and night, but of one living form into 
another. 


»— Certain germs, falling upon water, become duckweed. When 
they reach the junction of the land and water, they become lichen. 
Spreading up the bank, they become the dog-tooth violet. Reach- 


The Primordial Pair - 65 


ing rich soil, they become wu-tsu (exact meaning unknown), the 
root of which becomes grubs, while the leaves become butter- 
flies, or crabs. These are changed into insects, born in the chimney 
corner, which look like skeletons. .. . After a thousand days it 
becomes a bird called kan-yii-ku, the spittle of which becomes the 
ssu-mi (unidentifiable). The ssu-mi becomes a wine-fly. ... The 
ch’ing-ning (insect) produces the leopard, which produces the 
horse, which produces man. Then man goes back to the germ, 
from which all things come and to which all things return.33 


Ever differing in form, this undulation is a single process of 
life-death, up-down, and wisdom—at least in the Chinese 
Taoist and Buddhist philosophies—consists in realizing the 
basic identity of the two. In the words of the Chuang-tzu: 


»— Life follows upon death. Death is the beginning of life. Who 
knows when the end is reached? . . . If then life and death are 
but consecutive states, what need have I to complain? Therefore 
all things are one. What we love is animation. What we hate is 
corruption. But corruption in its turn becomes animation, and 
animation once more becomes corruption. Therefore it has been 
said that the world is permeated by a single vital fluid (ch’z), and 
the sages accordingly value its unity.34 


But the unity is not so much obscured and concealed in 
the yin-yang alternation as positively revealed for those who 
have the wit to see it—a point illustrated in the Chuang-tzu 
with the following whimsical anecdote: 


»— Therefore it is that, viewed from the standpoint of Tao, a 
beam (horizontal) and a pillar (vertical) are identical. So are 
ugliness and beauty, greatness, wickedness, perverseness, and 
strangeness. Separation is the same as construction; construction 
is the same as destruction. Nothing is subject either to construction 
or destruction, for these conditions are brought together into one. 
Only the truly intelligent understand this principle of the 


66 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


identity of all things... . But to wear out one’s intelligence in 
order to unify things without knowing that they are already in 
agreement, this is called “Three in the Morning.” .. . A keeper 
of monkeys said with regard to their rations of chestnuts that 
each monkey was to have three in the morning and four at night. 
But at this the monkeys were very angry, and so the keeper said 
that they might have four in the morning and three at night, with 
which arrangement they were all well pleased. The actual number 
of chestnuts remained the same, but there was an adaptation to 
the likes and dislikes of those concerned. Thus the sages harmo- 
nize the statements “it is” and “it is not,” and rest in the natural 
equilibrium of Heaven. This is called following two courses at 
once.35 


In many respects the yin-yang symbolism is more of a 
philosophy or even a primitive science than a mythology. 
Though called male and female they are never personified 
as god and goddess progenitors of the world, nor is there 
the slightest hint of their being engaged in a cosmic war of 
light against darkness or good against evil. The Chinese never 
seem to have taken the personification of cosmic forces very 
seriously, nor to have had any strong inclination to consider 
the universe as the creation and dominion of a heavenly ruler. 
Yin-yang imagery inclined them, on the whole, to consider 
the universe as a self-organizing body which moves and 
regulates itself spontaneously, like the circulation of the 
blood or the legs of a centipede. 


»— The walnis said to the centipede, “I hop about on one leg, 
but not very successfully. How do you manage all those legs you 
have?” 

“I don’t manage them,” replied the centipede. “Have you ever 
seen saliva? When it is ejected, the big drops are the size of pearls, 
the small ones like mist. They fall promiscuously on the ground 


The Primordial Pair - 67 


and cannot be counted. And so it is that my mechanism works 
naturally, without my being conscious of the fact.” 

The centipede said to the snake, “With all my legs I do not 
move as fast as you with none. How is that?” 

“One’s natural mechanism,” replied the snake, “is not a thing 
to be changed. What need have I for legs?’’3é 


A more fantastic aspect of the yang-yin theory emerges, 
however, in those developments of Taoism which had to do 
with the quest for physical immortality—that is, for attaining 
the same equilibrium of the forces in the individual organism 
as in the universe. It was thus hoped that the individual 
might become a system as self-perpetuating as the universe, a 
hsien or immortal. Many techniques were employed to this 
end—the alchemical preparation of an elixir of immortality, 
exercises for slowing down the breath, and particular sexual 
experiments to nourish the yang power of the male with the 
yin power of the female. The successful application of these 
methods was said to enable the hsien to shed his aging skin 
like a snake, and crawl out as soft-complexioned as a boy. 

As with Western alchemy in its search for the stone that 
would turn base metals into gold, it is always difficult to 
judge how literally these enterprises should be taken. There 
is little doubt that in some instances both the end and the 
means were, as described, figurative representations of a 
process of spiritual and psychic transformation. Thus an 
alchemical writer of the thirteenth century, Ch’en Hsien-wei, 
discusses the preparation of genuine cinnabar, which, mixed 
with honey and made into pills, was supposed to be the 
medicine of immortality. He describes the process going on 
in the alchemical cauldron (fu), but associates this fu with 
the hexagram fu in the Book of Changes which designates a 
“turning point.” 


6S » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


> Spiritual fire ... drives away the yang which is inside the 
yin. This yang flies upwards and ascends, and at the “original 
position of the spiritual fire” it meets with the yin which is inside 
the yang. These two capture each other, control each other, have 
intercourse with each other, and knot each other together. .. . The 
two ch’: (energies), buttoning on to each other, and knotting 
each other together, produce change and transformation. Some- 
times the phenomena of the “lad” and “girl” appear, and some- 
times the shapes of the Dragon and Tiger. With numerous 
changes they fly about, rising, running, and leaping, never quiet 
for a moment, and never coming out from the vessel and the 
stove. ... So will the true (cinnabar) medicine be condensed and 
aggregated. This is the Tao. The two most important things 
are the observant mind and the attracting spirit; both helping 
the efficacy of the “fire-times.” The meditation methods of the 
Buddhists seem to be valuable but are not really so. The Taoists 
who take deep breaths and swallow saliva are pursuing trifles 
and abandoning what really matters.%? 


The last three sentences seem to indicate clearly that the 
“alchemical” process is actually spiritual. It is of interest 
that the image of the interplay of the Dragon and the Tiger 
was also used in connection with the dances preceding the 
Taoist sexual ritual. And here, again, we may be dealing 
with figurative language. 

In other words, the immortality of the hsien with his 
continuous changing of skins may refer, not to a personal 
conquest of death, but to a shift in the sense of one’s identity 
—from the ego to the universe. This would come about 
through a clear and complete perception of the implicit unity 
of the yang and yin principles, for this would include the 
realization of the same unity between the self and the not-self, 
the world inside the skin and the world outside. 


The Primordial Pair - 69 


»>— Master Lii Tzu said: In comparison with Heaven and Earth, 
man is like a mayfly. But compared to the Great Meaning (Tao), 
Heaven and Earth, too, are like a bubble and a shadow. Only 
the primordial spirit and the true essence overcome time and 
space. The power of the seed (semen, ?.e., biological life), like 
Heaven and Earth, is subject to mortality, but the primordial 
spirit is beyond the polar differences. Here is the place whence 
Heaven and Earth derive their being. When students understand 
how to grasp the primordial spirit they overcome the polar 
opposites of Light (yang) and Darkness (ym) and tarry no longer 
in the three worlds (of heaven, earth, and the underworld). But 
only he who has looked on essence in its original manifestation 
is able to do this. . . . Buddha speaks of the transient, the creator 
of consciousness, as being the fundamental truth of religion. And, 
in our Taoism, the expression “to produce emptiness” contains 
the whole work of completing life and essence. All . . . agree in 
the one proposition, the finding of the spiritual] Elixir in order to 
pass from death to life. In what does this spiritual Elixir consist? 
It means forever tarrying in purposelessness. The deepest secret 
in our teaching, the secret of the bath, is confined to the work of 
making the heart (hsin, also “mind”) empty. Therewith the 
heart is set at rest. What I have revealed here in a word is the 
fruit of decades of effort.%8 


The “empty heart’ (wu-hsin) is when one’s whole being 
seems as the head seems to the eyes—a transparent void, filled 
by all that one sees. So with every sense; the senser, the senses, 
and the things sensed become one, and the duality of the 
knower and the known, the inside and the outside, is 
transcended. 


»— The (Heavenly) Light is not in the body alone, neither is it 
only outside the body. Mountains and rivers and the great Earth 
are lit by the sun and moon; all that is this Light. Therefore it 


70 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


is not only within the body. Understanding and clarity, knowing 
and enlightenment, and all motion (of the spirit), are likewise 
this Light; therefore it is not just something outside the body. The 
Light-flower of Heaven and Earth fills all thousand spaces (within 
the body). But also the Light-flower of one body passes through 
Heaven and covers the Earth.%° 


Here, in the symbol of the Light-flower, is what I feel 
to be the height of Chinese wisdom: its profound grasp of 
the relational character of the world, of things as ‘mutually 
arising” and “mutually interpenetrating.” All things are like 
the rainbow, for there is no phenomenon “rainbow” except 
where there is a certain relationship of sun, moisture in the 
atmosphere, and observer. The rainbow is “void” because 
it has no independent existence of its own. But in Chinese 
thought it was seen that this is true of everything, including 
the observer. Eyes and light arise mutually in the same way 
as yin and yang. The universe is not, therefore, composed of 
independent things, that is, as human thought ordinarily 
fragments it: but the universe disposes itself as things. It is 
one body, one field, whose parts give rise to each other as 
inseparably as fronts and backs, but in an endlessly complex 
and interconnected maze. Thus to become a hsien was, at 
root, to take conscious possession of one’s true and original 
body—the world, and this by quite literally coming to one’s 
senses, which, after all, do the work of integration for us. 
Light, color, shape, weight, and texture are all states of a 
nervous system and a body which, in its turn, is an integral 
part of the rainbow-world seen in these terms. But man cuts 
himself off from it and loses the sense of his original body 
by considering himself as an “I’’ which has these experiences, 
standing back from them just as one looks at a picture. 


PLATE 1. Lingam and yoni. 


PLATE 2. Kali. 


PLATE 3. Black Madonna. 


PLATE 4. Yamantaka, 


St. Michael and the Dragon. 


PLATE 5. 


S 
S 
=> 
ne 
iS) 
= 
™ 
ia 
[<2] 
i 
< 
| 
aah 


The Primordial Pair + 71 


To empty (wu) the heart (sin) is to stop standing back from 
experience and to see, not that one has it, but that one is it. 


»— (The Master said:) “You hear not with the ears, but with 
the mind (hsin) ; not with the mind, but with your soul. But let 
hearing stop with the ears. Let the working of the mind stop with 
itself. Then the soul will be a negative existence, passively respon- 
sive to externals. In such a negative existence, only Tao (the 
Way of Nature) can abide. And that negative state is the fasting 
of the heart (hsin).” 

“Then,” said Yen-hui, “the reason I could not get the use of 
this method is my own individuality (ego). If I could get the use 
of it, my individuality would have gone. Is that what you mean 
by the negative state?” 

“Exactly so,” replied the Master. ‘Let me tell you. . . . See 
that emptiness. There is light in an empty room, and there is 
good fortune in repose. Without repose, your mind will be rush- 
ing around even when you are sitting still. Let your eyes and ears 
respond within, but shut out all (idea of) knowledge with a 
mind.’’40* 

I have devoted so much space to this quasi-mythologicat 
theory of the yin and yang because it seems to me to reflect a 
far deeper grasp of the polar principle than is found in any 
other ancient tradition. But the traditions of India, too, 
contain the same insight, though expressed in a far greater 
wealth of mythological imagery, and to these we must now 
turn. 


* Cf. J. Z. Young in Doubt and Certainty in Science. London, 1953. p. 155. 
“We each probably still say, if pressed, something like, ‘The central thing that 
I know is my mind, my experience, my consciousness.’ That is to say we refer 
to ourselves as if we were a body occupied by a pcerson—the old model of a 
circle with something inside it. Is it possible that we should convey more 
information if we tried to do without this whole apparatus of the words of 
conventional psychology? We can say everything that we want to say quite 
well without speaking all the time as if we were inhabited by this spirit called 
the mind.” 


[x] 
O 
Z, 
< 
a) 
= 
= 
MN 
© 
0 
[x] 
an 
s 


\ \ hat is more exuberant than Hindu sculpture? 

I am thinking of those ovoid domes of stone at 
Konarak, Bhuvaneshwar, and Khajuraho, which look, at first 
sight, as if they had decomposed into the kind of squirming 
vitality that one finds upon overturning a rock, as if they 
were alive with anthropoid maggots, swarming together in a 
colossal rout of dancing, fighting, and copulating. But close 
inspection reveals that the stone has come alive in figures of 
unbelievable grace and lilting sensuousness—at one time 
vividly polychromed, but now perhaps all the better for being 
the combination of drab gray rock and endlessly dancing 
form. One must look at these temple figures in the light of 
classical Hindu dancing—an art in which jeweled bodies move 
as if they were plants suspended in water, where muscles are 
an ivory liquid, and where legs, hips, belly, shoulders, and 
head move quite independently in their own planes. Such 
exotic, rich, and jungle-like displays of human fecundity are 
perhaps repellent to the Western, and especially Anglo-Saxon, 
taste. But to penetrate the depth and grandeur of Hindu 


75 


76 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


mythology and philosophy, one must somehow allow oneself 
to enter into this seething imagery, and then feel one’s way 
down through its bewildering variety to the simple and pre- 
siding intuition which underlies it. 

In a world of intense heat, of the most startling extremes 
of fertility and aridity, wealth and poverty, and where life is 
cheap and security almost unknown, the human mind _ can. 
acquire a peculiar sensitivity. Somehow the world seems lack- 
ing in solidity. External forms and surfaces are now diapha- 
nous, and now bristling with the sharpest points. Nothing is 
certain but change, and change is less apt to be gradual and 
orderly than sudden and unforeseen. It is not surprising, 
then, that to the Hindu consciousness the world has seemed 
like an arabesque of smoke, and that its totally unreliable 
transitoriness has been the principal ground for considering 
it to be fundamentally unreal. But the word maya, by which 
this peculiar unreality is described, is not necessarily a term 
of contempt, as if the world were merely an illusion to be 
dismissed. Maya also means art and magic, and thus a seeming 
solidity evoked by divine power. But under the spell of this 
power the Hindu does not feel himself entirely a victim. 
However obscurely, he knows or feels that the source of this 
enchantment is in some roundabout way himself—as if being 
alive and human were to have got oneself deliberately lost 
in a labyrinth. 

For the presiding intuition of the Hindu world-view is 
that the whole universe of multiplicity is the lila, or play, of 
a single energy known as Paramatman, the Supreme Self. The 
coming and going of all worlds, all beings, and all things is 
described as the eternal outbreathing and inbreathing of this 
One Life—eternal because it is beyond all dualities, compris- 
ing non-being as much as being, death as much as life, still- 


The Cosmic Dance « 77 


ness as much as motion. One of the principal symbols of the 
Paramatman is the Swan, Hamsa, flying forth from its nest 
and returning, and the syllable ham stands for breathing out, 
sa for breathing in. As the exhalation and inhalation are 
repeated endlessly, ham-sa-ham-sa-ham-sa-ham, there is also 
heard saham, that is, sa aham, “He I am’—which is to say 
that the essential self of every being is the Supreme Self. 

This in-and-out rhythm or undulation goes on endlessly 
through every dimension of life. It is the birth-and-death of 
innumerable universes, not only succeeding one another in 
kalpa-periods of 4,320,000 years, but also co-existing in untold 
myriads. Small universes compose great universes: our galax- 
ies are the dust in another cosmos, and the dust in our world 
contains suns and stars—infinitely small or infinitely great 
according to the point of view. An individual is therefore a 
vast cosmos in his own right, and the ups and downs of his 
life are just the same ups and downs as those of the macro- 
cosms beyond him and the microcosms within him. To the 
eye of wisdom size makes no difference: every mote, every 
being, every cosmos is an exemplar of the one archetypal 
rhythm. All beings—divine, human, demonic, or animal—are, 
as it were, under the spell of the Juggler, tossing and catching 
the multitudinous balls of the worlds with his thousands of 
arms and hands, simultaneously giving delight with the dis- 
play of skill and terror with the thought that a ball might 
drop. Yet the skill and resourcefulness of the Divine Juggler 
are endless. The ball that seems to drop and shatter simply 
bursts into a million more Jugglers; the disaster turns out 
with unfailing astonishment to be a new tour de force, 
though it is all part of the game that this shall never be 
expected. Yet there is a clue for the wise. In all images of the 


78 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


many-armed divinity there is one hand raised and unmoving, 
with palm toward the beholder—the gesture of “Fear not.” 
It is just a game (plate 21). 

This, then, is the underlying theme of those Hindu art 
forms depicting the myriads of gods and goddesses in their 
loves and wars: it is the endless complication of a single prin- 
ciple, complicated by an infinite capacity for maya, for con- 
cealing the stratagem. Now you see it, now you don’t. 

At some time between B.C. 500 and A.D. 100 there was 
compiled that great epic of Hindu mythology, the Maha- 
bharata. One section of this epic, The Lord’s Song or Bhaga- 
vad-Gita, has been regarded for centuries as the most 
authoritative epitome of Hindu doctrine, taking the form of 
a discourse between the warrior Arjuna and Sri Krishna, the 
incarnation or avatar of Vishnu—one of the many names 
under which the Supreme Self is known. The scene of the 
Gita is a battlefield where opposing forces are encamped before 
their engagement. Krishna appears in the role of Arjuna’s 
charioteer, and their conversation begins with Arjuna’s 
despondency at the prospect of having to do battle with his 
own kinsmen. The battle is, of course, a symbol of the whole 
struggle of life-and-death, and Krishna’s encouragement of his 
reluctant master, Arjuna, must be taken not so much as the 
praise of military valor as of fearlessness in the face of all life’s 
terrors. The immediate importance of this discourse is that at 
one point Krishna reveals himself to Arjuna in his divine 
form, at which moment the Gita gives us the most vivid 
picture of the cosmic vision which I have been describing, 
the beautiful and terrible dance of the Divine Juggler and the 
maya of his innumerable forms and manifestations. Krishna 
says: 


The Cosmic Dance - 79 


»— I am the Self existing in the heart of all beings. I am the 
beginning, the middle and also the end of beings. 

Among purifiers, I am the wind; among warriors, I am Rama; 
among fishes, I am Makara (the shark); and among rivers, I am 
the Ganges. 

O Arjuna, of all creations I am the beginning, the middle 
and also the end; of all sciences, I am the science of Self-knowl- 
edge. 

Of syllables, I am “A,” and Dvandva (copulative) of all 
compound words. I am inexhaustible Time; I am the Dispenser, 
facing everywhere. 

I am all-seizing Death; I am the origin of all that is to be; 
of the female I am fame, prosperity, speech, memory, intelligence, 
constancy and forgiveness. 

I am gambling among the fraudulent; I am the prowess of 
the powerful. I am Victory, I am Perseverance, I am the Goodness 
of the good. 

I am the Rod of disciplinarians; I am the Polity of the seekers 
of conquest. I am the Silence of secrets; I am the Wisdom of the 
wise. 

O Arjuna, whatever is the seed of all beings, that also am I. 
Without Me there is no being existent, whether moving or 
unmoving. 

There is no end to the manifestations of my Divine Power; 
what I have declared is only a partial statement of the vastness 
of my divine manifestation. 

Whatever being there is, glorious, prosperous or powerful, 
know thou that to have sprung from a portion of My splendor. 

O Arjuna, what need is there for thee to know these details? 
I alone exist, sustaining this whole universe by a portion of 
Myself. 

Arjuna said: 

The supremely profound word regarding Self-knowledge, 
spoken by Thee out of compassion for me, has dispelled this my 
delusion. 


80 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


O Lotus-eyed, I have heard at length from Thee of the 
creation and dissolution of beings, as well as of thine inexhaus- 
tible glory. 

O great Lord, as thou hast declared thyself, so it is. O 
Supreme Being, I desire to see thy godly form. 

O Lord, if thou thinkest me able to see that, then, O Lord 
of yogis, show me thine infinite Self. 

The Blessed Lord said: 

Behold my various celestial forms, of different colors and 
shapes, by hundreds and by thousands. 

Behold in this body of mine the entire universe together, 
with all that is moving and unmoving and whatever else thou 
desirest to perceive. 

But with these eyes of thine thou canst not see me; therefore 
I give thee divine sight, Behold my supreme yoga power! 

Sanjaya said: 

O King, having spoken thus, the great Lord of yoga, Hari, 
then showed his supreme godly form. 

With many faces and eyes, with many wondrous sights, with 
many celestial ornaments and with many celestial weapons 
uplifted. 

Wearing celestial garlands and garments, anointed with 
celestial fragrant perfumes; the all-wonderful Deity, infinite, 
facing the universe everywhere. 

If the effulgence of a thousand suns were to shine at once 
in the sky, that might resemble the splendor of that great Being. 

Then Arjuna saw the entire universe resting together, with 
its manifold divisions, in the body of the God of gods. 

Then (Arjuna), overpowered with wonder, and his hair 
standing on end, bending down his head in awe to the Deity, 
spoke with folded hands: 

Arjuna said: 

O God! in thy body I see all the gods, as well as multitudes 
of all kinds of beings; the Lord Brahma, seated on the lotus 
throne, all the Rishis (sages) and all the celestial serpents. 


The Cosmic Dance - 81 


O Lord of the universe, O universal form, I see thee with 
manifold arms, bellies, mouths and eyes, boundless on every side; 
neither do I see thy beginning, nor middle nor end. 

I see thee with diadems, maces, discus, shiningly effulgent 
everywhere, blazing all around like the burning fire and the sun, 
dazzling to the sight and immeasurable. 

Thou art the imperishable, the supreme, the One to be 
known. Thou art the supreme refuge of this universe; thou art 
the ever unchanging guardian of the eternal Dharma; thou art, 
I know, the ancient Being. 

I see thee without beginning, middle or end, with infinite 
power, with numberless arms, the sun and the moon as thine 
eyes, thy mouth as the blazing fire, heating this universe with 
thine own radiance. 

By thee alone the space between heaven and earth and all 
the quarters is pervaded. O great Soul, seeing this, thy wonderful 
and terrifying form, the three worlds are stricken with fear. 

Verily, these hosts of devas (angels) are entering into thee; 
some in fear, praising thee with folded hands. The host of great 
Rishis and Siddhas, saying “Svasti’” (peace, may it be well), are 
singing thy glory in beautiful hymns. 

O mighty-armed, seeing thine immeasurable form, with many 
mouths and eyes, with many arms, thighs and feet, with many 
loins, and fearful with many large teeth, the worlds, and I as 
well, are agitated with terror. 

O Vishnu, seeing thee touching the sky, shining in many 
colors, with mouths wide open, and with large blazing eyes, my 
heart is terrified and I find neither peace nor tranquillity. 

O Lord of gods! seeing thy mouths, terrible with long teeth, 
blazing like the fires of destruction, I know not the four quarters, 
nor do I find any peace. Have mercy, O abode of the universe! 

All these sons of Dhritarashtra, with the multitude of mon- 
archs, Bhishma, Drona and Sutaputra, as well as our own prin- 
cipal warriors, 

Enter rushingly into thy mouths, terrible with long teeth 


82 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


and fearful to look at. Some are seen hanging between thy teeth, 
with their heads crushed to powder. 

As many torrents of rivers rush toward the ocean, similarly 
do these heroes amongst men enter into thy mouths, blazing 
fiercely on all sides. 

As the moths rush into the burning fire with headlong speed 
for destruction, in the same manner do these creatures rush into 
thy mouths with headlong speed, only to perish. 

O Vishnu! swallowing all the worlds with thy blazing flames, 
thou art licking all around. Thy fierce, radiant rays, filling the 
whole universe, are burning. 

Tell me, who art thou, in this terrible form? Salutation to 
thee! O supreme Deity, have mercy! O primeval One, I desire to 
know thee, for indeed I know not thy purpose. 

The Blessed Lord said: 

I am eternal, world-destroying Time, manifested here for the 
destruction of these people. Even without thee, none of these 
warriors, arrayed here in the hostile amnies, shall live. 

Therefore, do thou arise and acquire glory. Conquering the 
enemies, enjoy the unrivalled kingdom. By me alone have they 
already been slain; be thou merely an instrumental cause. 

Do thou kill and be not distressed by fear. Fight! and thou 
shalt conquer thine enemies in battle.*! 


Because the scene of the Gita is the battlefield, the 
polarity stressed in this vision of the cosmic dance is life and 
death, creation and destruction. But the texts represent it in 
other ways as well—as the peaceful and the wrathful, the male 
and the female, the warp and the woof—each pair a variation 
of the fundamental rhythm which is the very texture of life. 
Going back perhaps as far as B.C. 800 are a group of docu- 
ments known as the Upanishads—a term meaning “‘to sit 
near,’ that is, to sit at the feet of a teacher. These are the 
sources from which the complex of Hindu imagery and doc- 


The Cosmic Dance + 83 


trine is derived, though they, in their turn, represent a reinter- 
pretation of the Vedas—the archaic hymns of the Aryan 
invaders of the Indian subcontinent, whose attitudes and 
institutions were slowly modified by the aboriginal popula- 
tion.* One of the oldest of the Upanishads is known as the 
Brihadaranyaka, in which the theme of unity-in-duality is 
already prominent. Here is its account of the production of 
the world through the bifurcation of the Supreme Self into 
male and female: 


»— In the beginning this was Self alone, in the shape of a 
person (purusha). He looking round saw nothing but his Self. 
He first said, ‘This is I”; therefore he became I by name. There- 
fore even now, if a man is asked, he first says, “This is I,” and 
then pronounces the other name which he may have. And because 
before all this, he burnt down all evils, therefore he was a person. 
Verily he who knows this, burns down everyone who tries to be 
before him. 

He feared, and therefore anyone who is lonely fears. He 
thought, “As there is nothing but myself, why should I fear?” 
Thence his fear passed away. For what should he have feared? 
Verily fear arises from a second only. 

But he felt no delight. Therefore a man who is lonely feels 
no delight. He wished for a second. He was so large as man and 
wife together. He then made his Self to fall in two and thence 
arose husband and wife. Therefore Yajnavalkya said: ‘“We two 
are thus (each of us) like half a shell.” Therefore the void which 
was there, is filled by the wife. He embraced her, and men were 
born. 


* The Aryan invasion of India, from the Northwest, is thought to have 
occurred between B.C. 1500 and 1000. Archeological study of the earlier Indus 
Valley culture (second millennium B.C.) suggests that the basic attitudes of 
Hinduism as now known reflect this earlier level of civilization which, in turn, 
has affinities with the world-view of the Sumerians. Cf. Joseph Campbell, 
The Masks of God. vol. ii. Viking. New York, 1962. 


84 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


She thought, ‘“‘How can he embrace me, after having pro- 
duced me from himself? I shall hide myself.” 

She then became a cow, the other became a bull and 
embraced her, and hence cows were born. The one became a 
mare, the other a stallion; the one a male ass, the other a female 
ass. He embraced her, and hence one-hoofed animals were born. 
The one became a she-goat, the other a he-goat; the one became a 
ewe, the other a ram. He embraced her, and hence goats and 
sheep were born. And thus he created everything that exists in 
pairs, down to the ants. 

He knew, “I indeed am this creation, for I created all] this.” 
Hence he became the creation, and he who knows this lives in this 
his creation.*? 


This passage contains a curious allusion to the primal 
guilt or shame of the sexual union. ‘‘How can he embrace me, 
after having produced me from himself? I shall hide myself.” 
But it is quite obvious that the female, hiding herself in the 
cow, the ass, the goat, and the ewe, is hiding in order to be 
found. But the delight of the situation is just that she must 
not admit this to herself. The whole force of the cosmic game 
depends upon the pretense (maya) that it is not a game, upon 
an unconsciousness or forgetting, which will always renew 
the fear that the Juggler will drop the ball, that the villain 
will rape the heroine, and that, in short, the worst will 
happen. Sexual shame is thus the blushing admitting and not 
admitting of complicity—the secret enjoyment of what was 
feared so explicitly that one loses face in confessing it. There- 
fore the guilt or shame attaching itself to sexuality is an 
integral part of its pleasure, and to maintain it we will do 
everything possible not to “let the cat out of the bag.” 

Another theme of the Brihadaranyaka is the world as 
warp and woof, since, in woven cloth, the one cannot hold 


The Cosmic Dance - 85 


together without the other. The sage, Yajnavalkya, is ques- 
tioned by the woman, Gargi: 


— “Since all this world is woven, warp on woof, on water, on 
what, pray, is the water woven, warp on woof?” 
“On wind, O Gargi.” 
“On what then, pray, is the wind woven, warp and woof?” 
“On the atmosphere-worlds, O Gargi.” 


And as question follows question, Yajnavalkya explains that 
the woof of the atmosphere-worlds is the world of celestial 
musicians, that behind them is the sun, and then the moon, 
the stars, the gods, of Indra, Prajapati, and Brahma—and 
when Gargi asks upon what the world of Brahma is woven, 
the sage replies: 


»— “Gargi, do not question too much, lest your head fall off. 
In truth, you are questioning ‘too much about a divinity about 
which further questions cannot be asked. Gargi, do not over- 
question.” 


Nevertheless, the woman persists: 


»— “As a noble youth .. . might rise up against you, having 
strung his unstrung bow and taken two foe-piercing arrows in 
his hand, even so, O Yajnavalkya, have I risen up against you 
with two questions. Answer me these.” 

Yajnavalkya said: “Ask, Gargi.” 

She said: ‘‘That, O Yajnavalkya, which is above the sky, that 
which is beneath the earth, that which is between these two, sky 
and earth, that which people call the past, the present, and the 
future—across what is that woven, warp and woof?” 

He said: “That, O Gargi, which is above the sky, that which 
is beneath the earth, that which is between these two, sky and 


86 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


earth, that which people call the past and the present and the 
future—across space is that woven, warp and woof.” 

She said: “Adoration to you, Yajnavalkya, in that you have 
solved this question for me. Prepare yourself for the other.” 

“Ask, Gargi.” 

She said: “Across what then, pray, is space woven, warp and 
woof?” 

He said: “That, O Gargi, Brahmans call the Imperishable. 
It is not coarse, not fine, not short, not long, not glowing, not 
adhesive, without shadow and without darkness, without air and 
without space, without stickiness, odorless, tasteless, without eye, 
without ear, without voice, without wind, without energy, with- 
out breath, without mouth, without measure, without inside and 
without outside. 


It consumes nothing soever. 
No one soever consumes it. 


Verily, O Gargi, at the command of that Imperishable the sun 
and the moon stand apart. Verily, O Gargi, at the command of 
that Imperishable the earth and the sky stand apart. Verily, O 
Gargi, at the command of that Imperishable the moments, the 
days, the nights, the fortnights, the months, the seasons, and the 
years stand apart. Verily, O Gargi, at the command of that 
Imperishable some rivers flow from the snowy mountains to the 
east, others to the west, in whatever direction each flows... . 
Verily, O Gargi, that Imperishable is the unseen Seer, the 
unheard Hearer, the unthought Thinker, the ununderstood 
Understander. Other than It there is naught that sees .. . hears 
... thinks... understands. Across this Imperishable, O Gargi, is 
space woven, warp and woof.’’48 


The series of negations implies that if one tries to penetrate 
the ultimate interdependence of warp and woof, one comes to 
the point beyond which language cannot travel, since. it is 
impossible to denote ‘“‘this” without the contrast of “that.” 


The Cosmic Dance - 87 


Now as there is no woven cloth without the simultaneous 
interpenetration of warp and woof, there is no world without 
both the exhalation and inhalation of the Supreme Self. 
Though the image of breathing, as distinct from weaving, 
makes the two successive rather than simultaneous, neverthe- 
less the one always implies the other. Successive in time, they 
are simultaneous in meaning—that is, sub specie aeternitatis, 
from the standpoint of eternity. Beginning and end, birth 
and death, manifestation and withdrawal always imply each 
other. In Western—that is, Judaic and Christian—imagery 
there has generally been a tendency to overlook this mutu- 
ality and to see each life and the creation itself as unique— 
as a beginning, and then an end which does not imply another 
beginning. Our world is linear, and the course of time is 
very strictly a one-way street. Nature is a clockwork mech- 
anism which does not wind itself up in the process of running 
down. In Western religion and physics alike, we tend to 
think of all energy as expenditure and evaporation. There 
is no hope for a renewal of life beyond the end unless the 
supernatural Creator, by an act of special grace, winds things 
up again. 

But the Indian view of time is cyclic. If birth implies 
death, death implies rebirth, and likewise the destruction of 
the world implies its recreation. The Western images are 
.thus essentially tragic. Nature is a fall and its goal is death. 
There is no necessity for anything to happen beyond the 
end: only divine grace, operating outside the sphere of neces- 
sity, can redeem and restore the world. But the Indian 
imagery makes the world-drama a comedy—a sport or lila— 
in which all endings are the implicit promise of beginnings. 
Yet comedy must always depend on surprise. The burst of 
laughter is our expression of relief upon discovering that 


88 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


some threatened doom was an illusion—that “death was but 
the good King’s jest.” 

Consider a very simple but typical comedy enacted many 
years ago in a London music hall. The curtain rises upon an 
elaborately furnished bedroom. The sleeper is at once 
awakened by a shrill alarm clock. Reaching under his pillow, 
he produces a hammer and smashes it in the face. Sitting up 
in bed, he glowers at his early-Monday-morning surround- 
ings, and, hammer still in hand, slowly crawls out from the 
covers. Thereupon he proceeds, item by Victorian item, to 
smash everything in the bedroom—the bedside table, the 
flowered pitcher and basin on the washstand, the knickknacks 
on the mantel, the chocolate-colored chamber pot patterned 
with green leaves, the glass on the pictures, the windows, 
and the bed itself—leaving only a bulbous and pretentious 
floor lamp with a huge glass shade. Creeping stealthily across 
the wreckage he eyes this last and perfect object of his rage, 
very obviously designed to disintegrate with a spectacular 
explosion. Instead of smashing it with his hammer, he grasps 
it with both hands and flings it high into the air—and, falling 
to the floor, it bounces: made of rubber. 

This is the vulgar archetype of the cosmic punch line, 
the totally unexpected anticlimax which, in Hindu mythol- 
ogy, follows the terrifying tandava—the dance in which ten- 
armed Shiva, wreathed in fire, destroys the universe at the 
end of each cycle. But Shiva is simply the opposite face of 
Brahma, the Creator, so that as he tums to leave the stage 
with the world in ruin, the scene changes with his turning, 
and all things are seen to have been remade under the cover 
of their destruction. 

The polarity of Brahma and Shiva thus finds its expres- 
sion in what at times seems to be the extreme ambivalence 


The Cosmic Dance - 89 


of Hindu culture—extreme in its asceticism as in its sensu- 
ality. On the one hand, there is the goal of Yoga, the medita- 
tion-discipline: to concentrate thought so as to penetrate and 
burn away the illusion of the world. Yoga is thus man’s 
participation in the inhalation or withdrawal of the world 
breath, in the dissolution of maya, and in return to the undif- 
ferentiated unity of the Godhead. Shiva, the destructive 
aspect of Godhead, is therefore the archetypal yogi, the naked 
ascetic daubed with ashes sitting hour after hour with his 
consciousness in total stillness. On the other hand, there is 
that exuberant delight in form and flesh which is so exqui- 
sitely celebrated in Hindu dancing, music, and sculpture, 
in the marvelously refined eroticism of the Kamasutra, the 
scripture of love, as well as in the vision of the perfectly 
governed society laid out in the Arthashastra, the scripture 
of politics. One might almost say that India had set herself 
the problem of exploring these two attitudes to their 
extremes and then of finding the synthesis between them. 
This problem, stated in mythological terms, is the recur- 
rent theme of a type of popular Hindu literature known as 
the Puranas. Certainly much later than the Upanishads, these 
are texts of uncertain date,* forming a repository of myth 
and legend accumulated over many centuries. Notable in the 
Puranas is the relationship of the gods to their feminine 
.counterparts or shaktis, the feminine symbols of maya, the 
world-illusion, whereby the male god is alternatingly seduced 
and disenchanted. Originally the Godhead is hermaphroditic, 
beyond the opposites, but at the moment of creation the 


* To the continual exasperation of Western scholars, the authors of ancient 
Indian texts seem to have no sense whatsoever of history, and thus all attempts 
to date these texts are extremely vague. Manuscripts are usually late transcrip- 
tions of materials that have been memorized and handed down orally from 
one generation to another. 


90 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


feminine shakti leaps forth spontaneously, as Eve was created 
from the body of Adam while he slept. 


— The Creator, Brahma, the demiurgic, world-producing aspect 
of the Godhead, sat in serene meditation, bringing forth, from 
the enlivened depths of his own divine and all-containing sub- 
stance, the universe and its multitudes of beings. A number of 
apparitions had already sprung into the sphere of time and space 
out of the abyss of his yogic state, crystal pure visions suddenly 
precipitated into embodied form. And these were disposed 
around him in a serene circle, as he continued im his creative 
trance. .. . Brahma, sinking still further into the limpid dark- 
ness of his own interior, struck a new depth: suddenly the most 
beautiful dark woman sprang from his vision, and stood naked 
before everyone’s gaze. 

She was Dawn, and she was radiant with vivid youth. Nothing 
like her had yet appeared among the gods; nor would her equal 
ever be seen, either among men, or in the depths of the waters 
in the jeweled palaces of the serpent queens and kings. The 
billows of her blue-black hair were glistening like the feathers 
of a peacock, and her clearly curving, dark brows formed a bow 
fit for the God of Love. Her eyes, like dark lotus calyxes, had the 
alert, questioning glance of the frightened gazelle; and her face, 
round as the moon, was like a purple lotus blossom. Her swelling 
breasts with their two dark points were enough to infatuate a 
saint. Trim as the shaft of a lance stood her body, and her smooth 
legs were like the stretched-out trunks of elephants. She was 
glowing with little delicate pearls of perspiration. And when she 
found herself in the midst of her startled audience, she stared 
about at them, in uncertainty, and then broke into a softly 
rippling laugh. 

Brahma became aware of her, arose from his yogic posture, 
and fastened on her a long and earnest gaze. Then with his 
physical eyes still fixed upon her, the Creator permitted his 


The Cosmic Dance + 91 


spiritual vision to fall back again into its own profundity; and 
he searched to know .. . what the task of this apparition would 
be in the further unfoldment of the work of creation, and to 
whom she would belong.** 


And from this second absorption there sprang a magnificent 
male youth, the God of Love, with his flower-tipped bow and 
shafts. But now Brahma has produced something almost 
beyond his own control. 


> (He) remained silent for a moment, astounded by his own 
production. What had slipped from him? What was this? Then 
he gathered and constrained his consciousness, and brought his 
mind again to center. Surprise was conquered. Again in mastery, 
the World Creator addressed his remarkable creature and 
assigned to him his field. 

“You will go wandering about the earth,” he said, “striking 
bewilderment into men and women with your flower-bow and 
shafts, and in this way bring to pass the continuous creation of 
the world. No god, no heavenly spirit . . . shall be inaccessible to 
your aim. And I myself, as well as all-pervading Vishnu (the 
Preserver of the World), even Shiva, the rocklike immovable 
ascetic, steeped in his meditation, We Three, shall be given into 
your power—not to speak of other breathing existences. . . .” 

Then (Kama, the God of Love) made himself invisible. 
“Right here, and without a moment's delay,” he thought, “I 
will prove upon these holy ones, and upon the Creator himself, 
the supernal power that Brahma has assigned to me. Here they 
all stand, and here is this magnificent woman, Dawn; they shall 
be made—every one—the victims of my weapon... .” 

Having decided, he assumed the stance of an archer, notched 
a flower-arrow to the flower-string, and drew the great curve of 
the bow. Then there began to blow intoxicating breezes, heavy 
with the scents of spring flowers; and these disseminated rapture. 


92 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


From the Creator to the last of his mind-born sons, the gods then 
were set mad, one after another, by the shots of the disorderer, 
their temperaments undergoing immediately a magnitudinous 
change. They continued to stare at Dawn, the woman, but with 
altered eyes, and the spell of love increased in them. . .. They 
were all set wild together, and their senses thickened with lust. 
Indeed, the entrancement was so strong that when the Creator’s 
pure mind apprehended his daughter, . . . his awakened suscep- 
tibilities and compulsions directly opened themselves, with all 
their gestures and spontaneous physical manifestations, for the 
world to see.4® 


But suddenly there arrived in the company Shiva him- 
self, destroyer of illusions, and, seeing the Creator and his 
divine sons in their unseemly infatuation, he laughed in 
cutting contempt. 


w— “Well, well! Well, well! ... Brahma, just what is going on 
here? What has brought you to this pretty pass? The sight of your 
own daughter? But it hardly becomes the Creator to disregard the 
precepts of the Vedas: “The sister shall be as the mother, and the 
daughter as the sister!’ That is what the Vedas declare—the laws 
revealed by your own mouth; and have you forgotten all 
this, in an excess of desire? ... How did the God of Love ever do 
this to you all, indolent and destitute of discernment as he is? A 
curse on him through whose power the beauty of woman is 
made to purloin integrity, and the spirit is delivered to the billows 
of desire!” 

When Brahma heard these words, his mind immediately 
split in two: on the one hand, his original nature again asserted 
itself, but on the other, the person overcome by concupiscence 
remained. Waves of heat streamed down his limbs. A longing to 
possess the incarnation of his desire groaned in him, yet he con- 


The Cosmic Dance - 93 


quered this passionate modification of his character, and let the 
image of the woman go. At which moment, a burst of perspira- 
tion broke over his entire body, for the desire could not be 
destroyed, even though expelled. And from these drops then 
were born the so-called “Spirits of the Departed,” ... the pro- 
genitors of the human race.*® 


Stung by Shiva’s ridicule, Brahma thereupon declared 
that a time would come when Shiva, too, would be struck 
by the flower-arrow, though, at the same moment, the God 
of Love would be incinerated by the fire of Shiva’s gaze. 
However, he promised at the same time that whensoever 
Shiva should take a wife to himself, the God of Love should 
be born in a new body. The story goes on to describe how 
Kama, the God of Love, became so infatuated with Dawn 
that he forgot Brahma’s warning and set about discovering 
the abode of Shiva to involve even the Destroyer in his spell. 
Meanwhile, behind the scenes as it were, Brahma, too, is 
plotting the downfall of Shiva, realizing that he can do so only 
by evoking the ultimate embodiment of the feminine prin- 
ciple, Maha-maya, Vast Illusion—Mother of the World— 
otherwise known as Kali. 

Now in Hindu myth and iconography Kali is the most 
ambivalent of all figures (plate 2). On the one hand, she 
is the embodiment of the Terrible Mother, the Spider 
Woman, the all-devouring maw of the abyss, image of every- 
thing of which the human soul seems to be ultimately afraid. 
On the other hand, she is the Ewig Wetbliche, eternal wom- 
anhood, cherishing mother of the world, to whom that 
remarkable Hindu saint of modern times, Sri Ramakrishna, 
gave his whole life’s devotion. He loved to chant the poet 
Ramprasad’s song in her praise: 


94 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


All creation is the sport of my mad Mother Kali; 

By her maya the three worlds are bewitched. 

Mad is She and mad is her Husband; mad are her two 
disciples! 

None can describe her loveliness, her glories, gestures, 
moods; 

Shiva, with the agony of the poison in his throat, 

Chants her name again and again.47 


»— The Primordial Power is ever at play (said Ramakrishna). 
She is creating, preserving, and destroying in play, as it were. 
This Power is called Kali. Kali is verily Brahman, and Brahman 
is verily Kali. It is one and the same Reality. When we think of 
It as inactive, that is to say, not engaged in the acts of creation, 
preservation, and destruction, then we call It Brahman. But when 
It engages in these activities, then we call It Kali or Shakti. The 
Reality is one and the same; the difference is in name and form. 
... She plays in different ways. ... She is the Dispenser of boons 
and the Dispeller of fear... . She resides in the cremation ground, 
surrounded by corpses, jackals, and terrible female spirits. From 
her mouth flows a stream of blood, from her neck hangs a garland 
of human heads, and around her waist is a girdle made of human 
heads. 

After the destruction of the universe, at the end of a great 
cycle, the Divine Mother garners the seeds for the next creation. 
She is like the elderly mistress of the house, who has a hotch- 
potch-pot in which she keeps different articles for household use. 
Oh yes! Housewives have pots like that, where they keep “‘sea- 
foam,” (i.e., dried cuttlefish), blue pills, small bundles of seeds 
of cucumber, pumpkin, and gourd, and so on. They take them 
out when they want them. In the same way, after the destruction 
of the universe, my Divine Mother, the Embodiment of Brahman, 
gathers together the seeds for the next creation. After the creation 
the Primal Power dwells in the universe itself. She brings forth 
this phenomenal world and then pervades it. In the Vedas 


The Cosmic Dance - 95 


creation is likened to the spider and its web. The spider brings 
the web out of itself and then remains in it. God is the container 
of the universe and also what is contained in it. 

Is Kali, my Divine Mother, of a black complexion? She 
appears black because she is viewed from a distance; but when 
intimately known she is no longer so. The sky appears blue at 
a distance; but look at it close by and you will find that it has no 
color.*8 


All, then, is the play of this infinitely wily Mother—the good 
and the bad, the lovely and the terrible—and the twinkle in 
her eye implies the unreality of both. As Ramprasad says: 


Glory and shame, bitter and sweet, are thine alone; 

This world is nothing but thy play. 

Then why, O Blissful One, dost thou cause a rift in 
it? 

... Thou hast bestowed on me this mind, 

And with a knowing wink of thine eye 

Bidden it, at the same time, to go and enjoy the 
world.40 


This, then, was the ultimately Mysterious Feminine 
whom Brahma evoked for the beguiling of Shiva—and to 
every Hindu her image is familiar as a black and shapely 
body, four-armed, and adorned with crown and bracelets of 
gold, standing upon the prostrate form of Shiva. One right 
hand is extended in the gesture of blessing, the other of 
allaying fear. One left hand grasps a scimitar, and the other 
holds a severed head by the hair. From her mouth droops a 
long, blood-licking tongue. (One might compare the Black 
Madonnas of the West, not, however, so frank in their 
spiritual realism.) According to our story, it was not in this 


96 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


form that Shiva first saw her, for Brahma caused her to be 
born in the shape of a baby girl with the name of Sati, or 
She-Who-Is. 

Coming of marriageable age, Brahma and the gods led 
this surpassingly exquisite being before Shiva, brought up 
through all her childhood in the practice of bhakti or devo- 
tional Yoga toward him alone. As the eyes of Shiva opened 
upon her kneeling form, his heart skipped a beat for the 
minute fraction of time necessary for the God of Love to 
let fly an arrow that would reach its mark, and from that 
moment Shiva let his meditations and yogic austerities take 
care of themselves. Kali-Sati had then and there engulfed 
the whole withdrawal principle of the universe in her power. 
The Godhead could not inhale the worlds, for by the magic 
of the World Mother he had lost his breath. 

But Hindu mythology never lets anything drop into the 
“then they lived happily ever after” situation. Although 
Shiva and Sati lived in delight for 3,600 years, the day came 
when the god Daksha, Sati’s father, summoned all sentient 
beings in the world to the celebration of a great sacrifice, but 
neither Shiva nor Sati were invited because of Daksha’s con- 
tempt for Shiva’s mode of life—since he lived with Sati upon 
remote mountain peaks, and went naked and ash-smeared 
like a yogi. This would seem surprising in view of his aban- 
donment of the ascetic life for Sati, unless we bear it in mind 
that certain forms of Indian Yoga, in common with Chinese 
Taoism, employ motionless sexual union as a form of medi- 
tative discipline, and here the symbolic implication is simply 
that Shiva absorbed in sexual union with Sati represents the 
Supreme Self enchanted and enraptured with the world- 
illusion. He is not invited to the sacrifice because he has thus 


The Cosmic Dance + 97 


forgotten himself and no longer “appears” among the com- 
pany of the gods. 

Now as soon as she became aware of this insult, Sati was 
possessed with an immense rage whose depths led her to the 
recollection of her original form as Kali, the Terrible 
Mother, and at this she burst from her body, leaving Sati to 
Shiva only as a corpse. Shiva was thus aroused to such a 
paroxysm of rage and grief that he went down to the sacrificial 
assembly and spread fire and terror from one end of the 
universe to the other, putting even the gods in fear for their 
lives, until at last Brahma soothed him, saying: 


»— O thou, Yogi from before the beginning, pain does not 
become thee. The proper object of thine inward regard is the 
Light Supernal, Unmitigated Majesty. Why does that regard 
repose now on a woman? ... The same Sati who beguiled thee 
is Maya, the enchantress of the world. She takes from the unborn 
infant, while yet it lives in the mother-womb, all remembrance of 
its previous state of being; and she has similarly deluded thee, 
so that thou art racked with pain. A thousand times before hast 
thou been ravished of thy wit by Sati, and thou has lost her in 
every eon precisely as now. But just as Sati has always returned 
to thee, so wilt thou know her again as thou hast known her, and 
again cleave to her. Collect thy recollection and behold the 
thousand Satis, how they were snatched from thee by death, so 
that thou wert forsaken of them a thousand times; and then see 
how they are born again, and again attain to thee who art hardly 
accessible even to the meditations of the gods. Behold in thine 
inner vision how Sati is to be again thy bride.5° 


In Puranic literature the Hindu gods, like those of the 
Greeks, disport themselves by descending to the human con- 
dition and allowing themselves to be carried away by human 
passions. This is perhaps a way of saying that at every level of 


98 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


life—divine, human, or animal—the problem and predica- 
ment of life is the same: an eternal giving-in to the tempta- 
tion of losing control of the situation, of trusting oneself to 
chance—the passion of the gambler. Hence the words of 
Krishna in the Bhagavad-Gita, “I am the gambling of the 
cheat.”’ This goes right down to the metaphysical roots of the 
whole system—to the intuition that Paramatman, the Supreme 
Self, is always just beyond its own control of itself. In the 
words of the philosopher Shankara: 


»— Now a distinct and definite knowledge is possible in respect 
of everything capable of becoming an object of knowledge: but 
it is not possible in the case of That which cannot become such 
an object. That is Brahman, for It is the Knower, and the Knower 
can know other things, but cannot make Itself the object of Its 
own knowledge, in the same way that fire can burn other things 
but cannot burn itself. Neither can it be said that Brahman is 
able to become an object of knowledge for anything other than 
Itself, since outside Itself there is nothing which can possess 
knowledge.51 


To be an object of knowledge is to be controlled; but the 
opposite pole of the controlled is the uncontrolled controller 
—the dimension of life which is always inaccessible to itself. It 
is impossible to describe something and, at the same time, 
describe the act of describing. This is why the known forever 
implies the unknown, and the found the lost. From the 
Supreme Self to the simplest amoeba the principle and the 
problem are identical, and if it were solved life would simply 
cease. The gambling, the game, would have come to an end. 

This, then, is why the world-view of Hinduism veers now 
to the renunciation of the world and now to its affirmation, 
and why the way of the Buddha is, at one moment in history, 


The Cosmic Dance - 99 


a way of complete withdrawal from maya, the cosmic game, 
and, at another, the way of the Bodhisattva who lays aside the 
endless peace of nirvana to return into the cycle of birth-and- 
death to work for the final liberation of all “sentient beings’ — 
a task as interminable as could be imagined. Every one of 
these alternations, these swings of the pendulum, is a mani- 
festation in time, in succession, of the eternal inbreathing and 
outbreathing of the Supreme Self whereby the worlds are 
destroyed and recreated again and again forever. But beyond 
time, from the eternal standpoint of the Supreme Self, the 
two motions are simultaneous. 


»— Conceive that the “field” is the round or circus of the world, 
that the throne of the Spectator, the Universal Man, is central and 
elevated and that his aquiline glance at all times embraces the 
whole of the field (equally before and after the enactment of any 
particular event) in such manner that from his point of view all 
events are always going on. We are to transfer our consciousness 
of being, from our position in the field where the games are going 
on, to the pavilion in which the Spectator, on whom the whole 
performance depends, is seated at ease. 

Conceive that the right lines of vision by which the Spectator 
is linked to each separate performer, and along which each per- 
former might look upward (inward) to the Spectator if only his 
powers of vision sufficed, are lines of force or the strings by which 
the puppet-master moves the puppets for himself. . . . Each of 
the performing puppets is convinced of its own independent 
existence and of itself as one amongst others which it sees in its 
own immediate environment which it distinguishes by name, 
appearance and behavior. The Spectator does not, and cannot, 
see the performers as they see themselves, imperfectly, but he 
knows the being of each one of them as it really is—that is to say, 
not merely as effective in a given local position, but simultaneously 
at every point along the line of visual. force by which the puppet 


100 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


is connected with himself [the Spectator], and primarily at that 
point at which all lines converge and where the being of all 
things coincides with being in itself. There the being of the 
puppet subsists as an eternal reason in the eternal intellect— 
otherwise called the Supernal Sun, the Light of lights, Spirit and 
Truth. 

Suppose now that the Spectator goes to sleep: when he closes 
his eyes the universe disappears, to reappear only when he opens 
them again. The opening of the eyes (“Let there be light’) is 
called in religion the act of creation, but in metaphysics it is called 
manifestation, utterance, or spiration. . . : the closing of eyes is 
called in religion the “end of the world” but in metaphysics it is 
called concealment, silence, or despiration. For us, then, there is 
an alternation of evolution and involution. But for the central 
Spectator there is no succession of events. He is always awake and 
always asleep, . . . nowever.°? 


The following passage from the Vishnu Purana explains, 
too, that the Supreme Self is primordially, 7. e., eternally, 
both spirit and body, Brahma and Rudra (Shiva), male and 
female: 


»— From Brahma ... were born mind-engendered progeny, with 
forms and faculties derived from his corporeal nature; embodied 
spirits, produced from the person of that all-wise deity... . But, 
as they did not multiply themselves, Brahma created other mind- 
born sons, like himself... . But they were without desire or 
passion, inspired with holy wisdom, estranged from the universe, 
and undesirous of progeny. This when Brahma perceived, he 
was filled with wrath capable of consuming the three worlds, the 
flame of which invested, like a garland, heaven, earth, and hell. 
Then from his forehead, darkened with angry frowns, sprang 
Rudra, radiant as the noon-tide sun, fierce, and of vast bulk, and 
of a figure which was half male, half female. Separate yourself, 


The Cosmic Dance - 101 


Brahma said to him, and, having so spoken, disappeared; 
obedient to which command, Rudra became twofold, disjoining 
his male and female natures. His male being he again divided 
into eleven persons, of whom some were agreeable, some hideous; 
some fierce, some mild. And he multiplied his female nature 
manifold, of complexions black or white.53 


Brahma the Creator and Shiva the Destroyer are further 
“synthesized” in Vishnu the Preserver. But he, too, is of 
double aspect, male and female. 


b— Sri, the bride of Vishnu, the mother of the world, is eternal, 
imperishable. In like manner as he is all-pervading, so also is she 
...ommnipresent. Vishnu is meaning; she is speech. Hari (Vishnu) 
is polity; she is prudence. Vishnu is understanding; she is intellect. 
He is righteousness; she is devotion. He is the creator; she is the 
creation. Sri is the earth; Hari, the support of it. The deity is 
content; the eternal Lakshmi (Sri) is resignation. He is desire; 
Sri is wish. He is sacrifice; she is sacrificial donation... . Lakshmi 
is the light; and Hari, who is all, and lord of all, the lamp. She, 
the mother of the world, is the creeping vine; and Vishnu, the 
tree around which she clings. She is the night; the god who is 
armed with the mace and discus is the day. He, the bestower of 
blessings, is the bridegroom; the lotus-throned goddess is the 
bride. The god is one with all male, the goddess one with all 
female, rivers. The lotus-eyed deity is the standard; the goddess, 
seated on a lotus, the banner. Lakshmi is cupidity; Narayana 
(Vishnu), the master of the world, is covetousness. . . . Govinda 
(Vishnu) is love; and Lakshmi, his gentle spouse, is pleasure. But 
why thus diffusely enumerate their presence? It is enough to say, 
in a word, that of gods, animals, and men, Hari is all that is 
called male; Lakshmi is all that is termed female. There is 
nothing else than they.54 


102 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


The intuition of polarity, of the non-dual (advaita) 
principle underlying all oppositions is so deep in the Indian 
mind that Hindu-Buddhist imagery contains nothing like 
the Christian Devil, even though it has its full share of 
monstrous and terrifying beings. Mara, the tempter, and 
Yama, the presiding judge of the purgatories, are always in 
the final analysis agents or aspects of the Supreme Self or, to 
use Buddhist terminology, of one’s own mind—which is at 
root no other than the universal mind (alaya-vijnana). 

Thus there is no doubt whatever of the essential divinity 
of both combatants in the cosmic battle between Indra, King 
of the Gods, and the dragon-like Vritra, as described in the 
Mahabharata: 


»— Let us hear, O Sage, of the great dedication to virtue 
(dharma) of that immeasurably brilliant Vritra, whose wisdom 
was unequaled and devotion to Vishnu beyond account. 


And so the tale of the cosmic tournament begins: 


»— In those days the puissant chariot-riding King of Gods, sur- 
rounded by his army of celestials, saw before him the great titan, 
standing mighty as a mountain, 4500 miles tall and in girth a full 
1500. Whereupon, perceiving that prodigious form, which the 
powers of all three worlds together would have been impotent to 
undo, the entire celestial host was paralyzed with fear, and their 
leader, discerning the contour of his foe, lost the use of his limbs 
from the waist down. 

A noise of beaten drums, trumpets, and other sounding 
instruments went up on all sides, and the titan, taking notice 
of the army of the gods and its king before him, was neither 
astonished nor appalled. Nor did he feel that he would be called 
upon to make use of all his powers in this fight. 

The war commenced. And it terrified all three worlds. For 


The Cosmic Dance + 103 


the entire sky was covered with the warriors of both sides, wield- 
ing swords, javelins, dirks and axes, spears and heavy clubs, rocks 
of various size, bows of loud sound, numerous types of celestial 
weapon, fires and burning brands. And there assembled to watch, 
gathering in their best chariots, all of those blessed seers to whom 
the Vedas had in times of yore been revealed, likewise yogis fully 
realized, and heavenly musicians in their own fair cars, wherein 
were also celestial mistresses; moreover, shining above all was the 
creator and governor of the world, the great god Brahma himself. 

Then dharma-supporting Vritra deftly overwhelmed both 
the King of Gods and the entire world of air with a dense 
shower of rocks. And the gods, burning with anger, pouring a 
shower of arrows at those rocks, dissolved them. But the titan, 
mighty in his ma@ya-power as well as in his strength, completely 
stupefied the King of Gods by virtue of his maya. And when 
the god of a hundred sacrifices, numbed by that mdyd-power, 
stood without moving, the Vedic sage Vasishtha—who in con- 
templation had heard, and so composed, all the hymns of the 
seventh book of the Rig Veda—restored him to his senses by 
chanting at him Vedic verses. “You are the leader of the gods,” 
said the sage. “Within you is the power of all three worlds. Why, 
therefore, do you falter? Brahma the Creator, Vishnu the Pre- 
server, and Shiva the Destroyer of Illusion, as well as glorious, 
divine Soma, and all the Vedic seers, are watching. Do not col- 
lapse here like a mere mortal. All three of Shiva’s eyes are upon 
you. And do you not hear the Vedic saints lauding you in your 
victory with hymns?” 

Thus recalled to his senses, the god, becoming confident, 
applied himself to yoga, and so dispelled the maya by which he 
had been stupefied. Whereupon the seers, who had now been 
witness to the prowess of the titan, turned to Shiva, lord of the 
universe, in prayer. And that Great God, in response, sent his 
energy into Vritra in the form of a terrific fever. Simultaneously 
Vishnu entered Indra’s weapon. And the whole company of seers, 


104 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


turning to Indra, bade him attack his foe. The god Shiva himself 
addressed him: 

“Before you is your foe, Vritra, supported by his army: the 
very Self (dtman) of the universe, ubiquitous, and of immense 
deluding power. For 60,000 years that titan applied himself to 
severe ascetic austerities for the acquisition of this strength, until, 
in the end, Brahma was compelled to grant the boons he wished. 
And these were the greatest to be gained by yoga, namely, the 
power of creating illusions at will, unconquerable force, and 
energy without end. However, I am now committing to you my 
energy and force. Therefore, with yoga to assist you, slay the 
enemy with your bolt.” 

Said the King of Gods: “O Greatest God, before thy blessed 
eyes, endowed with the boon of thy grace, I shall now, with this 
my thunderbolt, slay that invincible son of the mother of demons.” 

And the gods and all the saints, seeing the enemy struck with 
that fever, raised a roar of great joy. Rolling drums, kettle drums, 
conchs and trumpets, thousands upon thousands, everywhere 
began to beat and blow. The demons lost their wits. Their powers 
of delusion left them. And the form that the King of Gods then 
assumed, on the point of the great moment of his victory, seated 
in his car, amid the shouts of acclaim of the Vedic seers, was such 
that none could look at it without fear. 

But let us tell, first, of the stricken titan. When he had been 
filled with that burning fever, his immense mouth gave forth a 
blast of flame. His color disappeared. Everywhere he trembled, he 
could scarcely breathe, and each hair on his body stood erect. His 
mind came out through his jaws in the shape of an evil, hideous 
jackal, and meteors burst blazing from his sides, both right and 
left. 

And the King of Gods, praised and worshiped by the gods, 
handling his bolt, watched the monster,. who, when he had 
been ravished by that fever, yawned wide with a great howl; 
and while his great mouth was open still the god let fly into it his 
bolt, filled with no less energy than the fire that consumes the 


The Cosmic Dance + 105 


universe at the end of a cosmic cycle, which blasted Vritra 
prodigiously, forthwith. The gods were in ecstasy. And the King 
of Gods, recovering his bolt, made away in haste in his chariot 
toward the sky. 

But that heinous crime, Brahmanicide, dreadful, ominous, 
striking fear into all the worlds, came forth from the body of the 
murdered titan with teeth projecting terribly, of an aspect furi- 
ously contorted, tawny and black, with disheveled hair, appall- 
ing eyes, and a garland of skulls around her neck, bathed in blood, 
clad in rags and in the bark of trees. And she went after the 
master of the bolt, overtook his chariot, seized him, and from that 
moment Brahmanicide was stuck to him. Terrified, he fled into 
a lotus stalk, where he stayed for years with it clinging to him 
still, trying every way to be quit of her. But all his attempts were 
in vain until, at last, with that fiend still attached, the miserable 
King of Gods approached in obeisance Brahma the Creator, who, 
knowing the crime, commenced to ponder the question of how 
the King of Gods might be set free.>® 


The battle here described between the angels of light 
and darkness, deva and ashura, is—for all its thunders—very 
different in spirit from the War in Heaven as we find it in the 
Christian apocalypses and in Milton, where the demonic 
power is felt to be absolutely and irredeemably bad. But 
here Vritra is simply the dark, obverse form of “‘the very Self 
(atman) of the universe,’ and in defeating him Indra involves 
himself in the guilt of Brahmanicide—priest murder, here 
symbolizing rather the murder of the Godhead in its unrec- 
ognized form. 

One of the best sources for an understanding of the 
function of the dark or demonic aspect of divinity in Hindu- 
Buddhist mythology is a curious work known as the Bardo 
Thédol, or the Tibetan Book of the Dead, a text which may 
be as early as the seventh or eighth century A.D. Based, no 


106 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


doubt, upon the ideas of Indian Tantric Buddhism, this 
document describes the various states of consciousness which 
are supposed to follow the moment of death, filling the inter- 
mediate period between death and rebirth. These comprise 
a series of visions, beatific and then horrendous, whereby the 
spiritual attainment of the departed is tested. To the spirit- 
ually immature person, the beatific visions are so poignant 
and unbearable that he slips away to sights which, though at 
first more tempting, turn out to be increasingly appalling, so 
that at last he has to seek refuge from them by fleeing to a 
maternal womb from which he is again born into the world. 
The book is cast in the form of a liturgy or ritual addressed to 
the departed immediately after his decease. The first vision 
following death is of the Clear Light of reality itself, of the 
“void” or undifferentiated consciousness which underlies all 
being, knowledge, and perception. 


»— O nobly-born (so-and-so) , listen. Now thou art experiencing 
the Radiance of the Clear Light of Pure Reality. Recognize it. 
O nobly-born, thy present intellect, in real nature void, not 
formed into anything as regards characteristics or colour, natu- 
rally void, is the very Reality, the All-Good. 

Thine own intellect, which is now voidness, yet not to be 
regarded as of the voidness of nothingness, but as being the intel- 
lect itself, unobstructed, shining, thrilling, and blissful, is the very 
consciousness, the All-good Buddha. 

Thine own consciousness, not formed into anything, in real- 
ity void, and the intellect, shining and blissful,—these two,—are 
inseparable. The union of them is the Dharma-Kaya* state of 
Perfect Enlightenment. 

Thine own consciousness, shining, void, and inseparable 


* The Dharma-kaya is the first and most fundamental of the so-called Tri- 
kaya, or Three Bodies of Buddha, where “Buddha” refers not to the historic 


The Cosmic Dance - 107 


from the Great Body of Radiance, hath no birth, nor death, and 
is the Immutable Light—Buddha Amitabha.* 

Knowing this is sufficient. Recognizing the voidness of thine 
own intellect to be Buddhahood, and looking upon it as being 
thine own consciousness, is to keep thyself in the [state of the] 
divine mind of the Buddha.... 

O nobly-born, when thy body and mind were separating, 
thou must have experienced a glimpse of the Pure Truth, subtle, 
sparkling, bright, dazzling, glorious, and radiantly awsome, in 
appearance like a mirage moving across a landscape in spring- 
time in one continuous stream of vibrations. Be not daunted 
thereby, nor terrified, nor awed. That is the radiance of thine 
own true nature. Recognize it. 

From the midst of that radiance, the natural sound of 
Reality, reverberating like a thousand thunders simultaneously 
sounding, will come. That is the natural sound of thine own 
real self. Be not daunted thereby, nor terrified, nor awed. 

The body which thou hast now is called the thought-body of 
propensities. Since thou hast not a material body of flesh and 
blood, whatever may come,—sounds, lights, or rays,—are, all three, 
unable to harm thee: thou art incapable of dying. It is quite 
sufficient for thee to know that these apparitions are thine own 
thought-forms. Recognize this to be the Bardo. 

O nobly-born, if thou dost not now recognize thine own 
thought-forms, whatever of meditation or of devotion thou mayst 


Buddha, Gautama, but to the Buddha-nature, the transcendental consciousness 
underlying the universe. The word Buddha is basically a title, designating one 
who has awakened to the true nature of the world, but it also comes to mean 
the reality to which such a one is awakened. The other two Bodies (kaya) are 
termed the Sambhoga-kaya and the Nirmana-kaya, and thus the three refer 
to the following aspects of the transcendental consciousness: (1) its original 
and undivided essence, (2) its blissful, joyous, and hence playful propensity, 
which gives rise to (3) the apparent division of itself into all the variations of 
individual form. 

* Amitabha, Immutable or Boundless Light, is one of the five Dhyani 
Buddhas, i.e., Buddhas dwelling above and beyond the manifested world and 
Tepresenting the five aspects of the supramundane order which correspond to 
the five elements of the mundane order—space, air, fire, water, and earth. 


108 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


have performed while in the human world—if thou hast not met 
with this present teaching—the lights will daunt thee, the sounds 
will awe thee, and the rays will terrify thee. Shouldst thou not 
know this all-important key to the teachings,—not being able to 
recognize the sounds, lights, and rays,—thou wilt have to wander 
in the Sangsara.*56 

If the departed is not endowed with sufficient insight to 
become absorbed into the vision of the Clear Light, then and 
there attaining nirvana, he finds its radiance intolerable and 
is next exposed in succession to its beatific and horrendous 
aspects. First comes the beatific: 


»— Then, from the Central Realm, called the Spreading Forth 
of the Seed, the Bhagavan Vairochana, white in colour, and 
seated upon a lion-throne, bearing an eight-spoked wheel in his 
hand, and embraced by the Mother of the Space of Heaven, will 
manifest himself to thee. 

It is the aggregate of matter resolved into its primordial state 
which is the blue light. 

The Wisdom of the Dharma-Dhatu,t blue in colour, shin- 
ing, transparent, glorious, dazzling, from the heart of Vairochana 
as the Father-Mother, will shoot forth and strike against thee 
with a light so radiant that thou wilt scarcely be able to look at it. 

Along with it, there will also shine a dull white light from 
the devas,§ which will strike against thee in thy front. 

Thereupon, because of the power of bad karma,|| the 


® Sangsara or samsara is the wheel or round of birth-and-death through 
which all sentient beings wander again and again until they are awakened by 
becoming aware of their identity with the transcendental Buddha-conscous- 
ness, i.e., by attaining nirvana. 

+ Bhagavan (the Lord) Vairochana is another of the five Dhyani Buddhas, 
usually given the supreme or central position. He is here described as appear- 
ing with his shakti, or feminine counterpart, Mother of the Space of Heaven, 
because Vairochana corresponds to the mundane element of space (akasha). 

t The Dharma-dhatu designates the whole universe as a realm (dhatu) in 
which all things and events are mutually interdependent and interpenetrating 


The Cosmic Dance - 109 


glorious blue light of the Wisdom of the Dharma-Dhatu will 
produce in thee fear and terror, and thou wilt [wish to] flee 
from it. Thou wilt beget a fondness for the dull white light of 
the devas. 

At this stage, thou must not be awed by the divine blue light 
which will appear shining, dazzling, and glorious; and be not 
startled by it. That is the light of the Tathagata* called the 
Light of the Wisdom of the Dharma-Dhatu. Put thy faith in it, 
believe in it firmly, and pray unto it, thinking in thy mind that 
it is the light proceeding from the heart of the Bhagavan Vairo- 
chana coming to receive thee while in the dangerous ambuscade 
of the Bardo.t That light is the light of the grace of Vairochana. 

Be not fond of the dull white light of the devas. Be not 
attached [to it]; be not weak. If thou be attached to it, thou wilt 
wander into the abodes of the devas and be drawn into the whirl 
of the Six Lokas.t That is an interruption to obstruct thee on 
the Path of Liberation. Look not at it. Look at the bright light in 
deep faith.57 

But for the person who flees from the light of the 


like a net of jewels, in which each jewel carries the reflection of all the others, 
and of all the reflections in all the others. See below, pp. 221-235. 

§ Devas are best translated as “angels” rather than “gods.” They represent 
the height of delight and success possible of attainment in samsara, the round 
of birth-and-death, but because samsara is a round the situation of the devas 
is impermanent, and must in due course give place to its opposite. 

|| Karma (lit., “doing”) is action leading necessarily to further involvement 
in action, and thus action in the pattern of a vicious circle (samsara). Often 
it is somewhat misleadingly translated as “cause-and-effect,” the principle 
whereby good and bad deeds have their appropriate results, leading to good 
and bad situations upon the round of birth-and-death. 

* Tathagata (he who goes or comes “thus”) is a title often applied to 
Buddhas because they see the universe in its true state or ‘“‘thus’’-ness (tathata). 
Hindu and Buddhist philosophy use the word tat (that) or tatha (thus or 
such) to indicate reality without describing or qualifying it, to refer to the 
realm of reality as non-verbal or unutterable and so beyond the verbal classi- 
fications of “being” or ‘‘non-being,” “eternal” or “temporal,” etc. 

+ The Bardo is the world of the dead, i.e., the interval between death and 
rebirth. 

t The six lokas (worlds) are the six divisions of samsara, the wheel, i.e., of 
humanity, of the devas, of the asuras (wrathful angels), of animals, of the 
purgatories, and of the frustrated ghosts (pretas). 


110 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


beatific aspect of the Buddhas there now follows the wrathful 
or horrendous aspect. A Tibetan painting of such beings (plate 
3) displays figures which the Westerner would at once identify 
as demons or devils, but the text assures the departed that 
they are only ‘‘the former Peaceful Deities in changed aspect.” 
Here is plainly stated what, west of Persia and the Urals, is 
for the most part hidden or barely hinted—Demon est deus 
inversus, the Devil is God inverted: the two are the One 
seen from opposite points of view. The beatific vision, or the 
Clear Light itself, is terrifying to whoever would retain his 
separateness, and to retain separateness, to cling to egocentric 
existence, is only to intensify terror—which in fact is no other 
than the spasm of clinging. But the beatific and the hor- 
rendous must alike ‘“‘be recognized to be the emanations of 
one’s own intellect.” For maya, the world-illusion, is generated 
by the power of thinking, of being able to divide the universe 
into named and classified segments called things and events— 
segments which thereupon appear to be isolated and inde- 
pendent. The vision of totality, of the universe as the one 
body of the Dharma-kaya, is lost, and in its place comes the 
vision of multiplicity, magnificent in its variety and terrifying 
in its discordance. For ‘there is nothing either good or bad 
but thinking makes it so.” The text therefore continues: 


»— Therefore, after the cessation [of the dawning] of the Peace- 
ful and the Knowledge-Holding Deities, who come to welcome 
one, the fifty-eight flame-enhaloed, wrathful, blood-drinking 
deities come to dawn, who are only the former Peaceful Deities in 
changed aspect—according to the place [or psychic-centre of the 
Bardo-body of the deceased whence they proceed]; nevertheless, 
they will not resemble them. ... 

O nobly-born, the Great Glorious Buddha-Heruka, dark- 
brown of colour; with three heads, six hands, and four feet firmly 


The Cosmic Dance - 111 


postured; the right [face] being white, the left, red, the central, 
dark-brown; the body emitting flames of radiance; the nine eyes 
widely opened, in terrifying gaze; the eyebrows quivering like 
lightning; the protruding teeth glistening and set over one 
another; giving vent to sonorous utterances of ‘a-la-la’ and ‘ha.ha’, 
and piercing whistling sounds; the hair of a reddish-yellow colour, 
standing on end, and emitting radiance; the heads adorned with 
dried [human] skulls, and the [symbols of the] sun and moon; 
black serpents and raw [human] heads forming a garland for the 
body; the first of the right hands holding a wheel, the middle one, 
a sword, the last one, a battle-axe; the first of the left hands, a 
bell, the middle one, a skull-bowl, the last one, a plough-share; 
his body embraced by the Mother, Buddha-Krotishaurima, her 
right hand clinging to his neck and her left putting to his mouth 
a red shell [filled with blood], [making] a palatal sound like a 
crackling [and] a clashing sound, and a rumbling sound as loud 
as thunder; [emanating from the two deities] radiant flames of 
wisdom, blazing from every hair-pore [of the body] and each 
containing a flaming dorje;* [the two deities together thus], 
standing with [one] leg bent and [the other] straight and tense, 
on a dais supported by horned eagles, will come forth from 
within thine own brain and shine vividly upon thee. Fear that 
not. Be not awed. Know it to be the embodiment of thine own 
intellect. As it is thine own tutelary deity, be not terrified. Be not 
afraid, for in reality it is the Bhagavan Vairochana, the Father- 
Mother. Simultaneously with the recognition, liberation will be 
obtained. ... 

O nobly-born, the Peaceful Deities emanate from the Void- 
ness of the Dharma-Kaya; recognize them. From the Radiance 
of the Dharma-Kdadya emanate the Wrathful Deities; recognize 
them. 

At this time when the Fifty-eight Blood-Drinking Deities 


*Dorje (Sanskrit, vajra) is the symbolic adamantine thunderbolt, emblem 
of wisdom and its power. It is represented as an object the size of a small 
dumbbell with claws of flame upon either end. 


112 « THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


emanating from thine own brain come to shine upon thee, if thou 
knowest them to be the radiances of thine own intellect, thou 
wilt merge, in the state of at-one-ment, into the body of the Blood- 
Drinking Ones there and then, and obtain Buddhahood. 

O nobly-born, by not recognizing now, and by fleeing from 
the deities out of fear, again sufferings will come to overpower 
thee. If this be not known, fear being begotten of the Blood-Drink. 
ing Deities, [one is] awed and terrified and fainteth away: one’s 
own thought-forms turn into illusory appearances, and one 
wandereth into the Sangsara; if one be not awed and terrified, 
one will not wander into the Sangsara. 

Furthermore, the bodies of the largest of the Peaceful and 
Wrathful Deities are equal [in vastness] to the limits of the 
heavens; the intermediate, as big as Mt. Meru;* the smallest, 
equal to eighteen bodies such as thine own body, set one upon 
another. Be not terrified at that; be not awed. If all existing 
phenomena shining forth as divine shapes and radiances be 
recognized to be the emanations of one’s own intellect, Buddha- 
hood will be obtained at that very instant of recognition.5® 

We leave, now, the realms of myth in which there is an 
explicit recognition of the basic unity of the light and dark 
forces. Curiously, as we move Westward this recognition 
becomes increasingly implicit, at times vanishing altogether 
into a mythology of total conflict wherein the two forces are 
implacable and perpetual enemies. 


*In Hindu-Buddhist mythology Meru corresponds roughly to the Greek 
Olympus, the central mountain of the world, uniting heaven and earth. 


op) 
pe 
(2) 
o 
= 
OC 
pe 
ea 
oe) 
= 
= 
(2) 
an 
- 


S ioting rivalry is probably just as usual as broth- 

erly love. But the importance of the symbol of 
conflict between brothers is that it keeps harmony and con- 
flict in balance. The basic tie between the opposites is not 
entirely submerged, even though it may somehow aggravate 
the bitterness of the battle. Yet however acrimonious the 
conflict may be, it is impossible to disown one’s own blood 
completely. Thus in a number of mythologies the opposition 
between light and darkness, good and evil, is represented as 
a rivalry between brothers, sometimes unresolved, though 
sometimes culminating in the redemption of that brother 
who stands for the side of the shadow. 

Today the mythology of ancient Egypt seems bewilder- 
ing and remote—a complex and chaotic polytheism without 
the unifying philosophy of Hinduism, a multitude of images 
emerging from a vast span of time so distant from our own 
that it is hard for us to realize how much history and how 
much variety it contains. Nevertheless, a relatively late docu- 
ment* gives us one of the most remarkable versions of this 


* The Chester Beatty Papyrus, No. 1. 


Is 


116 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


fraternal combat upon the cosmic scale. Strictly speaking, 
Horus and Set are not brothers but nephew and uncle, Set 
being the brother of Horus’ mother, Isis. However, they are 
frequently described as brothers in the texts, since Horus 
stands for the sky by day and Set for the sky by night, Horus 
for the northern division of Egypt and Set for the southern, 
and thus it may be assumed that the stories of their contests 
represent both cosmic and political rivalries. 

Horus, son of Osiris and Isis, has the hawk form which 
allies him with Ra, god of the sun and one of the many forms 
of the Egyptian creator of the world. Set is usually depicted 
with the head of a doglike creature, perhaps a saluki, upon 
a human body. He is the son of the sky-goddess Nut and true 
brother of Osiris, but, as we shall see, Horus is in some sense 
a reincarnation of his father and always stands toward Set as 
equal and opposite. The story begins with Horus as a boy 
petitioning the Nine Gods for the right to occupy his father’s 
throne. The council of the gods is presided over by Neb-er- 
djer, the Lord Without Limit, otherwise known as Ra 
Harakhti, or Ra ‘‘Horus-of-the-two-horizons,’’ another of the 
many forms of the creator god.* Horus’ petition is enthusias- 
tically supported by Isis, his mother, and by Thoth, the god 
of wisdom, but their enthusiastic haste to reach a decision in 
favor of Horus displeases Neb-er-djer, the president, at which 
point Set asks to be allowed to settle the matter by duel. 
After much indecision, haggling, and intrigue, the Nine Gods 
meet on the Western Delta of the Nile and command that the 
White Crown be set on the head of Horus, and that he be 


* Since the text here is late and also of a slightly humorous and disrespect- 
ful attitude, the various gods appear as separate personalities without regard 
to the anachronism involved. For example, the creator god, known at different 
times and places under different names and symbols, appears here in al] guises 
at once. 


The Two Brothers + 117 


established in the office of his father Osiris. But Set cries out 
in fury, “Is the office to be given to my young brother whilst 
I, his elder brother, am in being?’’* It is at this point that 
the president gives permission for a duel. 


»— And Set proposed to Horus that each of them should trans- 
form himself into a hippopotamus, and then cast himself into the 
sea, and that he who came out of the water before the end of 
three months was ipso facto disqualified from the office of Osiris. 
So each took the form of a hippopotamus and entered the sea. 
Then Isis began to weep saying: ‘Set hath killed my son Horus’, 
and she set to work to find a means of saving him. She fetched a 
hank of flax (or fibre?) and plaited (or twisted) it into a rope. 
And she fetched a lump of copper [weighing] a teben, and she 
beat and moulded it into a marine weapon, and having tied the 
rope to it she hurled it into the water at the place where Horus 
and Set had entered the sea. The harpoon struck Horus, and he 
cried out to Isis to make it drop from him; and Isis did so. A 
second time she hurled the harpoon, and this time it struck Set, 
and he cried out to Isis as his maternal sister to make the harpoon 
drop from him. Isis was sorry for him, and when Set entreated her 
not to bear enmity against her maternal brother, she commanded 
the harpoon to drop from his body, and it did so forthwith. Then 
Horus was wroth with Isis, and he became like a panther of the 
Sidan. He had his axe in his hand [now it weighed sixteen 
eben], and he hacked off the head of his mother Isis, and clasp- 
ing it to his bosom he went up into a mountain. Forthwith Isis 
transformed herself into a flint statue which had no head. Seeing 
this, Ra Harakhti said to Thoth, ‘What is this headless thing 
which hath come?’ and Thoth told him that it was Isis, the 
mother of Horus, who had hacked off her head. Ra Harakhti 
cried out with a loud voice to the Nine Gods, saying, ‘Let us 


* We shall note the recurrent theme of the advantage going to the younger 
brother. 


118 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


hasten and punish him severely,’ and he and the Nine Gods went 
up into the mountains to seek for Horus, the son of Isis. 

Now behold Horus was lying down under a tree with dense 
foliage in the country of Uahet ... There Set found him and 
he seized him, and he threw him upon his back on the stony 
ground. He gouged out his two Udjats (i.e. eyes) from their 
sockets, and he fastened them on the stony ground to light up 
the earth, and the rims (literally, the outsides) of his two eyes 
became two balls (?) skharer-t, and they grew (or sprouted) into 
lotuses. Then Set went back and lied to Ra Harakhti, saying ‘I 
could not find Horus.’ 

The goddess Hathor* having, presumably, knowledge of 
what had happened, went and found Horus lying on the stony 
ground weeping. She caught a gazelle and milked it, and told 
Horus to open his eyes so that she might pour in milk. At her 
command Horus opened his eyes, first the right and then the 
left, and when she looked at them she found that Horus had 
recovered his sight. She went to Ra Harakhti and told him that 
she had found Horus whose eyes Set had carried away, and that 
she had restored them, and added, ‘Behold, he hath come.’ There- 
upon the Nine Gods ordered that Horus and Set be cited to 
appear that sentence may be passed on them. When they appeared 
before the Nine Gods Neb-er-djer addressed Horus and Set, say- 
ing, ‘O get ye gone, and let there be heard by you what I am about 
to say to you: Eat ye, drink ye, [but] we would be at peace. Stop 
ye from the contention in which ye indulge every day.’ Then Set 
suggested that they should pass a happy time together (i.e. keep 
a feast) in his house, and Horus said unto him, ‘Assuredly I will 
do so; of course I will’; and the two went to Set’s house. When 


* Hathor or Sekhmet is a goddess usually shown with the head of a cow 
surmounted by the lunar disk between the horns. The name Hathor is het- 
hor, i.e., “the house of Horus'’’—designating the eastern sky. In the fabulous 
muddle of Egyptian theology, she is the wife of Ra and mother of Horus, and 
thus perhaps an early form of Isis. 


The Two Brothers - 119 


evening came a diwdn, or couch, was prepared for them to sleep 
on, and the two laid themselves down on it. 

During the night Set became excited sexually and attempted 
to violate Horus and failed because Horus caught the efflux of 
Set in one of his hands. Horus went to Isis and showed her his 
hand and its contents, and seizing her knife she hacked off the 
polluted hand of Horus and threw it into the water, and then 
fashioned a hand for him as useful as that which she had cut off. 
Then she fetched some sweet smelling unguent and smeared the 
phallus of Horus with it. This she made to swell up, and when 
she had placed it in a vessel Horus made his emission to fall into 
it. In the morning Isis took the efflux of Horus and went to the 
garden of Set, and asked the gardener which plant Set was in the 
habit of eating as an aphrodisiac. The gardner replied that 
the only herb there under his charge which Set ate was the 4b-t, 
which some believe to have been a kind of lettuce. 

Then Isis poured the efflux of Horus over these plants, and 
Set came day by day according to his wont, and ate them; the 
text adds the astonishing remark that Set became with child by 
the seed of Horus.* 

Then Set went and told Horus that he wished to go into 
Court and plead against him, and as Horus was willing they both 
went and stood before the Nine Gods, who straightway ordered 
them to make their pleadings. Set stood up and claimed the office 
of Osiris because he had performed on Horus, who was there 
present, the deed of the victorious warrior (i.e. he claimed to 
have violated Horus). The Nine Gods believed his lie and 
retched and spat in (or in front of) the face of Horus. Horus 
laughed at them, and then swore an oath by God that what Set 


* “This, of course, means that Set was believed to be a bisexual god like 
Temu or Ra. The allusion to pregnancy caused by swallowing mentioned in 
the Tale of the Two Brothers does not help us, for the person who swallowed 
the two splinters of wood was a woman who could conceive and not a man 
who could not.”—Comment by A. Gardiner. 


120 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


had said was a lie. And he demanded that the seed of Set and 
his own seed should be summoned as witnesses, so that they might 
see from whence each seed would respond. On this Thoth laid 
his hand on the arm of Horus, saying, ‘Come forth, O seed of Set’, 
and it made answer to him from the water in the marsh. Then 
Thoth laid his hand on the arm of Set, and he said, ‘Come forth, 
O seed of Horus.’ The seed answered, ‘Where shall I come forth?’ 
and Thoth said, ‘From his ear.’ The seed said, ‘Must I, being a 
divine essence, come forth from his ear?’ And Thoth said, ‘Come 
forth from the crown of his head.’ And it came forth as a Disk of 
Gold (i.e. the solar disk) on the head of Set. At this Set was 
wroth and he reached out his hand to lay hold on the Gold Disk, 
but Thoth snatched it away from him and set it as a diadem 
upon his own head. 

The Nine Gods who had been watching these acts decided 
that Horus was in the right and Set in the wrong, and when 
they delivered their judgement according to their opinion Set 
raged, and he swore an oath and refused to accept it until he 
had made another attempt to defeat Horus. 


The contest continues until at last the Nine Gods 
decide to write a letter to Osiris himself in his remote king- 
dom of the Tuat or Underworld. Osiris replies in favor of 
Horus, and warns the Nine Gods that all their power derives 
ultimately from himself. And the narrative proceeds: 


mw [Many days] after these happenings the letter of Osiris 
reached the place where Neb-er-djer was with the Nine Gods, 
and Thoth read it before them. When they had heard it they 
said, Osiris is in the right. But Set petitioned to be allowed to 
have one more fight, and when it had taken place on the island 
mentioned above Horus was declared to be the victor, and Set 
was made a prisoner by Isis. Atem* ordered Isis to bring Set 


The Two Brothers « 121 


before him, and when she did so he asked Set why he had 
refused to accept the judgement of the gods and had seized the 
office of Osiris. Set replied that such was not the fact, and he 
agreed that Horus should have his father’s office. Horus was 
brought forthwith, and the White Crown was placed on his head, 
and he was set in the place of Osiris. The gods acclaimed him as 
the good king of Ta-mera (Egypt), and the good lord of every 
land for ever. Isis rejoiced at the triumph of her son. Then Ptaht 
asked what was to be done to Set, and Ra Harakhti decreed 
that Set should live with him and be as a son to him, and that 
his occupation would be to thunder in the heavens and terrify 
men. The gods told Ra Harakhti that Horus had become 
governor, and he rejoiced and he ordered the Nine Gods to 
‘rejoice down to the ground’ before Horus, the son of Isis. Isis 
said, ‘Horus standeth as Heq (i.e. the hereditary Governor of 
Egypt), the Nine Gods celebrate a festival, heaven rejoiceth,’ 
Forthwith they placed garlands of flowers on their heads. The 
Nine Gods and all the earth were content when they saw Horus, 
the son of Osiris of Tetu, made Governor.®® 


Note that the story ends without any punishment for 
Set. On the contrary, the Supreme Sun, Ra Harakhti, adopts 
him and puts him in charge of the thunder. After all, Ra 
Harakhti=Neb-er-djer=Ptah=Osiris, each having in the 
course of Egyptian history done duty as the Lord and Creator 
of the Universe. It is thus as if Horus were the right hand and 
Set the left of the Supreme Being, dispensing mercy in one 
direction and wrath in the other. Egyptian iconography gives 
us several examples of a Horus-Set figure with the two heads 
upon one and the same body: 


* Atem or Temu is the divine personification of the setting sun. 


+ Ptah is one of the earliest forms of the creator god, usually represented 
in human form as a divine craftsman. 


122 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


Fic. 6—After Lanzone, Dizionario di mitologia egiziana. Torino, 1881-1886. 
Pl. 378, 2. 


It is also noteworthy that Set becomes pregnant by Horus, 
giving birth to the solar disk through the crown of his head. 
Connected or unconnected, there is a comparable symbolism 
in Kundalini-yoga where the individual is liberated by pass- 
ing out through the crown of the head in the form of a 
flame, and the aperture in the skull is taken as the micro- 


The Two Brothers - 123 


cosmic counterpart of the Sun door in the dome of the 
heavens—that is, the point at which the light of the Godhead 
shines through the firmament. 

Next is a version of the two-brothers theme from the 
literature of Jainism, an Indian philosophy or “way of libera- 
tion” astonishingly akin to primitive Buddhism in doctrine, 
mythology, and period of origin, approximately 526 B.C., 
though Jaina legends take it back much earlier. The follow- 
ing story concerns the successive incarnations of the Lord 
Parsva, who is supposed to have attained the rank of Tir- 
thankara in 772 B.C. The Jaina conception of a Tirthankara 
is closely similar to the idea of a Buddha, namely the man 
who is in nirvana, the state of liberation from maya—the 
cosmic illusion. But Jainism veers even more than primitive 
Buddhism to the negative, world-denying pole of Indian 
spirituality, and thus it is hard to see how the Jaina nirvana 
differs from total extinction. But this need not concern us in 
the following sequence of myths:* 

During the course of his many incarnations, the one 
who is to become the great Tirthankara, Parsva, has always 
an evil brother who seems to grow in vice in proportion to 
Parshva’s growth in virtue. 


»— The enmity between the two is represented as having begun 
in their ninth incarnation before the last. They had been born, 
that time, as the sons of Visvabhiti, the prime minister of a 
certain prehistoric king named Aravinda. And it so happened that 
their father, one day thinking: “Transitory surely is this world,’ 
went away on the path of emancipation, leaving his wife behind 


* Retold by Heinrich Zimmer and Joseph Campbell. Zimmer’s notes left no 
clue to the original source of this material. It is very similar to a version of the 
story found in Bhavadevasuri’s Parshvanatha Caritra, but this has not been 
translated fully into English. 


124 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


with the two sons and a great store of wealth. The elder son, 
Kamatha, was passionate and crafty, whereas the younger, 
Marubhiti, was eminently virtuous (the latter, of course, being 
the one who is to be ParSvanatha in their final birth), and so 
when their king one time had to leave his kingdom on a cam- 
paign against a distant enemy, he committed the safety of the 
palace not to the elder brother but to the younger, Marubhuti; 
and the elder, in sinful anger, then seduced his brother’s wife. 
The adultery being discovered, the king when he retumed asked 
Marubhiti what the punishment should be. The future Tirthan- 
kara advised forgiveness. But the king, commanding that the 
adulterer’s face should be painted black, had him seated, facing 
backwards, on an ass, conducted through the capital, and expelled 
from the realm. 

Deprived thus of honor, home, property, and family, 
Kamatha devoted himself in the wilderness to the most extreme 
austerities, not in a humble spirit of renunciation or contrition, 
but with the intent to acquire superhuman, demonic powers 
with which to win revenge. When Marubhtti was apprised of 
these penances, he thought that his brother had at last become 
purified, and therefore, in spite of the warnings of the king, 
paid him a visit, thinking to invite him home. He discovered 
Kamatha standing—as had been his custom day and night—hold- 
ing on his upstretched hands a great slab of stone, overcoming 
by that painful exercise the normal states of human weakness. 
But when the future Tirthankara bowed in obeisance at his feet, 
the terrible hermit, beholding this gesture of conciliation, was so 
filled with rage that he flung down the great stone on Maru- 
bhiti’s head, killing him as he bowed. The ascetics of the penance- 
grove, from whom the monster had learned his techniques of 
self-affliction, expelled him immediately from their company, 
and he sought refuge among a wild tribe of Bhils. He became a 
highwayman and murderer, and in due course died, following a 
life of crime.... 

Though both Kamatha and Marubhiti have died, this death 


The Two Brothers - 125 


is not to be the end of their adventure. The good king Aravinda, 
whom Marubhiti had served as minister, was moved, following 
the death of his officer, to abandon the world and take up the 
life of a hermit; the cause of his decision being a comparatively 
insignificant incident. Always pious, he was planning to build 
a Jaina sanctuary, when one day he beheld floating in the sky a 
cloud that looked like a majestic, slowly moving temple. Watch- 
ing this with rapt attention, he became inspired with the idea of 
constructing his place of worship in just that form. So he sent in 
haste for brushes and paints with which to set it down; but when 
he turned again, the form had already changed. A weird thought 
then occurred to him. ‘Is the world,’ he mused, ‘but a series of 
such passing states? Why then should I call anything my own? 
What is the good of continuing in this career of king?’ He sum- 
moned his son, installed him on the throne, and departed from 
the kingdom, became an aimless mendicant, and wandered from 
one wilderness to the next. 

And so he chanced, one day, upon a great assemblage of 
saints in the depths of a certain forest, engaged in various forms 
of meditation. He joined their company, and had not been long 
among them when a mighty elephant, running mad, entered the 
grove—a dangerous event that sent most of the hermits to the 
four directions. Aravinda, however, remained standing rigidly, 
in a profound state of contemplation. The elephant, rushing 
about, presently came directly before the meditating king, but 
instead of trampling him, became suddenly calm when it per- 
ceived his absolute immobility. Lowering its trunk it went down 
on its great front knees in obeisance. ‘Why are you continuing 
in acts of injury?’ the voice of Aravinda then was heard to ask. 
‘There is no greater sin than that of injuring other beings. Your 
incarnation in this form is the result of demerits acquired at the 
moment of your violent death. Give up these sinful acts; begin to 
practice vows; a happy state will then stand in store for you.’ 

The clarified vision of the contemplative had perceived that 
the elephant was his former minister, Marubhiti. Owing to the 


126 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


violence of the death and the distressing thoughts that had been 
harbored in the instant of pain, the formerly pious man was now 
in this inferior and rabid incarnation. His name was Vajraghosa, 
“Thundering Voice of the Lightning,’ and his mate was the former 
wife of his adulterous brother. Hearing the voice of the king 
whom he had served, he recalled his recent human life, took the 
vows of a hermit, received religious instruction at the feet of 
Aravinda, and determined to commit no further acts of nuisance. 
Thenceforward the mighty beast ate but a modicum of grass— 
only enough to keep its body and soul together; and this saintly 
diet, together with a program of austerities, brought it down so 
much in weight that it became very quiet and emaciated. Never- 
theless, it never relaxed, even for a moment, from its devout 
contemplation of the Tirthankaras, those ‘Exalted Ones’ (para- 
mesthins) now serene at the zenith of the universe. 

Vajraghosa, from time to time, would go to the bank of a 
nearby river to quench his thirst, and on one of these occasions 
was killed by an immense serpent. This was his former brother, 
the perennial antagonist of his career, who, having expired in 
deep iniquity, had been reincarnated in this malignant form. 
The very sight of the saintly pachyderm proceeding piously to 
the river stirred the old spirit of revenge, and the serpent struck. 
Its deadly poison ran like fire through the loose and heavy skin. 
But in spite of terrific pain, Vajraghosa did not forget his hermit 
vows. He died the death called ‘the peaceful death of absolute 
renunciation,’ and was born immediately in the twelfth heaven 
as the god Sasi-prabha, ‘Splendor of the Moon.’ . 

‘Splendor of the Moon,’ the happy deity, dwelt amidst the 
abundant pleasures of his heaven for sixteen oceans (sagaras) 
of time, yet did not relapse even there from the regular practice 
of pious acts. He was reborn, therefore, as a fortunate prince 
named Agnivega (‘Strength of Fire’), who, on the death of his 
father, ascended the throne of his domain. 

One day a homeless sage appeared, asking to converse with 
the young king, and he discoursed on the way of liberation. 


The Two Brothers - 127 


Immediately Agnivega experienced an awakening of the religious 
sense, and the world abruptly lost its charm for him. He 
joined his teacher’s monastic following and through the regular 
practice of graduated penances diminished within himself both 
his attachment and his aversion to worldly things, until at last 
all was supplanted by a sublime indifference. Then he retired to 
a cave in the high Himalayas and there, steeped in the pro- 
foundest contemplation, lost all consciousness of the external 
‘world—but while in this state was again sharply bitten by a 
snake. The poison burned; but he did not lose his peaceful 
equilibrium. He welcomed death, and expired in a spiritual 
attitude of sublime submission. 

The serpent, of course, was again the usual enemy, who, 
following his murder of the elephant, had descended to the fifth 
hell where the sufferings for a period of sixteen oceans of time 
had been indescribable. Then he had returned to the earth, still 
in the form of a snake, and at the sight of Agnivega committed 
again his characteristic sin. The hermit-king, at the very moment 
,of his death, was elevated to the status of a god—this time for a 
period of twenty-two oceans of years; but the serpent descended 
to the sixth hell, where its torments were even greater than in 
the fifth.... 

Queen Laksmivati, the pure and lovely consort of a certain 
king named Vajravirya (‘Having the Hero-Power of the Thunder- 
bolt’), dreamt in one night five auspicious dreams, from which 
her husband deduced that some god was about to descend to 
become his son. Within the yedr she gave birth to a boy, and on 
his beautiful little body were found the sixty-four auspicious 
signs of the Cakravartin.* He was named Vajranabha (‘Diamond 
Navel’), became proficient in every branch of learning, and in due 
time began to rule the realm. The world wheel (cakra) lay 


*Cakravartin is literally ‘tone who turns the wheel” and is applied cither to 
a universal monarch or to a great sage, such as a Buddha or Tirthankara, 
because he sets in motion the wheel of the dharma, the doctrine and method 
of liberation. 


128 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


among the weapons in his royal treasury in the form of a discus 
of irresistible force; and he conquered the four quarters ‘of the 
earth with this weapon, compelling all other kings to bow their 
heads before his throne. He also acquired the fourteen super- 
natural jewels that are the marks of the glory of the Cakravartin. 
And yet, surrounded though he was by supreme splendor, he did 
not forget for so much as a day the precepts of morality, but 
continued in his worship of the Tirthankaras and of the living 
Jaina preceptors—fasting, praying, practicing vows, and perforn- 
ing numerous acts of mercy. A hermit whose name was Kseman- 
kara therefore came to court; and the Cakravartin, hearing the 
holy man’s delectable words, was released from his last attach- 
ment to the world. He renounced his throne and wealth, and 
departed to practice holy penances in the wilderness, absolutely 
fearless of the howls of the elephants, jackals, and forest goblins. 

But his old enemy had returmed to the world, this time as a 
Bhil, a wild tribesman of the jungle. And in due course the savage 
hunter chanced upon the place of the meditating former Cakra- 
vartin. The sight of the saintly being in meditation aroused again 
the ancient hatred. The Bhil remembered his last human incar- 
nation, became fired with a passion for revenge, notched his 
keenest arrow to the bowstring, aimed, and let fly. Vajranabha 
died peacefully—absolutely unperturbed. And so he ascended to 
one of the very highest celestial spheres—the so-called Madhya- 
gratveyaka heaven, which is situated in the middle (madhya) of 
the neck (griva) of the human-shaped world-organism—and there 
he became an Aham-Indra (“I am Indra”); whereas the Bhil, 
when he died, since he was full of vile and sinful thoughts, 
descended to the seventh hell—again for a period of indescribable 
pain. 

On a supremely auspicious night, the lovely Queen Vama 
dreamt fourteen auspicious dreams, and the moment King 
Asvasena was informed of them he understood that his son would 
be a savior—either a Cakravartin or a Tirthankara,... 

When the son was born the thrones of all the Indras trem- 


The Two Brothers + 129 


bled, and the gods understood that the Lord had seen the light of 
day. With pomp they descended for the celebration of the Second 
Kalyana, ‘the salutary event of the Savior’s birth’.... 

Now Parsva’s maternal grandfather was a king named Mahi- 
pala, who, when his wife died, became so disconsolate that he 
renounced his throne and retired to the wilderness to practice 
the severest disciplines known to the penitential groves. There 
was, however, no real spirit of renunciation in this passionate 
man. He was an example of that archaic type of cruel asceticism 
—self-centered though directed to lofty ends—which the Jaina 
ideal of compassion and self-renunciation was intended to super- 
sede. With matted locks and deerskin loincloth, full of passion 
and the darkness of ignorance, storing tremendous energies 
through self-inflicted sufferings, Mahipala moved from forest to 
forest, until one day he was in the neighborhood of Benares, 
practicing a particularly arduous spiritual exercise known as the 
penance of the ‘Five Fires.’ It was here that he was accidentally 
encountered by the grandson, the beautiful child of his lovely 
daughter Vama. 

The boy came riding on an elephant, surrounded by the 
playmates with whom he had entered the jungle; and when the 
lively company broke upon the grim solitude of the passion- 
ridden old hermit among the fires, Mahipala was beside himself. 
He cried out to the prince, whom he immediately recognized: 
‘Am I not your mother’s father? Was I not born of an illustrious 
family, and have I not given up all to betake myself to the 
wilderness? Am I not an anchorite, practicing here the severest 
possible penances? What a proud little fellow you are, not to 
greet me with a proper salutation!’ 

Parsva and the company halted in amazement. 

The old man then got up and seized an ax, which he pre- 
pared to bring down on a huge piece of timber—no doubt to 
work off something of his temper, but ostensibly to cut fuel for 
his great system of fires. But the boy shouted to make him stop; 


130 « THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


then explained: “There are dwelling in that log a serpent and his 
mate: do not murder them for nothing.’ 

Mahipala’s state of mind was not improved by this peremp- 
tory advice. He turned and demanded with searing scorn: ‘And 
who are you? Brahma? Visnu? Siva? I perceive that you can see 
everything, no matter where.’ He raised his ax and deliberately 
brought it down. The log was split. And there were the two 
serpents, cut in half. 

The boy's heart bled when he beheld the writhing, dying 
creatures. ‘Do you not feel compassion?’ he demanded of the old 
man. ‘Grandfather, you are without knowledge. These austerities 
of yours are absolutely worthless.’ 

Mahipala, at that, lost all control. ‘I see, I see, I see!’ he 
cried. ‘You are a sage, a very great sage. But I am your grand- 
father. Besides, I am a hermit. I practice the penance of the Five 
Fires. I stand for days on one leg with lifted arms. I suffer hunger; 
thirst; break my fast only with dry leaves. Surely it is proper that 
a youngster, such as you, should call the austerities of his grand- 
father fruitless and unwise!’ 

The little prince answered firmly, but in a sweet and wonder- 
fully gentle tone. “The spirit of envy,’ he said, ‘infects all of your 
practices; and you are killing animals here every day with your 
fires. To injure others, even if only a little, is to be guilty of a 
great sin; but great suffering is the consequence even of a little 
sin. Such practices as yours, divorced as they are from right knowl- 
edge, are as barren as chaff separated from grain. Give up this 
meaningless self-torture; follow the way of the Tirthankaras and 
perform right acts, in right faith and right knowledge: for that 
is the only road to emancipation.’ 

The Lord Parsva then chanted a hymn to the dying serpents 
and they expired to his presence calmly. He returned to his 
palace and they—following such a meritorious death—were 
immediately reborn in the underworld: the male was now 
Dharanendra, ‘Lord of the Earth’ (the cosmic snake, Sesa, who 


The Two Brothers - 131 


supports the earth on his head), and the female, Padmavarti (the 
goddess Laksmi). They enjoyed unbounded delight. 

Crotchety old Mahipala, it must now be told, was none other 
than the wicked brother. As a lion, he had slain and eaten the 
savior at the end of his previous incarnation, and in consequence 
had been hurled to the sufferings of the fifth hell, where he had 
remained for a period of seventeen oceans of time. After that, 
for a period of three oceans of time, he had passed through a 
number of incarnations in the forms of quadrupeds, during the 
last of which he performed certain meritorious acts, and in reward 
he was reborn as this old rufhan. But the words of the grandson 
bore no fruit. The hermit continued in his unproductive prac- 
tices, and at last expired. 

The prince grew to young manhood, and when he arrived 
at the age of sixteen his father wished to procure for him a bride, 
but the youth rejected the idea. ‘My life,’ he said, ‘is not to be 
as long as that of the first Tirthankara, the Lord Rsabha; for I am 
to live to be only one hundred. Sixteen of my short years have 
already been whiled away in boyish play, whereas in my 
thirtieth I am to enter the Order. Should I marry for a period 
so brief, in the hope of knowing a few pleasures, which, after all, 
are but imperfect?’ 

The king understood. His son was preparing for the Great 
Renunciation; all efforts to restrain him would be in vain... 

The future Tirthankara thereupon entered the “Twelve 
Meditations’ and perceived that the chain of existences is without 
beginning, as well as painful and impure, and that the self is 
its own only friend.... 

The great goal, however, was not to be attained without 
further event; for the antagonist had yet to deal his final stroke. 
One day, while the Savior was standing perfectly still, erect, 
absorbed in meditation, the car of a god of the luminary order, 
Samvara by name, was stopped abruptly in its airy course—for not 
even a god can cut through the radiance of a saint of Parsva’s 
magnitude, absorbed in meditation. Samvara, since he has clair- 


132 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


voyant knowledge, realized what had occurred; but then, sud- 
denly, he knew that the saint was Parsvanatha. 

Now the personage in the chariot was the antagonist again— 
this time in the form of a minor deity, in consequence of powers 
gained by the penances of old Mahipala. The annoyed god 
determined, therefore, to resume his ancient battle, making use 
this time of the supernatural forces that he commanded. And so 
he brought down a dense and terrible darkness and conjured up 
a howling cyclone. Trees splintered and hurtled through the air. 
The earth was rent, opening with a roar, and the high peaks fell, 
shattering to dust; a torrential rain descended. Yet the saint 
remained unmoved, serene, absolutely lost in nis meditation. 
The god, exceedingly wrathful, became as hideous as he could: 
face black, mouth vomiting fire, and he was like the god of death, 
garlanded with a necklace of human heads. When he rushed at 
Parsva, gleaming in the night, he fiercely shouted, ‘Kill! Kill!’ 
but the saint never stirred. 

The whole subterranean domain of the serpent supporting 
the earth began to tremble, and the great Dharanendra, ‘King 
of Earth,’ said to his consort, the goddess Padmavarti: “That 
compassionate Lord to whose sweet teachings at the time of our 
death we owe our present splendor is in danger.’ The two came 
up, made obeisance to the Lord, who remained unaware of the 
arrival, and stationing themselves at either side of him, lifting 
their prodigious forms, spread out their hoods, so that not a drop 
of the torrent touched his body. The apparitions were so large 
and terrifying that the god Samvara tumed in his chariot and 
fled. 

Parsva then broke the fetters of his karma one by one, and 
became absorbed in the White Contemplation, by which even 
the last and slightest traces of the human desire for advantage 
are dissolved. During the auspicious fourteenth day of the waning 
moon in the month of Caitra (March-April), the last of the sixty- 
three ties associated with the four modes of destructive karma 
broke, and the universal savior gained pure omniscience. He had 


The Two Brothers - 133 


entered the thirteenth stage of psychical development: he was 
‘emancipated though embodied.’* From that instant, every par- 
ticle of the universe was within the purview of his mind. 

His chief apostle, Svayambhu, prayed respectfully that the 
Tirthankara should teach the world, and the gods prepared an 
assembly hall of twelve parts, which was named the ‘Flocking 
Together’ (samavasarana), in which there was an allotted place 
for every species of being. The multitudes that came were 
tremendous. And to all without distinction—quite in contrast to 
the way of the Brahmans—the compassionate Lord Parsva gave 
his purifying instruction. His voice was a mysteriously divine 
sound. The highest Indra desired him to preach the true religion 
even to the most distant parts of India, and he consented to do so. 
Wherever he went a ‘Flocking Together’ was erected, and it was 
immediately filled. 

Samvara thought: ‘Is the Lord then truly such an unfailing 
source of happiness and peace?’ He came to one of the vast halls 
and listened. Parsva was teaching. And all at once the spirit of 
hostility that had persisted through the incarnations was 
appeased. Overwhelmed with remorse, Samvara flung himself at 
the feet of Parsvanatha with a cry. And the Tirthankara, inex- 
haustible in his kindness, gave consolation to the one who from 
birth to birth had been his foe. Samvara’s mind, by his brother’s 
grace, opened to right vision; he was placed on the way to libera- 
tion. Along with him, seven hundred and fifty ascetics who had 
been stiff-necked in their devotion to cruel penances—which, 
according to Jaina view, are useless—gave up their futile practices 
and adopted the faith of the Tirthankara.® 


Once again, the story has a happy ending, but only in 
the moment of Parsva’s final liberation—comparable, perhaps, 


* The six ty-three ties, the four modes of karina, and the thirteenth stage of 
development are all technical terms associated with the Jaina disciplines of 
meditation, designed to eradicate the desire to go on living, or, as I would 
rather put it, to eradicate the compulsive necessity to go on living. These 
technicalities are numbered as an aid to memory in the times before writing. 


134 +» THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


to the coronation of Horus as Osiris. The sense is obviously 
that the implicit unity of the opposites is visible only from 
the throne of God, whose transcendental viewpoint is that 
of the Good which contains good-and-evil. 

Several examples of the two-brothers theme are found in 
the Bible, notably the stories of Cain and Abel (Genesis 4: 
1-16) and of Esau and Jacob (Genesis 25: 23-26, 27: 1-41). 
These versions should be so familiar that it is, perhaps, bet- 
ter to present at least one of them in its greatly enriched 
haggadah form—embellished, that is, with the haggadah or 
legends which have accumulated around the original tale 
during the course of many centuries. Here follows, then, the 
story of Cain and Abel, constructed by the marvelous Jewish 
scholar Louis Ginzberg from haggadah found in both rab- 
binical and patristic writings. 


h— Wickedness came into the world with the first being born 
of woman, Cain, the oldest son of Adam. When God bestowed 
Paradise upon the first pair of mankind, He warned them par- 
ticularly against carnal intercourse with each other. But after the 
fall of Eve, Satan, in the guise of the serpent, approached her, 
and the fruit of their union was Cain, the ancestor of all the 
impious generations that were rebellious toward God, and rose 
up against Him. Cain’s descent from Satan, who is the angel 
Samael, was revealed in his seraphic appearance. At his birth, the 
exclamation was wrung from Eve, ‘I have gotten a man through 
an angel of the Lord.’... : 

Immediately her son was born, a radiant figure. A little while 
and the babe stood upon his feet, ran off, and returned holding 
in his hands a stalk of straw, which he gave to his mother. For this 
reason he was named Cain, the Hebrew word for a stalk of straw. 

Now Adam took Eve and the boy to his home in the east. 
God sent him various kinds of seeds by the hand of the angel 


ne, 


The Last Judgme 


0: 


PLATE 


Hi 
ily |: 


of Hell. 


Kang 


Y, 


». Lucife 


1¢ 


PLATE. 


PLATE 11. Saintly Throng in form of a rose. 


. ae fae 
— ri \ is es Ah f 
i : fd ae " ‘ / 

— ye ve ‘ ahd Mae ee & 

as aye er - x 4 = “Oye 
ae 


PLATE 12, Vision of Throne of God. 


PLATE 13. St. Michael. 


PLATE 14. The Cross as Tree of Life. 


PLATE 15. fndian Tree of Life. 


PLATE 16. Vishnu on a serpent. 


The Two Brothers - 135 


Michael, and he was taught how to cultivate the ground and 
make it yield produce and fruits, to sustain himself and his family 
and his posterity. 

After a while, Eve bore her second son, whom she named 
Abel, because, she said, he was born but to die. 

The slaying of Abel by Cain did not come as a wholly 
unexpected event to his parents. In a dream Eve had seen the 
blood of Abel flow into the mouth of Cain, who drank it with 
avidity, though his brother entreated him not to take all. When 
she told her dream to Adam, he said, lamenting, ‘O that this may 
not portend the death of Abel at the hand of Cain!’ He separated 
the two lads, assigning to each an abode of his own, and to each 
he taught a different occupation. Cain became a tiller on the 
ground, and Abel a keeper of sheep. It was all in vain. In spite 
of these precautions, Cain slew his brother. 

His hostility toward Abel had more than one reason. It began 
when God had respect unto the offering of Abel, and accepted it 
by sending heavenly fire down to consume it, while the offering 
of Cain was rejected. They brought their sacrifices on the four- 
teenth day of Nisan, at the instance of their father, who had 
spoken thus to his sons: “This is the day on which, in times to 
come, Israel will offer sacrifices. Therefore, do ye, too, bring 
sacrifices to your Creator on this day, that He may take pleasure 
in you.’ The place of offering which they chose was the spot 
whereon the altar of the Temple at Jerusalem stood later. Abel 
selected the best of his flocks for his sacrifice, but Cain ate his meal 
first, and after he had satisfied his appetite, he offered unto God 
what was left over, a few grains of flax seed. As though his offense 
had not been great enough in offering unto God fruit of the 
ground which had been cursed by God! What wonder that his 
sacrifice was not received with favor! Besides, a chastisement was 
inflicted upon him. His face turned black as smoke. Nevertheless, 
his disposition underwent no change, even when God spoke to 
him thus: ‘If thou wilt amend thy ways, thy guilt will be for- 
given thee; if not, thou wilt be delivered into the power of the 


136 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


evil inclination. It coucheth at the door of thy heart, yet it 
depends upon thee whether thou shalt be master over it, or it 
shall be master over thee.’ 

Cain thought he had been wronged, and a dispute followed 
between him and Abel. ‘I believed,’ he said, ‘that the world was 
created through goodness, but I see that good deeds bear no fruit. 
God rules the world with arbitrary power, else why had He respect 
unto thy offering, and not unto mine also?’ Abel opposed him; he 
maintained that God rewards good deeds, without having respect 
unto persons. If his sacrifice had been accepted graciously by God, 
and Cain’s not, it was because his deeds were good, and his 
brother’s wicked. 

But this was not the only cause of Cain’s hatred toward Abel. 
Partly love for a woman brought about the crime. To ensure the 
propagation of the human race, a girl, destined to be his wife, was 
born together with each of the sons of Adam. Abel’s twin sister 
was of exquisite beauty, and Cain desired her. Therefore he was 
constantly brooding over ways and means of ridding himself of 
his brother. 

The opportunity presented itself ere long. One day a sheep 
belonging to Abel tramped over a field which had been planted by 
Cain. In a rage, the latter called out, ‘What right hast thou to 
live upon my land and let thy sheep pasture yonder?’ Abel 
retorted: ‘What right hast thou to use the products of my sheep, 
to make garments for thyself from their wool? If thou wilt take 
off the wool of my sheep wherein thou are arrayed, and wilt pay 
me for the flesh of the flocks, which thou hast eaten, then I will 
quit thy land as thou desirest, and fly into the air, if I can do it.’ 
Cain thereupon said, ‘And if I were to kill thee, who is there to 
demand thy blood of me?’ Abel replied: ‘God, who brought us 
into the world, will avenge me. He will require my blood at thine 
hand, if thou shouldst slay me. God is the Judge, who will visit 
their wicked deeds upon the wicked, and their evil deeds upon 
the evil. Shouldst thou slay me, God. will know thy secret, and He 
will deal out punishment unto thee.’ 


The Two Brothers - 137 


These words but added to the anger of Cain, and he threw 
himself upon his brother. Abel was stronger than he, and he would 
have got the worst of it, but at the last moment he begged for 
mercy, and the gentle Abel released his hold upon him. Scarcely 
did he feel himself free; when he turned against Abel once more, 
and slew him. So true is the saying, ‘Do the evil no good, lest evil 
fall upon thee.’... 

Questioned by God, ‘Where is Abel thy brother?’ Cain 
answered: ‘Am I my brother’s keeper? Thou art He who holdest 
watch over all creatures, and yet Thou demandest account of mel 
True, I slew him, but Thou didst create the evil inclination in me. 
Thou guardest all things; why, then, didst Thou permit me to 
slay him? Thou didst Thyself slay him, for hadst Thou looked 
with a favorable countenance toward my offering as toward his, 
I had had no reason for envying him, and I had not slain him.’ 
But God said, “The voice of thy brother’s blood issuing from his 
many wounds crieth out against thee, and likewise the blood of 
all the pious who might have sprung from the loins of Abel.’... 

In the obduracy of his heart, Cain spake: ‘O Lord of the 
world! Are there informers who denounce men before Thee? 
My parents are the only living human beings, and they know 
naught of my deed. Thou abidest in the heavens, and how 
shouldst Thou know what things happen on earth?’ God said in 
reply: “Thou fool! I carry the whole world. I have made it, and I 
will bear it’—a reply that gave Cain the opportunity of feigning 
repentance. “Thou bearest the whole world,’ he said, ‘and my sin 
Thou canst not bear? Verily, mine iniquity is too great to be 
borne! Yet, yesterday Thou didst banish my father from Thy 
presence, today Thou dost banish me. In sooth, it will be said, it 
is Thy way to banish.’ 

Although this was but dissimulation, and not true repent- 
ance, yet God granted Cain pardon, and removed the half of his 
chastisement from him. Originally, the decree had condemned 
him to be a fugitive and a wanderer on the earth. Now he was no 
longer to roam about forever, but a fugitive he was to remain. 


138 +» THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


And so much was hard enough to have to suffer, for the earth 
quaked under Cain, and all the animals, the wild and the tame, 
among them the accursed serpent, gathered together and essayed 
to devour him in order to avenge the innocent blood of Abel. 
Finally Cain could bear it no longer, and, breaking out in tears, 
he cried: ‘Whither shall I go from Thy spirit? Or whither shall 
I flee from Thy presence?’ To protect him from the onslaught 
of the beasts, God inscribed one letter of His Holy Name upon 
his forehead, and furthermore He addressed the animals: ‘Cain’s 
punishment shall not be like unto the punishment of future 
murderers. He has shed blood, but there was none to give him 
instruction. Henceforth, however, he who slays another shall 
himself be slain.’ Then God gave him the dog as a protection 
against the wild beasts, and to mark him as a sinner, he afflicted 
him with leprosy. .. . 

The crime committed by Cain had baneful consequences, 
not for himself alone, but for the whole of nature also. Before, 
the fruits which the earth bore unto him when he tilled the 
ground had tasted like the fruits of Paradise. Now his labor 
produced naught but thorns and thistles. The ground changed 
and deteriorated at the very moment of Abel's violent end. The 
trees and the plants in the part of the earth whereon the victim 
lived refused to yield their fruits, on account of their grief over 
him, and only at the birth of Seth those that grew in the portion 
belonging to Abel began to flourish and bear again. But never 
did they resume their former powers. While, before, the vine 
had bome nine hundred and twenty-six different varieties of 
fruit, it now brought forth but one kind. And so it was with all 
other species. They will regain their pristine powers only in the 
world to come.®! 


Though Cain is described as the offspring of Satan, or 
Sammael, and is also a murderer and a deceiver, the Lord’s 
treatment of him—in both the scriptural and haggadah ver- 


The Two Brothers - 139 


sions of the tale—is at once just and merciful. Also, Cain 
has the nerve to argue with the Lord, and the Lord is not yet 
so bereft-of humor as to strike him dead or cast him forthwith 
into hell. For in his mythological forrn the Lord God is still 
human. It is only when the image of God becomes abstract, 
that is to say theological and ethical, that he begins to turn 
into a monster. From the human standpoint, the purely good 
is aS monstrous as the purely evil. It is in this way that the 
human standpoint is the “image” of the divine and transcen- 
dental standpoint, beyond the opposites. 

When and where do we get the beginnings of the myth 
in which this transcendental viewpoint is absent? Not, I 
believe, in Judaic literature until about 170 B.C., the approx- 
imate date of that part of the apocryphal Book of Enoch 
which specifically refers to the everlasting punishment of the 
evil ones.* In the canonical Hebrew and Christian scriptures 
certain sayings of Jesus may perhaps be interpreted in this 
way, though his version of the two-brothers theme—the 
parable of the Prodigal Son—ends with reconciliation. It is in 
the Apocalypse of St. John (about 100 A.D.) that Satan is 
first clearly rejected with an enmity which is metaphysical— 
final, implacable, and eternal. 

It seems that the first real instance of the total irrecon- 
cilability of the brothers is in early Zoroastrian literature, 
which will take us back to the sixth century B.C. It will be 
noted that our first text here, taken from the Zoroastrian 
gathas, refers to the principle of goodness and light by the 

* The passage is Enoch 27: 2-3. “Then Uricl, one of the holy angels who 
was with me, answered and said: “This accursed valley is for those who are 
accursed for ever: here shall all the accursed be gathered together who utter 
with their lips against the Lord unseemly words and of his glory speak hard 
things. Here shall they be gathered together, and here shall be their place of 


judgement. Jn the last days there shall be upon them the spectacle of righteous 
judgement in the presence of the righteous for ever.’ "62 


140 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


name Ahura, which is obviously the Iranian form of the 
Aryan (Sanskrit) ashura, designating the wrathful, titanic 
angels who fought with the angels of light (deva). Probably 
as a consequence of war between the two peoples, the 
terminology has been inverted. So far as we know, the Aryan 
and Iranian traditions have a common Indo-European source, 
but it is apparent that when the latter was reformed by the 
prophet Zoroaster (c. sixth century B.C.) there was a funda- 
mental departure from the basic Aryan and Hindu concep- 
tion of light and darkness, good and evil as aspects of a 
common, non-dual principle. 


»— 1. Now will I proclaim to those who will hear the things 
that the understanding man should remember, for hymns unto 
Ahura and prayers to Good Thought; also the felicity that is with 
the heavenly lights, which through Right shall be beheld by 
him who wisely thinks. 

2. Hear with your ears the best things; look upon them with 
clear-seeing thought, for decision between the two Beliefs, each 
man for himself before the Great Consummation, bethinking 
you that it be accomplished to our pleasure. 

g. Now the two primal Spirits, who revealed themselves in 
vision as Twins, are the Better and the Bad in thought and word 
and action. And between these two the wise once chose aright, 
the foolish not so. 

4. And when these twain Spirits came together in the begin- 
ning, they established Life and Not-Life, and that at the last the 
Worst Existence shall be to the followers of the Lie, but the 
Best Thought to him that follows Right. 

5. Of these twain Spirits he that followed the Lie chose 
doing the worst things; the holiest Spirit chose Right, he that 
clothes him with the massy heavens as a garment. So likewise 
they that are fain to please Ahura Mazdah by dutiful actions. 

6. Between these twain the demons also chose not aright, for 


The Two Brothers - 141 


infatuation came upon them as they took counsel together, so 
that they chose the Worst Thought. Then they rushed together 
to Violence, that they might enfeeble the world of man. 

7. And to him (i.e. mankind) came Dominion, Good 
Thought, and Right; and Piety gave continued life of their 
bodies and indestructibility, so that by thy retributions through 
the (molten) metal he may gain the prize over those others. 

8. So when there cometh the punishment of these evil ones, 
then, O Mazdah, at thy command shall Good Thought establish 
the Dominion in the Consummation, for those who deliver the 
Lie, O Ahura, into the hands of Right. 

g. So may we be those that make this world advance! O 
Mazdah, and ye other Ahuras, gather together the Assembly, and 
thou too the Right, that thoughts may meet where Wisdom is 
at home. 

10. Then truly on the Lie shall come the destruction of 
delight; but they that get them good names shall be partakers 
in the promised reward in the fair abode of Good Thought, of 
Mazdah, and of Right. 

11. If, O ye mortals, ye mark those commandments that 
Mazdah hath ordained—of happiness and pain, the long punish- 
ment for the liars, and blessings for the righteous—then hereafter 
shall ye have bliss.® 


The only hint here that there is still something in 
common between the two principles is the reference in verse 
3 to their being twins. For an elaboration of this theme we 
must turn to the heterodox Zoroastrian literature of the 
Zurvanites, though even here is no hint of the ultimate 
reconciliation of the warring pair, Ohrmazd (Ahura Mazda) 
and Ahriman. But the Zurvanite doctrine seems to express 
the utter unthinkability of the two coming into being without 
some common root. 


142 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


h»— Except Time all other things are created. Time is the creator; 
and Time has no limit, neither top nor bottom. It has always 
been and shall be for evermore. No sensible person will say 
whence Time has come. In spite‘of all the grandeur that sur- 
rounded it, there was no one to call it creator; for it had not 
brought forth creation. Then it created fire and water; and when 
it had brought them together, Ohrmazd came into existence, and 
simultaneously Time became Creator and Lord with regard to 
the creation it has brought forth. Ohrmazd was bright, pure, 
sweet-smelling, and beneficent, and had power over all good 
things. Then, when he looked down, he saw Ahriman ninety-six 
thousand parasangs away, black, foul, stinking, and maleficent; 
and it appeared fearful to Ohrmazd, for he was a frightful 
enemy.® 


“Time” here is Zurvan—the perfectly neutral, amoral 
origin of things. Another text develops the origin of the 
twins from Zurvan in much more graphic detail: 


»— When absolutely nothing as yet existed, neither heaven, nor 
earth, nor other creatures such as might be in heaven or upon 
earth—there was one named Zurvan, which may be rendered 
‘fate’ or ‘fortune.’ For a thousand years he had offered sacrifice 
that he might perhaps have a son who would be named Ohrmazd, 
and who would make the heavens and the earth and all that they 
contain. He had thus offered sacrifice for a thousand years when 
he began to reflect, saying: ‘Of what good use is this sacrifice 
which I am offering? Shall I have a son, Ohrmazd? Or do I make 
these efforts in vain?’ And as soon as he had reflected thus, 
Ohrmazd and Ahriman were conceived in the womb of their 
mother: Ohrinazd by virtue of the offered sacrifice, and Ahriman 
by virtue of the aforesaid doubt. Then therefore, having taken 
account of this, Zurvan said: ‘Behold, there are two sons in the 
womb, and the one of them, whichever he may be, who comes to 
me the sooner, him will I make king.’ 


The Two Brothers + 143 


Ohmmazd, knowing the intentions of their father, revealed 
them to Ahriman, saying: ‘Zurvan our father has planned that 
whichever of us comes to him the sooner shall be made king.’ 
Ahriman having heard this pierced through the womb, came 
forth, and presented himself before his father.* 

And Zurvan, having seen him, knew not who he might be 
and asked, ‘You, who are you?’ And he answered, ‘I am your son.’ 
Zurvan said to him, ‘My son is sweet smelling and radiant, and 
you, you are benighted and stinking.’ And when they had 
exchanged these words, Ohrmazd was born at his time, radiant 
and sweet smelling, and came and presented himself before 
Zurvan. And, having seen him, Zurvan knew that this was his 
son Ohrmazd for whom he had offered sacrifice. And taking the 
barsomy which he held in his hand and with which he had offered 
sacrifice, he gave it to Ohrmazd saying, ‘Until now it is I who 
have offered sacrifice for you; henceforth it is you who will 
offer it for me.’ 

And as soon as Zurvan had given the barsom to Ohrmazd 
and blessed him, Ahriman came before Zurvan and said to him, 
‘Have you not, made the following vow: Whichever of my two 
sons comes to me the first, him I will make king?’ And Zurvan, so 
as not to violate his word, said to Ahriman, ‘O false and malicious 
one, the kingdom shall be accorded to you for nine thousand 
years, but Ohrmazd I shall make king above you; and after nine 
thousand years Ohrmazd shall reign, and he shall do all that 
he wishes.’ 

Thereupon Ohmrmazd and Ahriman set themselves to the 
making of creatures. And all that Ohrmazd created was good and 
right, but whatever Ahriman made was evil and twisted.® 


The peculiar interest of this story is that the respon- 
sibility for the birth of the evil one, Ahriman, is in no way 
* Thus forcing himself into the position of the older and, again, inauspi- 


cious brother. 
+A bundle of twigs, being the scepter of high priesthood. 


144» THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


shifted to the unnamed female counterpart of Zurvan who 
becomes the mother of the twins. The source of Ahriman is 
Zurvan’s failure of nerve, his doubt in the power. of his own 
sacrifice, which should here be understood in the sense of a 
magical ritual as distinct from an offering to some still higher 
power. In this respect the Iranian myth is strangely in agree- 
ment with Chinese and Japanese (Zen) Buddhism where the 
prime evil of ‘‘worldly attachment” is essentially to be under- 
stood as hesitation, doubt, blocking, or general ‘‘stickiness” in 
action. 

Another instance of a sort of hidden or sub-rosa unity 
between Ohnnazd and Ahriman is the text in which they 
collaborate in the creation of the sun and moon: 


»— He [Ohrmazd] created heaven and earth and the divers 
natures that are between them in the beauty and fairness, in 
which we see the world. But they were in darkness, and there 
was no light in them. And he was grieved, and consulted Satan 
[Ahriman] therein: and he counselled him to have intercourse 
with his mother. And he did so and had intercourse with her: 
and she conceived and bore the Sun as a light for the day. And 
(he also counselled him) to have intercourse with his sister. And 
he did so and had intercourse with her: and she conceived and 
bore the Moon as a light for the night.® 


And finally one quotation from a text in which Zurvan 
strikes a bargain with Ahriman, and suggests that if he can 
get the world to love him and hate Ohrinazd, he will have 
demonstrated the ‘‘one principle, that the increaser and 
destroyer are the same.” 


— When first creation began to move and Zurvan for the sake 
of movement brought that form, the black and ashen garment 
to Ahriman, (he made) a treaty in this wise, “This is that imple- 


The Two Brothers - 145 


ment like unto fire, blazing, harassing all creatures, that hath 
the very substance of Az.* When the period of nine thousand 
years comes to an end, if thou hast not perfectly fulfilled that 
which thou didst threaten in the beginning, that thou wouldst 
bring all material existence to hate Ohrmazd and to love thee— 
and verily this is the belief in the one principle, that the increaser 
and destroyer are the samet—then by means of these weapons 
Az will devour that which is thine, thy creation; and she herself 
will starve; for she will no longer obtain food from the creatures 
‘of Ohrmazd-—like unto a frog that liveth in the-water; so long 
as it defileth the water, it liveth by it, but when the water is 
withdrawn from it, it dieth parched.’67 


This is not the place to delineate the channels through 
which Zoroastrian dualism with its complex angelologies 
and demonologies has so powerfully influenced the develop- 
ment of both Judaism and, even more, Christianity—despite 
the strongest theoretical opposition of the two latter religions 
to the dualistic principle. But from the beginning of the fifth 
century B.C., the fall of Babylon to the Persians, to the end 
of the Crusades, the Mediterranean and European worlds” 
were exposed to this influence in many different ways— 
through its infiltration of Greek religion, of Jewish apocalyp- 
tic literature, of Gnostic theologies, and through such daugh- 
ter, cults as Mithraism, Manichaeism, and Catharism. It 
should be remembered that one of the most important mold- 
ers of Western Catholicism, St. Augustine of Hippo, was at 
firsta Manichaean. 

When we look at comparative dates and the successions 
of political hegemony and economic power in the ancient 
Near East, it seems more and more probable that Zoroastrian- 


* The principle of disorder and concupiscence. 
¢ Italics mine—A.W.W. 


146 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


ism was, at the very least, the challenge which moved the 
Hebrews to the development of an ethical monotheism. It 
was the first religion to absolutize the good, even at the cost of 
admitting the same status to the evil, and the appeal of its 
strong ethical idealism could well have moved Deutero- 
Isaiah, and perhaps even Hosea and Jeremiah, to see Yahweh 
in the same light of ethical glory as Ohrmazd.* 

Despite the theoretical opposition of monotheism to 
dualism, the monotheism of the West became ethical mono- 
theism—and evil is profoundly problematic in a universe 
governed by a single God both beneficent and omnipotent. 
If, then, one is to believe that evil is either an illusion or an 
expedient of the Godhead, there is no motivation for the 
strenuous effort against it which both Hebrew and Christian 
moralities demand. In a universe of ethical monotheism evil 
must then be considered as an effective and highly dangerous 
rebellion of the creature against the Creator. But the energy 
with which this rebellion is hated and opposed by those on the 
side of light can of itself endow the rebel with godlike power. 
One has to be turned into a god to be eternally damned. And 
there is always the concurrent danger that, in such a battle, 
God himself may be turned into the Devil. This, then, is the 
paradox that the greater our ethical idealism, the darker is 
the shadow that we cast, and that ethical monotheism became, 
in attitude if not in theory, the world’s most startling dualism. 


* It is problematic that most scholars in this field are Jewish and Christian 
theologians who, liberal as they may try to be, have a special interest in giving 
temporal priority to the Hebrews in all matters of deep spiritual insight. For 
further study see Cambridge Ancient History®, Scheftclowitz®®, and Gaster?®, 


= 
= 
= 
< 
=) 
= 
[=] 
E 
< 
= 
Ee 
> 
=) 


\ \ e are not going to quote sources which 
present, step by step, the historical origins and 
development of the Christian image of the Devil and of his 
domain, the everlasting torture chambers of Hell. The point 
is rather to present the image in its fully matured enormity, 
and to consider what serious belief in such an image can 
tell us of the nature and potentialities of the human mind. As 
was pointed out in the Introduction, the Christian concept of 
the Devil is unique, marking a total break with all polarized 
ideas of light and darkness, life and death, good and evil, as 
aspects of a single reality that transcends and yet expresses 
itself through them. Evil from this point of view has no 
essential place in the universe. It need not and should not 
have arisen. It is therefore the diabolical parody of divine 
grace, the free gift of malice as the latter is the free gift of 
love. Yet every step that one takes in insisting on the gra- 
tuitousness of evil and the sole responsibility of the Devil for 
bringing it into the universe is a step in the direction of the 
final metaphysical dualism.* 
*I have discussed the philosophical and theological implications of this 


problem much more fully in The Supreme Identity”, and in Myth and Ritual 
in Christianity”. 


149 


150 +» THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


According to the general consensus of Catholic tradition, 
the Devil, Satan, or Lucifer was in the beginning an angel of 
the highest order and beauty—an archangel, or, if one classifies 
these beings more precisely, a cherubim or seraphim, perhaps 
the head of all the angels in heaven and therefore the wisest 
and most beautiful creature that the Lord God had made. 
The story of his downfall is given by Ginzberg as follows: 


h— The extraordinary qualities with which Adam was blessed, 
physical and spiritual as well, aroused the envy of the angels. 
They attempted to consume him with fire, and he would have 
perished, had not the protecting hand of God rested upon him, 
and established peace between him and the heavenly host. In 
particular, Satan was jealous of the first man, and his evil 
thoughts finally led to his fall. After Adam had been endowed 
with a soul, God invited all the angels to come and pay him 
reverence and homage. Satan, the greatest of the angels in 
heaven, with twelve wings, instead of six like all the others, 
refused to pay heed to the behest of God, saying, “Thou didst 
create us angels from the splendor of the Shekinah,* and now 
Thou dost command us to cast ourselves down before the crea- 
ture which Thou didst fashion out of the dust of the ground!’ 
God answered, ‘Yet this dust of the ground has more wisdom 
and understanding than thou.’ Satan demanded a trial of wit 
with Adam, and God assented thereto, saying: ‘I have created 
beasts, birds, and reptiles. I shall have them all come before thee 
and before Adam. If thou art able to give them names, I shall 
command Adam to show honor unto thee, and thou shalt rest 
next to the Shekinah of My glory. But if not, and Adam calls 
them by the names I have assigned to them, then thou wilt be 
subject to Adam, and he shall have a place in My garden, and 
cultivate it.’ Thus spake God, and He betook Himself to Paradise, 


* The Shekinah is the Hebrew term for the radiance or glory of God, and is 
sometimes identified with the divine essence. 


Ultimate Dualism - 151 


Satan following Him. When Adam beheld God, he said to his 
wife, ‘O come, let us worship and bow down; let us kneel before 
the Lord our Maker.’ Now Satan attempted to assign names to 
the animals. He failed with the first two that presented them- 
selves, the ox and the cow. God led two others before him, the 
camel and the donkey, with the same result. Then God turned 
to Adam, and questioned him regarding the names of the same 
animals, framing His questions in such wise that the first letter 
of the first word was the same as the first letter of the name of 
the animal standing before him. Thus Adam divined the proper 
name, and Satan was forced to acknowledge the superiority of 
the first man. Nevertheless he broke out in wild outcries that 
reached the heavens, and he refused to do homage unto Adam 
as he had been bidden. The host of angels led by him did like- 
wise, in spite of the urgent representations of Michael, who was 
the first to prostrate himself before Adam in order to show a 
good example to the other angels. Michael addressed Satan: ‘Give 
adoration to the image of God! But if thou doest it not, then 
the Lord God will break out in wrath against thee.’ Satan replied: 
‘If He breaks out in wrath against me, I will exalt my throne 
above the stars of God, I will be like the Most High!’ At once 
God flung Satan and his host out of heaven, down to the earth, 
and from that moment dates the enmity between Satan and man.” 


It is of interest that in this strictly mythological account, 
the Lord God cheats a little in Adam’s favor, giving the 
incident just the slightest touch of comedy. It is almost as if 
the whole affair were a cosmic drama in which the parts to be 
played had been prearranged. We should therefore compare 
this excerpt with the following, which is a very serious 
analysis of the Devil’s motivations by Matthias Scheeben, who 
was in many respects one of the most sensitive and sophis- 
ticated theologians of modern times: 


152 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


>— If we want to emphasize a sinful act as extremely wicked, we 
are wont to call it a diabolical sin. By the use of this term one 
implies, first of all, that the specific sin was not committed out of 
weakness or ignorance, but with eyes wide open and with free- 
will, out of sheer maliciousness, as in the case of the fallen angels, 
and that evil was therefore intended with the same vigor and de- 
termination as of those angels when they forever and totally 
plunged themselves into evil. However, the essence, the real abyss 
of diabolical malice is not yet reached. This bottomless gulf can 
be gauged only when we realize that above all the angel violated 
God’s supernatural grace; that he turned the sweetness of the 
Holy Spirit into the vilest poison; that, sitting at God’s feet, he 
rebelled against Him and endeavored, as it were, to violate God’s 
innermost being. This unfathomable maliciousness affects the 
action and the intention of the devil not only objectively inasmuch 
as the deed represents an offence against the supernatural divine 
ordinance—as it happens when we commit sins out of weakness or 
ignorance—, but it also affects him subjectively in his core, be- 
cause its infamy was ignited by the very grace of God. Hence this 
inscrutable raging hatred of God which characterizes the devil’s 
sin, —this terrible obstinacy and wickedness which could never 
have evolved on the basis of nature alone, and which occurs in 
men but rarely and then only in some measure when sins are com- 
mitted against the Holy Spirit. It is exactly this inscrutable hatred 
of God, this obduracy and infamy which give the devil’s sin the 
specifically mysterious character which we are wont to call 
demonic. 

Hence follows yet another interesting truth. In the super- 
natural order sin has a terrible repercussion on the nature of 
the sinner, at least if committed in sheer malice. In this case the 
specific perfidy of sin does not pass by his nature without leaving 
a trace, as if his nature could shake off grace, but leave itself 
undamaged. By opposing grace and hardening his heart against 
it as the most sublime good of nature, the creature distorts and 


Ultimate Dualism + 153 


perverts his nature in a manner otherwise impossible. The will 
becomes so twisted, so malevolent and venomous as to be un- 
thinkable in mere rebellion against the natural order. And this, 
presumably, is the ultimate reason why a transformation and 
return of the will to good, even to the natural good, appears to 
be impossible for the fallen angels, and, save for a most sublime 
miracle of divine grace, seems also to be an impossibility for 
sinners against the Holy Ghost here on earth. Theologians ex- 
plain the impossibility of conversion for the fallen angels out of 
the natural proclivity of their will; but as the natural goodness 
of the creature receives its sanction through grace and thus be- 
comes sanctitas, so the perversion of the creature through its 
opposition to grace becomes more deeply embedded, more dread- 
ful and irreversible."4 


We shall have occasion to quote Scheeben again, upon 
the subject of the tortures of the damned. His peculiar com- 
bination of mythological literalness, dexterity of psychologi- 
cal description, and maturely restrained but eloquent invec- 
tive makes him one of the most accomplished horror writers 
of the world. He makes the evil motivation so profoundly 
awful that it surpasses the imagination into an inverted 
ineffability. It acquires thereby an infernal magnificence 
which begins to compel our admiration like Milton’s Satan, 
and we begin to realize that writers who can poetize evil in 
this way are, in effect if unknowingly, offering worship to the 
Mystery of Iniquity. From Scheeben we get a distinct whiff 
of the bubbling-green-slime-with-teeth-in-it, of that absolute 
loathsomeness which we shall find so well suggested in 
Machen. But Milton’s world is more heraldic and formal; it 
goes with Handel’s oratorios and the Anglican Church, and 
thus, in its own stately way, offers unconscious worship at 


154 +» THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


Satan’s throne. Here, then, is the account of the Fall of Luci- 
fer in Paradise Lost: 


As yet this World was not, and Chaos wild 

Reigned where these Heavens now roll, where Earth now 
rests 

Upon her centre poised, when on a day 

(For Time, though in Eeternity, applied 

To motion, measures all things durable 

By present, past, and future), on such day 

As Heaven’s great year brings forth, the empyreal host 

Of Angels, by imperial summons called, 

Innumerable before the Almighty’s throne 

Forthwith from all the ends of Heaven appeared 

Under their hierarchs in orders bright. 

Ten thousand thousands ensigns high advanced, 

Standards and gonfalons, ’twixt van and rear, 

Stream in the air, and for distinction serve 

Of hierarchies, of orders, and degrees, 

Or in their glittering tissues bear emblazed 

Holy memorials, acts of zeal and love 

Recorded eminent. Thus when in orbs 

Of circuit inexpressible they stood, 

Orb within orb, the Father Infinite, 

By whom in bliss enbosomed sat the Son, 

Amidst as from a flaming mount, whose top 

Brightness had made invisible, thus spake: 
“Hear all ye Angels, Progeny of Light, 

Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers, 

Hear my decree, which unrevoked shall stand. 

This day I have begot whom I declare 

My only Son, and on this holy hill 

Him have anointed, whom ye now behold 

At my right hand. Your head I him appoint, 


Ultimate Dualism + 155 


And by myself have sworn to him shall bow 

All knees in Heaven, and shall confess him Lord: 

Under his great vicegerent reign abide, 

United as one individual soul, 

Forever happy; him who disobeys, 

Me disobeys, breaks union, and, that day, 

Cast out from God and blessed vision, falls 

Into utter darkness, deep engulfed, his place 

Ordained without redemption, without end.” 
So spake the Omnipotent, and with his words 

All seemed well pleased; all seemed, but were not all.75 


What, one must ask, were all those ‘standards and 
gonfalons, ’twixt van and rear,” all this military panoply, 
doing in a cosmos wherein nothing had as yet gone wrong? 
The difficulty is that the whole notion of God as universal 
monarch, King of kings, is of itself provocative and almost 
calculated to stir up trouble. So, too, is the explicit prohibi- 
tion against eating the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge; this 
was just asking for disobedience. It will not do to argue that 
these military symbols represent power that is purely spirit- 
ual. For that sort of power there could be much more appro- 
priate metaphors—as of sunlight and water, or of soft grasses 
that in growing can crack open the rocks. And is not the Lord 
throwing down the challenge in saying, ‘Hear my decree, 
which unrevoked shall stand’? Of course, Milton is following 
the most ancient imagery, but it is the imagery and not the 
theoretical theology which tells the tale. The tale is that 
this isa God who rules the universe by political violence and 
not by the wooing of love. Even Jesus hinted that he had at 
his disposal ten thousand legions of angels. 

And so the story proceeds. Satan is sleepless that night, 
and aloof while all the good angels sit around their campfires 


156 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


and sing. The provocation in Milton’s story seems to be 
different: it is not the creation of Adam that wounds Satan’s 
pride, but the elevation of God the Son to the post of second- 
in-command. Yet it comes, in a way, to the same thing, for the 
angels have the power to look into God’s foreknowledge, and 
they know that God the Son is to become Man, the Second 
Adam. 


But not so waked 

Satan—so call him now; his former name* 
Is heard no more in Heaven: he, of the first, 
If not the first Archangel, great in power, 
In favour, and pre-eminence, yet fraught 
With envy against the Son of God that day 
Honoured by his great Father and proclaimed 
Messiah, King Anointed, could not bear 
Through pride, that sight, and thought himself impaired. 
Deep malice thence conceiving and disdain, 
Soon as midnight brought on the dusky hour 
Friendliest to sleep and silence, he resolved 
With all his legions to dislodge, and leave 
Unworshipped, unobeyed, the Throne supreme, 
Contemptuous, and, his next subordinate 
Awakening, thus to him in secret spake: 

“Sleep’st thou, companion dear? what sleep can close 
Thy eyelids? and rememberest what decree 
Of yesterday, so late has passed the lips 
Of Heaven’s Almighty? Thou to me thy thoughts 
Wast wont, I mine to thee was wont, to impart; 
Both waking we were one; how then can now 
Thy sleep dissent? New laws thou seest imposed; 
New laws from him who reigns new minds may raise 
In us who serve, new counsels, to debate 


* That is, Lucifer, the Light-Bearer. 


Ultimate Dualism - 157 


What doubtful may ensue. More in this place 
To utter is not safe. Assemble thou 

Of all those myriads which we lead the chief; 
Tell them that, by command, ere yet dim Night 
Her shadowy cloud withdraws, I am to haste, 
And all who under me their banners wave, 
Homeward with flying march where we possess 
The quarters of the North, there to prepare 
Fit entertainment to receive our King, 

The great Messiah, and his new commands, 
Who speedily through all the hierarchies 
Intends to pass triumphant, and give laws.”76 


Thereupon Satan and his legions of attendant angels, 
“thrones, dominations, princedoms, virtues, powers,” take 
flight toward the heavenly citadel which he occupies in the 
symbolic North of the divine realm. The story is now being 
told to Adam by the archangel Raphael. 


Satan with his Powers 
Far was advanced on winged speed, an host 
Innumerable as the stars at night, 
Or stars of morning, dewdrops which the sun 
Impearls on every leaf and every flower. 
Regions they passed, the mighty regencies 
Of Seraphim and Potentates and Thrones 
In their triple degrees, regions to which 
All thy dominion, Adam, is no more 
Than what this garden is to all the earth 
And all the sea, from one entire globose 
Stretched into longitude; which having passed, 
At length into the limits of the North 
They came, and Satan to his royal seat 
High on a hill, far-blazing, as a mount 


158 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


Raised on a mount, with pyramids and towers 

From diamond quarries hewn and rocks of gold, 

The palace of great Lucifer (so call 

That structure, in the dialect of men 

Interpreted) which, not long after, he 

Affecting all equality with God, 

In imitation of that mount whereon 

Messiah was declared in sight of Heaven, 

The Mountain of the Congregation called; 

For thither he assembled all his train, 

Pretending so commanded to consult 

About the great reception of their King 

Thither to come, and with calumnious art 

Of counterfeited truth thus held their ears: 
“Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,* 

If these magnific titles yet remain 

Not merely titular, since by decree 

Another now hath to himself engrossed 

All power, and us eclipsed under the name 

Of King Anointed; for whom all this haste 

Of midnight march, and hurried meeting here, 

This only to consult, how we may best, 

With what may be devised of honours new, 

Receive him coming to receive from us 

Knee-tribute yet unpaid, prostration vile, 

Too much to one, but double how endured, 

To one and to his image now proclaimed? 

But what if better counsels might erect 

Our minds, and teach us to cast off this yoke? 

Will ye submit your necks and choose to bend 

The supple knee? ye will not, if I trust 

To know ye right, or if ye know yourselves 


* These are some of the names of the nine orders of angels. The full list 
is as follows: Cherubim, Seraphim, Thrones; Dominations, Princedoms, Vir- 
tues; Powers, Archangels, and Angels. 


Ultimate Dualism +» 159 


Natives and Sons of Heaven possessed before 
By none, and, if not equal all, yet free, 
Equally free; for orders and degrees 

Jar not with liberty, but well consist. 

Who can in reason, then, or right, assume 
Monarchy over such as live by right 

His equals—if in power and splendour less, 
In freedom equal; or can introduce 

Law and edict on us, who without law 

Err not? Much less for this to be our Lord, 
And look for adoration, to the abuse 

Of those imperial titles which assert 

Our being ordained to govern, not to servel’?? 


Satan’s points are well taken, and, it must be admitted, 
accord fairly well with Milton’s own political views, demo- 
cratic, antimonarchical. Thereupon the War in Heaven 
begins: Satan defies the triune Godhead, and God the Son, at 
the head of his legions of angels, commands them to move 
into battle: 


So spake the Son, and into terror changed 

His countenance, too severe to be beheld, 

And full of wrath bent on his enemies. 

At once the Four* spread out their starry wings 

With dreadful shade contiguous, and the orbs 

Of his fierce chariot rolled, as with the sound 

Of torrent floods, or of a numerous host. 

He on his impious foes right onward drove, 

Gloomy as Night. Under his burning wheels 
ance upon the throne of God. Each has six wings, and their hcads are respec- 
tively those of a bull, a lion, an eagle, and a man, figures that were later 
associated with the Four Evangelists—Luke, Mark, John, and Matthew. But 


they are obviously the so-called fixed signs of the Zodiac—Taurus, Leo, Scorpio 
(often a phoenix), and Aquarius. 


160 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


The steadfast empyrean shook throughout, 
All but the throne of God. Full soon 
Among them he arrived, in his right hand 
Grasping ten thousand thunders, which he sent 
Before him, such as in their souls infixed 
Plagues. They, astonished, all resistance lost, 
All courage; down their idle weapons dropped; 
O’er shields, and helms, and helmed heads he rode 
Of Thrones and mighty Seraphim prostrate, 
That wished the mountains now might be again 
Thrown on them as a shelter from his ire. 
Nor less on either side tempestuous fell 
His arrows, from the fourfold visaged Four, 
Distinct with eyes, and from the living wheels, 
Distinct alike with multitude of eyes; 
One spirit in them ruled, and every eye 
Glared lightning and shot forth pernicious fire 
Among the accursed, that withered all their strength 
And of their wonted vigour left them drained, 
Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fallen. 
Yet half his strength he put not forth, but checked 
His thunder in mid-volley, for he meant 
Not to destroy but root them out of Heaven. 
The overthrown he raised, and, as a herd 
Of goats or timorous flock together thronged, 
Drove them before him thunderstruck, pursued 
With terrors and with furies to the bounds 
And crystal wall of Heaven, which, opening wide, 
Rolled inward, and a spacious gap disclosed 
Into the wasteful Deep. The monstrous sight 
Struck them with horror backward, but far worse 
Urged them behind: headlong themselves they threw 
Down from the verge of Heaven; eternal wrath 
Burnt after them to the bottomless pit. 

Hell heard the unsufferable noise; Hell saw 


Ultimate Dualism - 161 


Heaven ruining from Heaven, and would have fled 
Affrighted; but strict Fate had cast too deep 

Her dark foundations, and too fast had bound. 
Nine days they fell; confounded Chaos roared, 

And felt tenfold confusion in their fall 

Through his wild anarchy, so huge a rout 
Encumbered him with ruin. Hell at last, 

Yawning, received them whole, and on them closed— 
Hell, their fit habitation, fraught with fire 
Unquenchable, the house of woe and pain.78 


“But I say unto you which hear, Love your enemies, do 
good to them that hate you, bless them that curse you, pray 
for them that despitefully use you.” 

It has often been observed that the ethical behavior 
ascribed to the Lord God himself is vastly inferior to the 
ideals which he preaches for men. The reason, as already 
suggested, is that we have a tendency to make our images of 
God insufficiently anthropomorphic. In our attempts to 
imagine the superhuman and the supernatural we create 
something subhuman. “De Lawd” of Green Pastures is much 
nearer to the point, for he wears a top hat and smokes a big 
cigar. Of course we cannot take such an image quite seriously, 
but so much the better, because it prevents us from idolatry. 

Milton now goes on to describe the condition of the 
fallen Satan in hell: 


Him the Almighty Power 
Hurled headlong flaming from the ethereal sky, 
With hideous ruin and combustion down 
To bottomless perdition, there to dwell 
In adamantine chains and penal fire, 
Who durst defy the Omnipotent to arms. 
Nine times the space that measures day and night 


162 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


To mortal men, he with his horrid crew 

Lay vanquished, rolling in the fiery gulf, 
Confounded, though immortal; but his doom 
Reserved to him more wrath, for now the thought 
Both of lost happiness and lasting pain 
Torments him: round he throws his baleful cyes, 
That witnessed huge affliction and dismay, 
Mixed with obdurate pride and steadfast hate; 

At once, as far as angel’s ken, he views 

The dismal situation waste and wild; 

A dungeon horrible, on all sides round, 

As one great furnace flamed, yet from those flames 
No light, but rather darkness visible 

Served only to discover sights of woe, 

Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace 
And rest can never dwell, hope never comes 
That comes to all, but torture without end 

Still urges, and a fiery deluge, fed 

With ever-burning sulphur unconsumed. 

Such place Eternal Justice had prepared 

For those rebellious, here their prison ordained 

In utter darkness, and their portion set, 

As far removed from God and light of Heaven 
As from the centre thrice to the utmost pole.7® 


And, finally, the speech of the defeated archangel in 
which, intentionally or otherwise, Milton has made him the 
true hero of the drama: 


“Is this the region, this the soil, the clime,” 
Said then the lost Archangel, “‘this the seat 
That we must change for Heaven, this mournful gloom 
For that celestial light? Be it so, since he 
Who now is sovran can dispose and bid 


Ultimate Dualism - 163 


What shall be right: farthest from him is best, 
Whom reason hath equalled, force hath made supreme 
Above his equals. Farewell, happy fields, 

Where joy for ever dwells! Hail, horrors! hail, 
Infernal World! and thou, profoundest Hell, 
Receive thy new possessor—one who brings 

A mind not to be changed by place or time. 
The mind is its own place, and in itself 

Can make a Heaven of Hell, a Hell of Heaven. 
What matter where, if I be still the same, 

And what I should be, all but less than he 
Whom thunder hath made greater? Here at least 
We shall be free; the Almighty hath not built 
Here for his envy, will not drive us hence; 

Here we may reign secure, and, in my choice, 
To reign is worth ambition, though in Hell: 
Better to reign in Hell than serve in Heaven.’80 


If it was Milton’s intention to make a convincing image 
of the ultimately Evil One, he did not succeed. He depicted 
instead a proud, stubborn, but most courageous warrior. 
The villain in this story is really God the Son, as William 
Blake observed, for in his omnipotence he runs no real risks, 
and yet he is described as moving into battle with a super- 
colossal display of fury. 

The depiction of utter and abysmal evil is immensely 
difficult. Once I sat for hours with an artist friend attempting 
to draw perfectly evil faces, but all turned out to be merely 
angry, sad, or comic. The face of evil is actually as unimagin- 
able as the face of God, and it is thus that the only way of 
suggesting it is to use masks or veils such as those worm 
by the Spanish Inquisitors or the Ku Klux Klan—pointed 
and featureless head-coverings with slits for the eyes. Scheeben 


164 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


uses a comparable technique: he suggests the unimaginably 
depraved depths of Satan’s malice, but is never specific about 
anything. The same device is used, still more effectively, in 
the following extract from Arthur Machen’s story, ‘The 
White People,” where everything is suggested without being 
specified, where the final point is that the Mystery of 
Iniquity is as indescribable as the Vision of God. 


h— “Sorcery and sanctity,” said Ambrose, “these are the only 
realities. Each is an ecstasy, a withdrawal from the common life.” 

Cotgrave listened, interested. He had been brought by a 
friend to this mouldering house in a northern suburb, through 
an old garden to the room where Ambrose the recluse dozed and 
dreamed over his books. 

“Yes,” he went on, “magic is justified of her children. There 
are many, I think, who eat dry crusts and drink water, with a joy 
infinitely sharper than anything within the experience of the 
‘practical’ epicure.” 

“You are speaking of the saints?” 

“Yes, and of the sinners, too. I think you are falling into 
the very general error of confining the spiritual world to the 
supremely good; but the supremely wicked, necessarily, have their 
portion in it. The merely carnal, sensual man can no more be a 
great sinner than he can be a great saint. Most of us are just 
indifferent, mixed-up creatures; we muddle through the world 
without realizing the meaning and the inner sense of things, and, 
consequently, our wickedness and our goodness are alike second- 
lrate, unimportant.” 

“And you think the great sinner, then, will be an ascetic, as 
well as the great saint?” 

“Great people of all kinds forsake the imperfect copies and 
go to the perfect originals. I have no doubts but that many of 
the very highest among the saints have never done a ‘good action’ 
(using the words in their ordinary sense). And, on the other hand, 


Ultimate Dualism - 165 


there have been those who have sounded the very depths of sin, 
who all their lives have never done an ‘ill deed’.” 

He went out of the room for a moment, and Cotgrave, in 
high delight, turned to his friend and thanked him for the 
introduction. 

“He’s grand,” he said. “I never saw that kind of lunatic 
before.” 

Ambrose returned with more whisky and helped the two 
men in a liberal manner. He abused the teetotal sect with feroc- 
ity, as he handed the seltzer, and pouring out a glass of water 
for himself, was about to resume his monologue, when Cotgrave 
broke in— 

“I can’t stand it, you know,” he said, “‘your paradoxes are too 
monstrous. A man may be a great sinner and yet never do 
anything sinful! Comel” 

“You're quite wrong,” said Ambrose. “I never make para- 
doxes; I wish I could. I merely said that a man may have excel- 
lent taste in Romanée Conti, and yet never have even smelt sour 
ale. That’s all, and it’s more like a truism than a paradox, isn’t 
it? Your surprise at my remark is due to the fact that you haven't 
realized what sin is. Oh, yes, there is a sort of connexion between 
Sin with the capital letter, and actions which are commonly called 
sinful: with murder, theft, adultery, and so forth. Much the same 
connexion that there is between the A, B, C and fine literature. 
But I believe that the misconception—it is all but universal— 
arises in great measure from our looking at the matter through 
social spectacles. We think that a man who does evil to us and to 
his neighbors must be very evil. So he is, from a social standpoint; 
but can’t you realize that Evil in its essence is a lonely thing, a 
passion of the solitary, individual soul? Really, the average 
murderer, gua murderer, is not by any means a sinner in the true 
sense of the word. He is simply a wild beast that we have to get 
rid of to save our own-necks from his knife. I should class him 
rather with tigers than with sinners.”’ 

“It seems a little strange.” 


166 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


“I think not. The murderer murders not from positive quali- 
ties, but from negative ones; he lacks something which non- 
murderers possess. Evil, of course, is wholly positive—only it is 
on the wrong side. You may believe me that sin in its proper sense 
is very rare; it is probable that there have been far fewer sinners 
than saints. Yes, your standpoint is all very well for practical, 
social purposes; we are naturally inclined to think that a person 
who is very disagreeable to us must be a very great sinner! It is 
very disagreeable to have one’s pocket picked, and we pronounce 
the thief to be a very great sinner. In truth, he is merely an unde- 
veloped man. He cannot be a saint, of course; but he may be, and 
often is, an infinitely better creature than thousands who have 
never broken a single commandment. He is a great nuisance to us, 
I admit, and we very properly lock him up if we catch him; but 
between his troublesome and unsocial action and evil— Oh, the 
connexion is of the weakest.” 

It was getting very late. The man who had brought Cotgrave 
had probably heard all this before, since he assisted with a bland 
and judicious smile, but Cotgrave began to think that his “luna- 
tic” was turning into a sage. 

“Do you know,” he said, “you interest me immensely? You 
think, then, that we do not understand the real nature of evil?” 

“No, I don’t think we do. We over-estimate it and we 
under-estimate it. We take the. very numerous infractions of our 
social ‘bye-laws’—the very necessary and very proper regulations 
which keep the human company together—and we get frightened 
at the prevalence of ‘sin’ and ‘evil’. But this is really nonsense. 
Take theft, for example. Have you any horror at the thought of 
Robin Hood, of the Highland caterans of the seventeenth 
century, of the moss-troopers, of the company promoters of our 
day? 

“Then, on the other hand, we underrate evil. We attach 
such an enormous importance to the ‘sin’ of meddling with our 
pockets (and our wives) that we have quite forgiven the awfulness 
of real sin.” 


Ultimate Dualism + 167 


“And what is sin?” said Cotgrave. 

“I think I must reply to your question by another. What 
would your feelings be, seriously, if your cat or your dog began 
to talk to you, and to dispute with you in human accents? You 
would be overwhelmed with horror. I am sure of it. And if the 
roses in your garden sang a weird song, you would go mad. And 
suppose the stones in the road began to swell and grow before 
your eyes, and if the pebble that you noticed at night had shot 
out stony blossoms in the morning? 

_ “Well, these examples may give you some notion of what sin 
really is.” 

“Look here,” said the third man, hitherto placid, “you two 
seem pretty well wound up. But I’m going home. I've missed 
my tram, and I shall have to walk.” 

Ambrose and Cotgrave seemed to settle down more pro- 
foundly when the other had gone out into the early misty morn- 
ing and the pale light of the lamps. 

“You astonish me,” said Cotgrave. “I had never thought of 
that. If that is really so, one must turn everything upside down. 
Then the essence of sin really is—” 

“In the taking of heaven by storm, it seems to me,” said 
Ambrose. “It appears to me that it is simply an attempt to 
penetrate into another and higher sphere in a forbidden manner. 
You can understand why it is so rare. There are few, indeed, who 
wish to penetrate into other spheres, higher or lower, in ways 
allowed or forbidden. Men, in the mass, are amply content with 
life as they find it. Therefore there are few saints, and sinners 
(in the proper sense) are fewer still, and men of genius, who 
partake sometimes of each character are rare also. Yes; on the 
whole, it is, perhaps, harder to be a great sinner than a great 
saint.” 

“There is something profoundly unnatural about sin? Is that 
what you mean?” 

“Exactly. Holiness requires as great, or almost as great, an 
effort; but holiness works on lines that were natural once; it is an 


168 +» THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


effort to recover the ecstasy that was before the Fall. But sin is an 
effort to gain the ecstasy and the knowledge that pertain alone 
to angels, and in making this effort man becomes a demon. I told 
you that the mere murderer is not therefore a sinner; that is true, 
but the sinner is sometimes a murderer. Gilles de Rais is an 
instance. So you see that while the good and the evil are 
unnatural to man as he now is—to man the social, civilized being 
—evil is unnatural in a much deeper sense than good. The saint 
endeavours to recover a gift which he has lost; the sinner tries 
to obtain something which was never his. In brief, he repeats 
the Fall.” 

“But are you a Catholic?” said Cotgrave. 

“Yes; I am a member of the persecuted Anglican Church.” 

“Then, how about those texts which seem to reckon as sin 
that which you would set down as a mere trivial dereliction?” 

“Yes; but in one place the word ‘sorcerers’ comes in the same 
sentence, doesn’t it? That seems to me to give the key-note. 
Consider: can you imagine for a moment that a false statement 
which saves an innocent man’s life is a sin? No; very good, then, 
it is not the mere liar who is excluded by those words; it is, above 
all, the ‘sorcerers’ who use the material life as instruments to 
obtain their infinitely wicked ends. And let me tell you this: our 
higher senses are so blunted, we are so drenched with materialism, 
that we should probably fail to recognize real wickedness if we 
encountered it.” 

“But shouldn’t we experience a certain horror—a terror such 
as you hinted we would experience if a rose tree sang—in the 
mere presence of an evil man?” 

“We should if we were natural: children and women feel this 
horror you speak of, even animals experience it. But with most 
of us convention and civilization and education have blinded and 
deafened and obscured the natural reason. No, sometimes we may 
recognize evil by its hatred of the good—one doesn’t need much 
penetration to guess at the influence which dictated, quite uncon: 
sciously, the ‘Blackwood’ review of Keats—but this is purely 


Ultimate Dualism - 169 


incidental; and, as a rule, I suspect that the Hierarchs of Tophet 
pass quite unnoticed, or, perhaps, in certain cases, as good but 
mistaken men.” 

“But you used the word ‘unconscious’ just now, of Keats’ 
reviewers. Is wickedness ever unconscious?” 

“Always. It must be so. It is like holiness and genius in this as 
in other points; it is a certain rapture or ecstasy of the soul; a 
transcendent effort to surpass the ordinary bounds. So, surpassing 
these, it surpasses also the understanding, the faculty that takes 
note of that which comes before it. No, a man may be infinitely 
and horribly wicked and never suspect it. But I tell you, evil in 
this, its certain and true sense, is rare, and I think it is growing 
rarer.” 

“I am trying to get hold of it all,” said Cotgrave. “From what 
you say, I gather that the true evil differs generically from that 
which we call evil?” 

“Quite so. There is, no doubt, an analogy between the two; 
a resemblance such as enables us to use, quite legitimately, such 
terms as the ‘foot of the mountain’ and the ‘leg of the table’. And, 
sometimes, of course, the two speak, as it were, in the same 
language. The rough miner, or ‘puddler’, the untrained, undevel- 
oped ‘tiger-man’, heated by a quart or two above his usual 
measure, comes home and kicks his irritating and injudicious 
wife to death. He is a murderer. And Gilles de Rais was a mur- 
derer. But you see the gulf that separates the two? The ‘word’, 
if I may so speak, is accidentally the same in each case, but the 
‘meaning’ is utterly different. It is flagrant ‘Hobson Jobson’ to 
confuse the two, or rather, it is as if one supposed that Jugger- 
naut and the Argonauts had something to do etymologically with 
one another. And no doubt the same weak likeness, or analogy, 
runs between all the ‘social’ sins and the real spiritual sins, and 
in some cases, perhaps, the lesser may be ‘schoolmaster’ to lead 
one on to the greater—from the shadow to the reality. If you are 
anything of a theologian, you will see the importance of all this.” 

“I am sorry to say,” remarked Cotgrave, “that I have devoted 


170 * THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


very little of my time to theology. Indeed, I have often wondered 
on what grounds theologians have claimed the title of Science of 
Sciences for their favourite study; since the ‘theological’ books I 
have looked into have always seemed to me to be concerned with 
feeble and obvious pieties, or with the kings of Israel and Judah. 
I do not care to hear about those kings.” 

Ambrose grinned. . 

“We must try to avoid theological discussion,” he said. “I: 
perceive that you would be a bitter disputant. But perhaps the 
‘dates of the kings’ have as much to do with theology as the hob- 
nails of the murderous puddler with evil.” 

“Then, to return to our main subject, you think that sin is 
an esoteric, occult thing?” 

“Yes. It is the infernal miracle as holiness is the supernal. 
Now and then it is raised to such a pitch that we entirely fail to 
suspect its existence; it is like the note of the great pedal pipes 
of the organ, which is so deep that we cannot hear it. In other 
cases it may lead to the lunatic asylum, or to still stranger issues. 
But you must never confuse it with mere social misdoing. 
Remember how the Apostle, speaking of the ‘other side’, distin- 
guishes between ‘charitable’ actions and charity. And as one may 
give all one’s goods to the poor, and yet lack charity; so, remem- 
ber, one may avoid every crime and yet be a sinner.” 

“Your psychology is very strange to me,” said Cotgrave, “but 
I confess I like it, and I suppose that one might fairly deduce 
from your premisses the conclusion that the real sinner might 
very well strike the observer as a harmless personage enough?” 

“Certainly; because the true evil has nothing to do with 
social life or social laws, or if it has, only incidentally and acci- 
dentally. It is a lonely passion of the soul—or a passion of the 
lonely soul—whichever you like. If, by chance, we understand it, 
and grasp its full significance, then, indeed, it will fill us with 
horror and with awe. But this emotion is widely distinguished 
from the fear and the disgust with which we regard the ordinary 
criminal, since this latter is largely or entirely founded on the 


Ultimate Dualism + 171 


regard which we have for our own skins or purses. We hate a 
murderer, because we know that we should hate to be murdered, 
or to have any one that we like murdered. So, on the ‘other side’, 
we venerate the saints, but we don’t ‘like’ them as we like our 
friends. Can you persuade yourself that you would have ‘enjoyed’ 
St. Paul’s company? Do you think that you and I would have ‘got 
on’ with Sir Galahad? 

“So with the sinners, as with the saints. If you met a very evil 
man, and recognized his evil; he would, no doubt, fill you with 
horror and awe; but there is no reason why you should ‘dislike’ 
him. On the contrary, it is quite possible that if you could succeed 
in putting the sin out of your mind you might find the sinner 
capital company, and a little while you might have to reason 
yourself back into horror. Still, how awful it is. If the roses and 
the lilies ‘suddenly sang on this coming morning; if the furniture 
began to move in procession, as in De Maupassant’s talel’’81 

Machen never becomes more specific, in his suggestion of 
ultimate evil, than using such images as swelling stones and 
talking flowers. But what is it all about? Why would anyone 
want to make stones swell? The point is that if we knew it 
would cease to horrify. For nothing is more horrendous than 
disturbances of the order and regularity of events which make 
it impossible to predict and to chart rational courses of con- 
duct. If I saw a stone swelling, I would believe that I was 
going insane, or, what almost comes to the same thing, that 
the world was going insane. When the environment abandons 
those day-to-day regularities that we take most for granted 
there comes panic, and in panic we take measures for self- 
protection that are inappropriate and extreme. 

The same is true of our reaction to people who bash in 
the heads of babies, make lamp shades out of human skin, and 
put electric wires into prisoners’ testicles. Our emotions 


172 +» THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


panic; no punishment is enough for such devils, and we 
want to see them screaming in boiling oil for ever. But 
panic of this kind has nothing whatsoever to do with justice, 
much less with the prevention of future outrages. At this 
point, judge and criminal alike are in a common field of 
deranged communication and neurological pandemonium. 
It is out of this tortured, panic-ridden, ‘‘screaming meemies,” 
pole of human experience that there have arisen the awesome 
fantasies of Hell and everlasting damnation. Post-mortem 
hells, both hot and cold, are found in the popular mytholo- 
gies of Hinduism and Buddhism, described, and often 
painted, in vivid detail. But these oriental hells are really 
purgatories, for even though one may remain in them for 
eons of time there is always an end. The evil karma, or des- 
tiny, generated by the evil deed eventually works itself out. 
For the energy of karma generates a cyclic process of contin- 
ual rebirth through six realms: (1) of men, (2) of angels, (3) 
of titans or dark angels, (4) of animals, (5) of the hot and 
cold hells, and (6) of the frustrated ghosts. Hell is thus des- 
scribed in the (Hindu) Vishnu Purana: 


b> “Men are bound, when they die, by the servants of the king 
of Tartarus, with cords, and beaten with sticks, and have, then, 
to encounter the fierce aspect of Yama,* and the horrors of their 
terrible route. In the different hells there are various intolerable 
tortures with burning sand, fire, machines, and weapons: some 
are severed with saws; some, roasted in forges; some are chopped 
with axes; some, buried in the ground; some are mounted on 
stakes; some, cast to wild beasts, (to be devoured) ; some are 
gnawed by vultures; some, torn by tigers; some are boiled in oil; 
some, rolled in caustic slime; some are precipitated from great 


* Yama is the ruler of the Naraka (Purgatorial) realm and judge of the 
dead. 


Ultimate Dualism + 173 


heights; some, tossed (upwards) by engines. The number of pun- 
ishments inflicted in hell, which are the consequences of sin, is 
infinite. 

“But not in hell alone do the souls of the deceased undergo 
pain: there is no cessation, even in heaven; for its temporary 
inhabitant is ever tormented with the prospect of descending 
again to earth . . .'"8? 


In the long run, hell and heaven are both seen to be traps, 
and final liberation comes with realizing that there is nothing 
to choose between them. 

But in the Hell of the West there is neither escape nor 
cessation. The following is an early (third century) account 
from the Apocalypse of Peter: 


b>— 21 And I saw also another place over against that one, very 
squalid; and it was a place of punishment, and they that were 
punished and the angels that punished them had their raiment 
dark, according to the air of the place. 

22 And some there were there hanging by their tongues; and 
these were they that blasphemed the way of righteousness, and 
under them was laid fire flaming and tormenting them. 

23 And there was a great lake full of flaming mire, wherein 
were certain men that turned away from righteousness; and 
angels, tormentors, were set over them. 

24 And there were also others, women, hanged by their hair 
above that mire which boiled up; and these were they that 
adorned themselves for adultery. 

And the men that were joined with them in the defilement 
of adultery were hanging by their feet, and had their heads hidden 
in the mire, and said: We believed not that we should come unto 
this place. 

25 And I saw the murderers and them that were consenting 
to them cast into a strait place full of evil, creeping things, and 


174 +» THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


smitten by those beasts, and so turning themselves about in that 
torment. And upon them were set worms like clouds of darkness. 
And the souls of them that were murdered stood and looked upon 
the torment of those murderers and said: O God, righteous is thy 
judgement. 

26 And hard by that place I saw another strait piace wherein 
the discharge and stench of them that were in torment ran down, 
and there was as it were a lake there. And there sat women up to 
their necks in that liquor, and over against them many children 
which were born out of due time sat crying: and from them went 
forth rays of fire and smote the women in the eyes: and these 
were they that conceived out of wedlock (?) and caused abortion. 

27 And other men and women were being burned up to their 
middle and cast down in a dark place and scourged by evil 
spirits, and having their entrails devoured by worms that rested 
not. And these were they that had persecuted the righteous and 
delivered them up. 

28 And near to them again were women and men gnawing 
their lips and in torment, and having iron heated in the fire set 
against their eyes. And these were they that did blaspheme and 
speak evil of the way of righteousness. 

29 And over against these were yet others, men and women, 
gnawing their tongues and having flaming fire in their mouths. 
And these were the false witnesses. 

go And in another place were gravel-stones sharper than 
swords or any spit, heated with fire, and men and women clad in 
filthy rags rolled upon them in torment.® And these were they 
that were rich and trusted in their riches, and had no pity upon 
orphans and widows but neglected the commandments of God. 

31 And in another great lake full of foul matter (pus) and 
blood and boiling mire stood men and women up to their knees. 


* This is suggested by the Septuagint [i.e., the Greek version of the Old 
Testament] of two passages in Job: xli. 30, his bed is of sharp spits; viii. 17, 
on an heap of stones doth he rest, and shall live in the midst of gravel-stones. 


Ultimate Dualism + 175 


And these were they that lent money and demanded usury upon 
usury. 

32 And other men and women being cast down from a great 
rock (precipice) fell (came) to the bottom, and again were driven 
by them that were set over them, to go up upon the rock, and 
thence were cast down to the bottom and had no rest from this 
torment. And these were they that did defile their bodies, behav- 
ing as women: and the women that were with them were they 
that lay with one another as a man with a woman. 

33 And beside that rock was a place full of much fire, and 
there stood men which with their own hands had made images 
for themselves instead of God, [And beside them other men and 
women]* having rods of fire and smiting one another and never 
resting from this manner of torment... . 

34 And yet others near unto them, men and women, burning 
and turning themselves about and roasted as in a pan. And these 
were they that forsook the way of God. 

Furthermore the angel Ezraél shall bring children and 
maidens, to show them those that are tormented. They shall be 
chastised with pains, with hanging up (?) and with a multitude 
of wounds which flesh-devouring birds shall inflict upon them. 
These are they that boast themselves (trust) in their sins, and 
obey not their parents and follow not the instruction of their 
fathers, and honor not them that are more aged than they. 

Beside them shall be girls clad in darkness for a garment, 
and they shall be sore chastised and their flesh shall be torn in 
pieces. These are they that kept not their virginity until they 
were given in marriage, and with these torments shall they be 
punished, and shall feel them. 

And again, other men and women, gnawing their tongues 
without ceasing, and being tormented with everlasting fire. These 
are the servants (slaves) which were not obedient unto their 
masters; and this then is their judgement for ever. 


* The bracketed words are intrusive. 


176 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


And hard by this place of torment shall be men and women 
dumb and blind, whose raiment is white. They shall crowd one 
upon another, and fall upon coals of unquenchable fire. These 
are they that give alms and say: We are righteous before God: 
whereas they have not sought after righteousness. 

Ezraé] the angel of God shall bring them forth out of this 
fire and establish a judgement of decision. This then is their 
judgement. A river of fire shall flow and all they that are judged 
shall be drawn down into the middle of the river. And Uriel 
shall set them there. 

And there are wheels of fire, and men and women hung 
thereon by the strength of the whirling thereof. And they that 
are in the pit shall burn: now these are the sorcerers and sor- 
ceresses. Those wheels shall be in all decision (judgement, pun- 
ishment) by fire without number. 

Thereafter shall the angels bring mine elect and righteous 
which are perfect in all uprightness, and bear them in their 
hands, and clothe them with the raiment of the life that is above. 
They shall see their desire on them that hated them, and the 
torment of every one shall be for ever according to his works. 

And all they that are in torment shall say with one voice: 
Have mercy upon us, for now know we the judgement of God, 
which he declared unto us aforetime, and we believed not. And 
the angel Tatirokos (Tartaruchus, keeper of hell: a word corre- 
sponding in formation to Temeluchus) shall come and chastise 
them with yet greater torment, and say unto them: Now do ye 
repent, when it is no longer the time for repentance, and naught 
of life remaineth. And they shall say: Righteous is the judgement 
of God, for we have heard and perceived that his judgement is 
good; for we are recompensed according to our deeds.83 


As if this were not bad enough, the conception is 
strangely increased in horror when described by writers both 
emotionally sensitive and intellectually gifted. The mere 
narrative of the Apocalypse of Peter might be the description 


Ultimate Dualism - 177 


of a nightmare, but let us listen to the celebrated Jesuit 
theologian, Cardinal Bellarmine: 


b>— It remaineth that we consider the justice which God will use 
in punishing sinners in the uttermost depths of hell. Wherefore 
if we mark with attention and diligence, we shall indeed under- 
stand that it is most true which the Apostle teaches “It is a fearful 
thing to fall into the hands of the living God” (Heb. 10:31). 

For God the just judge will punish all sins though ever so 
small, as, for example, an idle word, for so we read in the Gospel: 
“Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall render an 
account of it in the day of judgement” (Matt. 12:36). 

Neither shall all sins be punished only, but so horribly pun- 
ished that scarcely any man can imagine it. For as no eye hath 
seen, nor ear heard; neither hath it entered into the heart of man, 
what things God hath prepared for them that love him (1 Cor. 
2:9) , so no eye hath seen nor ear heard, neither has it entered 
into the heart of man what things God has prepared for those 
who hate him. 

The punishments of sinners in hell shall be very great, very 
many and very pure, to wit, mixed with no comforts and which 
shall increase their misery everlasting. They shall be many because 
every power of the soul and every sense shall be tormented. 
Weigh the words of the highest Judge’s sentence “Get ye away 
from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire which has been prepared 
for the devil and his angels” (Matt. 25:41). Get ye away, He 
saith, depart ye from the company of the blessed, being forever 
deprived of the sight of God, which is the highest essential hap- 
piness and best end for which you were created. Ye cursed, He 
saith, that is, hope not hereafter for any benediction for ye are 
deprived of the life of grace and all hope of salvation; the water 
of wisdom and dew of divine inspiration shall not rain upon you; 
neither the grace of repentance nor the flower of charity, nor the 
fruits of good works shall grow in you. Neither shall ye lose only 
spiritual and eternal goods, but also corporal and temporal; ye 


178 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


shall have no riches, no delights, no comforts, but shall be like 
the fig tree which being cursed by me withered from the root all 
over (Matt. 21:19). Into fire, that is, into the furnace of burning 
and unquenchable fire (Matt. 13:42) which shall not consume 
one member alone but all the members together with horrible 
punishment. Everlasting, that is, into a fire which is blown by 
the breath of the Almighty and therefore needeth no fuel to make 
it always to burn, that as your fault shall still remain, so your 
punishment shall forever endure. Therefore I can truly exclaim 
“Which of you can dwell with devouring fire? Which of you 
shall dwell with everlasting burnings?” (Isa. 33:14). For there 
shall be the worm of conscience and remembrance of this life 
wherein they might easily, if they would, have escaped their pun- 
ishment and obtained eternal joys... . 

But if all these things which we have said of the loss of all 
goods both celestial and terrestrial and of most unsufferable 
dolours, ignominies and disgraces were to have end, or at least 
some kind of comfort or mitigation as all miseries in this life 
have, they might in some sort be thought tolerable; but since 
it is most certain and undeniable that the happiness of the blessed 
shall continue forever without mixture of misery, so likewise shall 
the unhappiness of the damned continue forever without mixture 
of comfort.* 

Lastly, if the sin of the damned were not eternal, we might 
marvel that the punishment thereof should be eternal but seeing 
that the obstinacy of the damned is eternal, why should we won- 
der if their punishment is also eternal? And this wilful obstinacy 
in wickedness, which is in both the damned and the devils, I 
say, this perverse will, which is in them averted from God the 
chief happiness, and shall so forever remain, maketh holy men 
more to fear a mortal sin than hell fire. 


And, as a final description of hell, here is Matthias 


* Italics mine. Compare with the passage similarly italicized in the follow- 
ing extract from Scheeben.—A.W.W. 


Ultimate Dualism - 179 


Scheeben again, writing in a modern idiom and with full 
sincerity and intellectual profundity, and for that very 
reason achieving what is possibly the highest masterpiece of 
subtle ghastliness in all religious literature: 


h— It is the punishment by fire in particular which distinguishes 
the state of the damned as the reverse of a mysterious order, and 
thus is in itself truly a mystery which in its horror surpasses the 
grasp of natural reason no less than the inexpressible magnifi- 
cence of salvation. 

The mysterious aspect of infernal punishment entails, espe- 
cially for man, corporal punishment and defines its nature. 

The fact that man must suffer his everlasting punishment 
also in his body has at least a de facto relation to the supernatural 
order. For the miraculous resurrection of the flesh and its un- 
relenting preservation for eternal punishment is undeniably re- 
lated to the resurrection and preservation of the body for eternal 
reward. If the latter did not occur, the former would not be rel- 
evant; but where the latter happens, the former must happen too, 
tf the manner and extent of the punishment is to correspond 
to that of the reward.* Since the latter is fully motivated only in 
the divine ordinance, the former, therefore, must be considered as 
the specific consequence of the violation of this ordinance. 

As for the punishment itself, it clearly must be seen on the 
one hand as analogous to the chastisement of the spirit, and on 
the other hand as a state which corresponds inversely to the trans- 
figuration of the bodies of the blessed. 

It must stem from a supernatural power which permeates the 
body without destroying it and, through the body, most dread- 
fully tortures the soul; it must stem from a supernatural power 
because otherwise the punishment of the body would not corre- 
spond to the punishment of the soul nor, for that matter, to the 


* Italics mine —A.W.W. 


180 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


glory of the transfigured body, and, finally, because natural forces 
can consume only while they simultaneously destroy. By the same 
divine power, by which He dignifies and exalts soul and body in 
man’s glorification, God must now debase and torture soul and 
body, but in reverse order. Because God achieves the body’s trans- 
figuration through the fact that he causes it to be governed and 
spiritualized by the soul, He uses the degradation of the body, 
on the other hand, as a means to a much deeper abasement of the 
soul; the body is to draw the soul along to its perdition. It is 
precisely the fact that the soul loses its superiority over the body 
and falls under its dominance which constitutes the soul’s well 
deserved punishment, while, on the other hand, the soul’s most 
precious reward lies in its fullest dominance over the body. 

In consequence of the body’s glorification a light that was 
induced by divine power and can be perceived by the senses, 
endows the body with an unearthly beauty: so, in a similiar way, 
a physical affliction must be connected with the degradation of 
the body—an affliction which, though caused by divine power 
and therefore supernatural, but for that reason no less discernible, 
devours and tortures the body; or rather, it is this very same 
affliction which similar to the natural fire brings the body to the 
brink of destruction and causes the soul in this body the same, 
only much more intense, suffering than it would endure from the 
natural fire at the height of its destructiveness. 

The material agent by which God reduces the body to this 
state of all-consuming heat, thereby inflicting the torture of burn- 
ing upon the soul which experiences this torture as the life prin- 
ciple of the body, is of course much more similar to earthly fire 
than that agent which tortures the spirit in itself. But it differs 
from natural fire inasmuch as its flame is not caused by a natural 
chemical process: it is maintained by divine power and therefore 
does not disintegrate the body which it assails, but keeps it for- 
ever suspended in a state of agonizing heat; it is, after all, super- 


Ultimate Dualism - 181 


natural fire in its origin, in its efficacy and in the immeasurable 
intensity of pain it causes. 

From this then follows that the fire of hell has a different 
effect on the body, and on the soul as the life-principle of the 
body, than it has on the soul not yet rejoined with the body, or 
on the pure spirits. In the first instance it can create a true agony 
of burning; in the latter, however, it can, as previously stated, 
neither burn the soul in an actual sense nor create in it the sensa- 
tion which our soul experiences when the body is exposed to the 
tortures of burning; it can only, by divine power, create an anal- 
ogous, but for that reason no less immense destruction and torture 
in the spirit. Therefore the Savior could designate as one and the 
same this fire which, on the one hand, was prepared for the resur- 
rected condemned human being and on the other hand for the 
devil and his angels because in both instances it is the same agent 
applied by the force of divine wrath, but it acts differently accord- 
ing to the different susceptibility of the subject.85 


The words italicized in both of the foregoing quotations 
are rather startling, considering the general viewpoint of 
their authors. In attempting a logical justification of the exist- 
ence of so excruciating a Hell in the same universe that 
contains the Beatific Vision of Love Itself, they have let slip 
the inevitable conclusion that Heaven and Hell are polar and 
thus mutually sustaining. The sine qua non of absolute 
goodness is absolute evil. And neither Bellarmine nor Schee- 
ben leave room for the least doubt that Hell is unqualified, 
absolute, and unimaginable evil. But if Heaven and Hell, and 
thus also the Lord and the Devil, are polar, the reality of the 
two is the unity which lies implicitly between them. In this 
light the War in Heaven begins to look like a conspiracy, 
an immense cosmic drama, an ultimate ‘big act’’ whereby the 
universe scares itself stiff for the thrill of it. For it is as if in 


182 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


the far-off beginnings, behind the scenes, before the world- 
drama began, the Lord and the Devil had agreed to have a 
battle, like Tweedledum and Tweedledee—their agreement 
being their inexpressible, unmanifest, and ineffable unity. 
To be an orthodox Christian is therefore to enter into an 
intense adventure. It is comparable to joining in with a 
gambling game like Russian roulette, where the stakes are 
life and death. Only here the stakes are eternal bliss and 
eternal torture—the issue to be decided irrevocably in one 
short human life which may end at any minute. Further- 
more, one lives in continual uncertainty as to the outcome 
because salvation depends upon avoiding the opposing sins 
of presumption and despair. The former is being sure that 
one is saved, and the latter being sure that one is damned. 
For once there is certainty, the essential suspense and thrill of 
the gambling game has been destroyed. What is more, it is of 
the essence of this game that one does not know that it is.a 
game, that the original conspiracy between the Lord and the 
Devil be kept secret. But it is also part of the whole mystique 
of such games that there be occasional cracks in the wall, 
occasional opportunities to look behind the scenes and 
become disillusioned. In the traditional Christian world these 
opportunities were made all the rarer, and thus all the more 
valuable, because the mystic was in constant danger of being 
accused of heresy. Just as one must not be certain as to one’s 
eventual salvation or damnation, there must also be doubt as 
to whether mystical vision is of the Lord or of the Devil. For 
without doubt there is no gambling. The guardian of the 
game’s secret, who, when it finally comes down to it, 1s 
oneself, will outface you until the very last moment. Let not 
your left hand know what your right hand doeth. Thus if 
Christ sits at the right hand of God, who sits at the left? 


Ultimate Dualism + 183 


To see through the game, then, requires somewhat more 
heroism than playing it, than taking quite seriously the 
stakes of Heaven and Hell. It involves the risk of the most 
awful blasphemy of saying that the Lord and the Devil are 
one—demon est deus inversus. The test of heroism in this 
case is that one must be able to find one’s way out of Hell 
from its ultimate bottom, and the clue is given in the con- 
cluding canto of Dante’s Inferno. Dante, with Virgil as his 
guide, has come to the deepest pit of Hell—the region where 
Satan himself sits locked in ice. The way out—down and out 
—lies through climbing down the back of the Fiend himself, 
first waiting for the moment when his batlike wings are most 
widely opened. 


At his command, I clasped him round the neck. 
He took advantage of the time and place, 
And when the wings were opened wide enough, 
He laid firm hold upon the shaggy flanks. 

| From shag to shag he now went slowly down, 
Between the matted hair and crusts of ice. 
When we had reached that point just where the thigh 
Doth turn upon the thickness of the haunch, 
My leader, with fatigue and labored breath 
Brought round his head to where his legs had been, 
And grasped the hair like one who clambers up, 
So that I thought our way lay back to hell. 
“Hold fast! For it is by such stairs as these,” 
My master said to me with panting breath, 
“We must depart from such great wickedness!” 
Now through a rocky cleft he issued forth, 
And made me seat myself upon its edge; 
He then walked carefully up to my side. 
I raised my eyes, believing I should look 
On Lucifer as I had seen him last: 


184 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


But lo! I saw his legs were uppermost. 

And if, indeed, I then became perplexed, 

Let me be judged in ignorance by those 

Who fail to see what point it was I passed! 
“Rise to your feet,” the master said to me, 
“Long is the way, and difficult the road: 

The sun returns already to mid-tierce.” 

It was no palace hallway where we were, 

But rather a vast dungeon in the rock; 
Uneven was its floor, and dim the light. 
“Before I turn my steps from the abyss, 

Dear master,” I said now that I had risen, 

“Say a few words to lead me from my error. 
Where is the ice? And how is Lucifer 

Thus fastened upside down? How has the sun 
So quickly moved from evening into morn?” 
And he replied: “You still must think yourself 
Beyond the center, where I grasped the hide 

Of that fell worm who perforates the world. 
You were upon that side when I went down; 
But when I turned around, we passed the point 
To which all weights are drawn from everywhere. 
Now that you have come beneath the hemisphere 
Facing the region where dry land prevails, 
Below whose culminating point was slain 

The Man who lived and died without one sin. 
Your feet now rest upon the little sphere 
That forms the other aspect of Giudecca. 

Here it is morn when there the evening falls; 
And he whose hair has served us for a ladder 
Still remains fixed as he was fixed before. 

It was upon this side he fell from heaven: 

The earth, which first projected outward here, 
For dread of him, made of the sea a veil, 
Retreating to your hemisphere. Perhaps 


Ultimate Dualism - 185 


The land where we now are, in fear of him 
Rushed upward too, and left this vacant space.” 
A place as distant from Beelzebub 

As his whole tomb’s extent, lies there below. 

It is not known by sight, but by the sound 

Of a small rivulet that there descends 

Along the hollow of a rock, carved out 

By its long, twisting course and slight incline. 
Upon this secret path my guide and I 

Now trod, to seek again the world of light; 
And caring not for rest, we mounted upward, 
He first and I behind, until I saw 

Some of those lovely gems that heaven wears, 
Through a round opening far above our heads: 
Thence we came forth, again to see the stars.86 


It will be recognized that in Dante’s Ptolemaic cosmology 
the bottom of Hell is the narrow end of a conical pit, reaching 
to the center of the earth, and that antipodal to this pit is the 
Mountain of Purgatory. Satan’s abode is therefore the very 
center of the cosmos. It seems, then, highly probable that the 
symbolism of the stream and the secret path are initiatic. The 
stream that is known by sound but not by sight recalls St. 
Thomas’s hymn: 


Taste and touch and vision to discern Thee fail; 
Faith, which comes by hearing, pierces through the veil. 


Furthermore the long, twisting course of the stream’s path is 
reminiscent of the recurrent theme of the labyrinth through 
which the hero or neophyte must find his way to freedom. To 
discover the secret path is to discover that as the center 
implies the circumference, so Hell implies Heaven, and 
Satan implies the Lord. And implication is the unity of 
opposites. The Roman Catholic liturgy also contains one 


186 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


point at which the veil is lifted, when, at the Blessing of the 
Paschal Candle on Holy Saturday, the deacon sings, “O truly 
necessary sin of Adam which the death of Christ has blotted 
out! O happy fault which merited such and so great a 
Redeemer!” So, too, Christ and Satan are at one as the. 
Serpent—Satan as the serpent coiled around the Tree of 
Knowledge, and Christ as the serpent on the Cross, prefigured 
by the nehushtan or bronze serpent which Moses “‘lifted up” 
for the healing of a plague of snakes.* There is, further- 
more, the celebrated Legend of the Cross in which it is told 
that the Cross was made from beams which Adam had cut 
from the Tree of Knowledge, thus making one the Tree of 
Salvation and the Tree of Perdition. Paradise Lost has also 
its hint of this fundamental polarity: ; 


There is a cave 
Within the Mount of God, fast by his throne, 
Where Light and Darkness in perpetual round 
Lodge and dislodge by turns, which makes through Heaven 
Grateful vicissitude, like day and night; 
Light issues forth, and at the other door 
Obsequious Darkness enters, till her hour 
To veil the heaven, though darkness there might well 
Seem twilight here.87 


Now if all this interpretation be deemed sophistry, let 
us consider one more image. The principle of evil is very 
frequently associated with corruption—that is, with slime, 
excrement, mud, worms, and everything that might be 
described as “goo.” One of the common beliefs about 


* The symbolism is Jesus’s own, in John 3: 14, “And as Moses lifted up the 
serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that who- 
soever believeth may in him have eternal life.” 


Ultimate Dualism - 187 


Satanism and witchcraft is that.it involves transformations of 
the human form so that it flows from shape to shape, assuming 
such aspects as one sees in the diabolical figures of Bosch 
and Breughel. The only thing to be done with the final, 
stinking, green goo to which all this leads is to burn it up; 
and that leaves us with nice, clean, dry ashes. On the other 
hand, the principle of goodness is commonly associated with 
structure—with that which is clear and firm, organized and 
reliable, crystalline and pure. Goo is the flesh and structure 
is the spirit. Soul, according to Aristotle, is the form of the 
body. As the corruptible and impermanent, matter tends 
toward goo. But as the perfect and eternal, spirit tends 
toward purely abstract structure. 

The trouble with pure structure, with ashes, bones, 
crystals, and perfect abstractions, is that it is quite dead. It 
is not truly spiritual at all because it is completely static 
and comprehensible. On the other hand, the greenest and 
sloppiest goo is a sort of compost from which living forms will 
again emerge. The body, just because it is impermanent and 
corruptible, is the true expression of spirit. It is allied to the 
dynamic arts of music, dancing, and poetry because it comes 
and goes like the ‘‘wind that bloweth where it listeth,’ and 
cannot be trapped in any fixed form. The romantic will 
therefore tend to favor goo, and the classicist, structure. Like- 
wise, Mysticism is in the direction of goo, whereas moralism 
and dogmatism go toward structure. But the obvious truth of 
the matter is that life is always structured goo, or gooey 
structure. When analyzed to the limit, structures turn out to 
be random quanta, a sort of electronic goo. Under the micro- 
scope, goo is a system of minute and rapidly changing struc- 
tures. Absolute goo or absolute structure would thus be 
total annihilation, and the same will be true of-absolute evil 


188 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


and absolute goodness. These harsh alternatives exist only in 
the abstract. The real world is rather vibration and alterna- 
tion, the wave that goes up and down at once. 

In sum, then, the vast metaphysical schism which tradi- 
tional Christianity proposes is redeemable only if there is a 
twinkle in the Father’s eye comparable’ to the ‘“‘fear-not”’ 
gesture of Shiva in his dance of world-destroying rage. The 
melodramatic choice between everlasting delight and ever- 
lasting torment, as also between taking it seriously or in play, 
is a test of nerve. There is ample precedent for this kind of 
thing in Holy Scripture, as witness the Lord’s command to 
Abraham to offer up his son, Isaac, as a sacrifice. Obviously, 
the Lord calls it off at the last minute when it has become 
clear that Abraham is going to go through with it. The game 
involved is a celestial version of “chicken.” 

The whole genius of Christianity is that by requiring its 
followers to accept impossible challenges it greatly intensifies 
human consciousness and self-knowledge. The first and great- 
est commandment, ‘““Thou shalt love the Lord thy God,” is 
just such an impossible challenge. For a resolute attempt to 
obey it reveals the illusory nature of the ego or conscious 
will as the effective agent in love, or in any other deeply 
spontaneous and creative activity. It is only by trying to 
love, or to be humble, with the Devil and all his angels in hot 
pursuit, that one discovers the full depth of self-interest and 
pride involved in the very attempt. The injunctions and pro- 
hibitions of Jehovah bear fruit in the subtle wisdom of 
Freud. This is perhaps why Western drama and fiction from 
Shakespeare onward display an understanding of human 
character without any parallel in the literature of the world. 


V. 
DISMEMBERMENT 
REMEMBERED 


O,.. of the more widely distributed themes of 

mythology is that the universe arises from the sacri- 
ficial dismemberment of a divine being. In Hindu mythol- 
ogy the cosmic drama of the One, Brahman, pretending to 
be the many is called atma yajna or ‘“‘self-sacrifice,”” meaning 
simultaneously that the plurality and differentiation of the 
world is the cutting up of a primal unity, and that the 
dismemberment is voluntary, for in the Godhead what 
happens and what is willed are one and the same. The 
obscure and unexplained reference in the Apocalypse to 
“the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world’ has 
been worked up by theologians of the Eastern Orthodox 
Church into a whole doctrine of the creation of the world 
by kenosts, that is, the self-emptying or self-abandonment of 
God. The creation is seen as the same kind of divine action 
as the Incarnation, in which God the Son voluntarily lays 
aside his omnipotence and glory to “humble himself and 
become obedient unto death.” In Babylonian mythology 
heaven and earth are created from the sliced body of the 


191 


192 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


dragon Tiamat, slain in battle by Marduk, the hero of 
heaven. In Norse mythology, too, Othin, Vili, and Ve create 
the world from the sundered body of Ymir, the hermaphro- 
ditic giant: 


Of Ymir’s flesh the earth was fashioned, 
And of his sweat the sea; 

Crags of his bones, trees of his hair, 
And of his skull the sky. 

Then of his bones the blithe gods made 
Midgard for sons of men; 

And of his brain the bitter-mooded 
Clouds were all created.88 


In Hesiod’s Theogeny Ouranos and Gaia, Heaven and Earth, 
are separated by the titan Kronos, who castrates his father, 
Ouranos, with a sickle and pushes him up out of the way. So 
also in the Maori creation myth Tane-mahuta, the son of the 
sky-father, Rangi, and the earth-mother, Papa, has to rend his 
parents apart in order to emerge from the womb.®® 

It follows quite logically, then, that where there is dis- 
memberment in the beginning there is remembrance at the 
end—that the fulfillment or consummation of the cosmic 
game is the discovery of what was covered and the recollec- 
tion of what was scattered. It is, perhaps, in the sense that we 
must understand the crucial moment of the Christian Mass 
when bread and wine are transformed into the Body and 
Blood of Christ in obedience to the commandment, ‘‘Do this 
in remembrance of me.” Is not this, also, why all the dis- 
ciplines of spiritual integration are based on concentration or 
recollection for the purpose of overcoming scattered and dis- 
tracted thoughts? “If thine eye be single, thy whole body 
shall be full of light.” Get with it. Pull yourself together. A 


Dismemberment Remembered - 193 


house which is divided against itself cannot stand. Make up 
your mind. The choice is between paranoia, being beside 
yourself, and metanoia, being with yourself—ordinarily trans- 
lated as repentance. 

Joseph Campbell®® has pointed out a curious contrast 
between the creation myths of the East and the West, namely, 
that in the East there is a primordial splitting apart of the 
Creator* whereas, in the West, the Creator remains entire 
and the split transpires within the creature. Actually, this 
split and non-split situation of the Creator corresponds with 
what, in Vedanta philosophy, is called the ntrguna Brahman 
and the saguna Brahman—the Godhead without differentiated 
qualities and the Godhead with such qualities, or the 
unmanifest and manifest aspects of the supreme Self. The 
Godhead is simultaneously involved and not involved in the 
production of the world, responsible and not responsible for 
the mystery of iniquity, omnipotently controlling everything 
and yet open to surprise, granting the creature freedom of 
will. 

Here then are two Western versions of the primordial 
split, the Hebrew and the Greek accounts of the division of 
the sexes, the former in Ginzberg’s reconstruction of the 
haggadah. 


»— When Adam opened his eyes the first time, and beheld the 
world about him, he broke into praise of God, ‘How great are 
Thy works, O Lord!’ But his admiration for the world surround- 
ing him did not exceed the admiration all creatures conceived 
for Adam. They took him to be their creator, and they all came 
to offer him adoration. But he spoke: ‘Why do you come to 
worship me? Nay, you and I together will acknowledge the 


* See above, p. 83, the quotation from the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad. 


194 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


majesty and the might of Him who hath created us all. The Lord 
reigneth,’ he continued, ‘He is apparelled with majesty.’ 

And not alone the creatures on earth, even the angels 
thought Adam the lord of all, and they were about to salute 
him with ‘Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts,’ when God 
caused sleep to fall upon him, and then the angels knew that he 
was but a human being. 

The purpose of the sleep that enfolded Adam was to give 
him a wife, so that the human race might develop, and all crea- 
tures recognize the difference between God and man. When the 
earth heard what God had resolved to do, it began to tremble 
and quake. ‘I have not the strength,’ it said, ‘to provide food for 
the herd of Adam's descendants.’ But God pacified it with the 
words, ‘I and thou together, we will find food for the herd.’ 
Accordingly, time was divided between God and the earth; God 
took the night, and the earth took the day. Refreshing sleep 
nourishes and strengthens man, it affords him life and rest, 
while the earth brings forth produce with the help of God, who 
waters it. Yet man must work the earth to earn his food. 

The Divine resolution to bestow a companion on Adam met 
the wishes of man, who had been overcome by a feeling of isola- 
tion when the animals came to him in pairs to be named. To 
banish his loneliness, Lilith was first given to Adam as wife. Like 
him she had been created out of the dust of the ground. But 
she remained with him only a short time, because she insisted 
upon enjoying full equality with her husband. She derived her 
rights from their identical origin. With the help of the Ineffable 
Name, which she pronounced, Lilith flew away from Adam, and 
vanished in the air. Adam complained before God that the wife 
He had given him had deserted him and God sent forth three 
angels to capture her. They found her in the Red Sea, and they 
sought to make her go back with the threat that, unless she went, 
she would lose a hundred of her demon children daily by death. 
But Lilith preferred this punishment to living with Adam. She 
takes her revenge by injuring babes—baby boys during the first 


Dismemberment Remembered - 195 


night of their life, while baby girls are exposed to her wicked 
designs until they are twenty days old. The only way to ward off 
the evil is to attach an amulet bearing the names of her three 
angel captors to the children, for such had been the agreement 
between them. 

The woman destined to become the true companion of 
man was taken from Adam’s body, for ‘only when like is joined 
unto like the union is indissoluble.’ The creation of woman from 
man was possible because Adam originally had two faces, which 
were separated at the birth of Eve. 

When God was on the point of making Eve, He said: ‘T will 
not make her from the head of man, lest she carry her head 
high in arrogant pride; not from the eye, lest she be wanton-eyed; 
not from the ear, lest she be an eavesdropper; not from the neck, 
lest she be insolent; not from the mouth, lest she be a tattler; not 
from the heart, lest she be inclined to envy; not from the hand, 
lest she be a meddler; not from the foot, lest she be a gadabout. I 
will form her from a chaste portion of the body,’ and to every 
limb and organ as He formed it, God said, ‘Be chaste! Be chastel’ 
Nevertheless, in spite of the great caution used, woman has all 
the faults God tried to obviate. The daughters of Zion were 
haughty and walked with stretched forth necks and wanton 
eyes; Sarah was an eavesdropper in her own tent, when the angel 
spoke with Abraham; Miriam was a talebearer, accusing Moses; 
Rachel was envious of her sister Leah; Eve put out her hand 
to take the forbidden fruit, and Dinah was a gadabout. 

The physical formation of woman is far more complicated 
than that of man, as it must be for the function of childbearing, 
and likewise the intelligence of woman matures more quickly 
than the intelligence of man. Many of the physical and psychical 
differences between the two sexes must be attributed to the fact 
that man was formed from the ground and woman from bone. 
Women need perfumes, while men do not; dust of the ground 
remains the same no matter how long it is kept; flesh, however, 
requires salt to keep it in good condition. The voice of women 


196 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


is shrill, not so the voice of men; when soft viands are cooked, 
no sound is heard, but let a bone be put in a pot, and at once 
it crackles. A man is easily placated, not so a woman; a few drops 
of water suffice to soften a clod of earth; a bone stays hard, even 
if it were to soak in water for days. The man must ask the woman 
to be his wife, and not the woman the man to be her husband, 
because it is man who has sustained the loss of his rib, and he 
sallies forth to make good his loss again. The very differences 
between the sexes in garb and social forms go back to the origin 
of man and woman for their reasons. Woman covers her hair in 
token of Eve’s having brought sin into the world; she tries to hide 
her shame; and women precede men in a funeral cortege, because 
it was woman who brought death into the world. And the 
religious commands addressed to women alone are connected with 
the history of Eve. Adam was the heave offering of the world, and 
Eve defiled it. As expiation, all women are commanded to separate 
a heave offering from the dough. And because woman extin- 
guished the light of man’s soul, she is bidden to kindle the 
Sabbath light. 

Adam was first made to fall into a deep sleep before the 
rib for Eve was taken from his side. For, had he watched her 
creation, she would not have awakened love in him. To this day 
it is true that men do not appreciate the charms of women whom 
they have known and observed from childhood up. Indeed, God 
had created a wife for Adam before Eve, but he would not have 
her, because she had been made in his presence. Knowing well 
all the details of her formation, he was repelled by her. But 
when he roused himself from his profound sleep, and saw Eve 
before him in all her surprising beauty and grace, he exclaimed, 
*This is she who caused my heart to throb many a night!’ Yet he 
discerned at once what the nature of woman was. She would, he 
knew, seek to carry her point with man either by entreaties and 
tears, or flattery and caresses. He said, therefore, “This is my 
never-silent belll’ 

The wedding of the first couple was celebrated with pomp 


Dismemberment Remembered - 197 


self, before presenting her to Adam, attired and adorned Eve as a 
bride. Yea, He appealed to the angels, saying: ‘Come, let us 
perform services of friendship for Adam and his helpmate, for 
the world rests upon friendly services, and they are more pleas- 
ing in My sight than the sacrifices Israel will offer upon the altar.’ 
The angels accordingly surrounded the marriage canopy, and 
God pronounced the blessings upon the bridal couple. .. . The 
angels then danced and played upon musical instruments before 
Adam and Eve in their ten bridal chambers of gold, pearls, and 
precious stones, which God had prepared for them.®! 


There now follows the Greek version, which Plato puts 
into the mouth of Aristophanes in the Symposium: 


»— First let me treat of the nature and state of man; for the 
original human nature was not like the present, but different. 
In the first place, the sexes were originally three in number, not 
two as they are now; there was man, woman, and the union of 
the two, having a name corresponding to this double nature; 
this once had a real existence, but is now lost, and the name only 
is preserved as a term of reproach. In the second place, the 
primeval man was round and had four hands and four feet, back 
and sides forming a circle, one head with two faces, looking 
opposite ways, set on a round neck and precisely alike; also four 
ears, two privy members, and the remainder to correspond. When 
he had a mind he could walk as men now do, and he could also 
roll over and over at a great rate, leaning on his four hands and 
four feet, eight in all, like tumblers going over and over with 
their legs in the air; this was when he wanted to run fast. Now 
there were these three sexes, because the sun, moon, and earth are 
three; and the man was originally the child of the sun, the 
woman of the earth, and the man-woman of the moon, which is 
made up of sun and earth, and they were all round and moved 
round and round like their parents. Terrible was their might 
and strength, and the thoughts of their hearts were great, and 


198 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


of Otus and Ephialtes who, as Homer says, dared to scale heaven, 
and would have laid hands upon the gods. Doubt reigned in the 
councils of Zeus and of the gods. Should they kill them and 
annihilate the race with thunderbolts, as they had done the 
giants, then there would be an end of the sacrifice and worship 
which men offered to them; but, on the other hand, the gods 
could not suffer their insolence to be unrestrained. At last, after 
a good deal of reflection, Zeus discovered a way. He said: ‘I have 
a notion which will humble their pride and mend their manners; 
they shall continue to exist, but I will cut them in two, and then 
they will be diminished in strength and increased in numbers; 
this will have the advantage of making them more profitable to 
us. They shall walk upright on two legs, and if they continue 
insolent and won't be quiet, I will split them again and they 
shall hop about on a single leg.’ He spoke and cut men in two, 
like a sorb-apple which is halved for pickling, or as you might 
divide an egg with a hair; and as he cut them one after another, 
he bade Apollo give the face and the half of the neck a turn in 
order that the man might contemplate the section of himself: 
this would teach him a lesson of humility. He was also to heal 
their wounds and compose their forms. Apollo twisted the face 
and pulled the skin all round over that which in our language is 
called the belly, like the purses which draw in, and he made one 
mouth in the centre, which he fastened in a knot (this is called 
the navel); he also moulded the breast and took out most of the 
wrinkles, much as a shoemaker might smooth out leather upon 
a last; he left a few, however, in the region of the belly and navel, 
as a memorial of the primeval change. After the division the two 
parts of man, each desiring his other half, came together, and 
threw their arms about one another eager to grow into one, and 
would have perished from hunger without ever making an effort, 
because they did not like to do anything apart; and when one 
of the halves died and the other survived, the survivor sought 
another mate, whether the section of an entire man or of an 


PLATE 17. Amphisbaena. 


a oo Bi 


Sea HIN 
* ae 
I ANI) 


- \ 4 VO. 
RUG Aa ae 


‘ 


’ ‘ ‘ 
a WAS pans 


Rr nee) 


| 
} 
Mi 
i 
, 
i 
hi 


sweets see 


2 weer 


Pec et en et 


t 
I 
t 


PLATE 18. Symbolic door. 


PLATE 19. Brahma. 


PLATES 20a. AND 20b. Two forms of the four-faced Brahma. 


PLATE 21. Shiva as Nataraja, King of the Dance. 


vorld. 


i 


Indian map of the 


9 


2 


PLATE 


PLATE 23. Amitayus Mandala. 


Dismemberment Remembered + 199 


entire woman, which had usurped the name of man and woman, 
and clung to that. And this was being the destruction of them, 
when Zeus in pity invented a new plan: he turned the parts of 
generation round in front, for this was not always their position, 
and they sowed the seed no longer as hitherto like grasshoppers 
in the ground, but in one another; and after the transposition 
the male generated in the female in order that by the mutual 
embraces of man and woman they might breed, and the race 
might continue; or if man came to man they might be satisfied, 
and rest and go their ways to the business of life: so ancient is the 
desire of one another which is implanted in us, reuniting our 
original nature, making one of two, and healing the state of man. 
Each of us when separated is but the indenture of a man, having 
one side only like a flat fish, and he is always looking for his 
other half. Men who are a section of that double nature which 
was once called Androgynous are lascivious; adulterers are 
generally of this breed, and also adulterous and lascivious women: 
the women who are a section of the woman don’t care for men, 
but have female attachments; the female companions are of this 
sort. But the men who are a section of the male follow the male, 
and while they are young, being a piece of the man, they hang 
about him and embrace him, and they are themselves the best 
of boys and youths because they have the most manly nature. 
Some indeed assert that they are shameless, but this is not true; 
for they do not act thus from any want of shame, but because 
they are valiant and manly, and have a manly countenance, and 
they embrace that which is like them. And these when they 
grow up are our statesmen, and these only, which is a great proof 
of the truth of what I am saying. And when they reach manhood 
they are lovers of youth, and are not naturally inclined to marry 
or beget children, which they do, if at all, only in obedience to 
the law, but they are satisfied if they may be allowed to live 
unwedded; and such a nature is prone to love and ready to 
return love, and always embracing that which is akin to him. 
And when one of them finds his other half, whether he be a 


200 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


lover of youth or a lover of another sort, the pair are lost in an 
amazement of love and friendship and intimacy, and one will 
not be out of the other’s sight, as I may say, even for a moment: 
these are they who pass their lives with one another; yet they 
could not explain what they desire of one another. For the intense 
yearning which each of them has towards the other does not 
appear to be the desire of intercourse, but of something else 
which the soul desires and cannot tell, and of which she has only 
a dark and doubtful presentiment. Suppose Hephaestus, with his 
instruments, to come to the pair who are lying side by side and 
say to them, ‘What do you people want of one another?’ they 
would be unable to explain. And suppose further, that when he 
saw their perplexity he said: ‘Do you desire to be wholly one; 
always day and night to be in one another’s company? for if this 
is what you desire, I am ready to melt you into one and let you 
grow together, so that being two you shall become one, and, 
while you live, live a common life as if you were a single man, 
and after your death in the world below still be one departed 
soul instead of two—I ask whether this is what you lovingly desire, 
and whether you are satisfied to attain this?’—there is not a man 
among them when he heard this who would deny or who would 
not acknowledge that this meeting and melting in one another’s 
arms, this becoming one instead of two, was the very expression 
of his ancient need. And the reason is that human nature was 
originally one and we were a whole, and the desire and pursuit 
of the whole is called love.® 


In the Brihadaranyaka Upantshad it is the Lord himself 
who becomes male and female, but in the West this ultimate 
identity of the many with the one is concealed. Duality and 
multiplicity pertain to the creature, never to the Creator, 
which is only to say that the Western situation is more 
“far out,” more adventurous, a more extreme dismemberment 
of the original unity, culminating as we have seen in the’ 


Dismemberment Remembered - 201 


shrieking madness of everlasting damnation. In the Western 
mythologies man is more lost, more out on his own, and thus 
unaware of his fundamental identity with the eternal and 
indestructible Self of all selves. And for this very reason the 
culture of the West is more frantic, more exciting, and more 
active than any other culture in the world, whether Oriental 
or “primitive.” 

Nevertheless, “the desire and pursuit of the whole” 
remains and is, as a matter of fact, all the stronger in mytho- 
logical traditions which veil the ultimate identity of the many 
and the One. Almost invariably, our mythologies preserve 
the hint of a way back to the lost unity, though the price that 
has to be paid for it is a form of death. It may be death in its 
most literal sense, as in the orthodox Christian belief that the 
Beatific Vision is available in its fullness only to those who 
have died. But in other traditions this death is metaphorical: 
it isa denial or simply an abandonment of oneself, a refusal to 
believe in anxiety, a disenchantment with the will-to-live as 
a compulsion. For if I feel that I must go on living at all 
costs, survival becomes then and there an insupportable 
drudgery. Death—the treatment of oneself as already dead— 
makes all time borrowed time, makes life unnecessary and 
purely gratuitous. Such are the only terms upon which life 
is worth living at all. 

And that is the state of “paradise regained.” For, as I 
tried to show in the Introduction, life is problematic and 
“fallen” so long as it seems that there is a real choice between 
the opposites. True integrity is therefore the recognition that 
it is simply impossible to take sides, except in play or illusion. 
To take the side of one’s own advantage in the struggle to 
survive is not so much a wickedness as an impossibility, for 
no being lives (¢.e., survives) except in relation to the whole 


202 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


community of beings. Human history seems to be showing 
that a chronic anxiety to survive is a major threat to survival, 
for the individual whom it afflicts is tormented inwardly and 
provokes aggression outwardly. The practical politics of sur- 
vival amounts all too often to the solution of today’s problem 
at the cost of seven new problems to be solved tomorrow. 

-It is in contrast with such “practicality” that the sage 
often appears to be an idiot or “wild man.” A Hindu verse 
says: 


Sometimes naked, sometimes mad, 
Now as a scholar, now as a fool, 
Thus they appear on earth— 

The free men! 


The Taoist, Chuang-tzu, says: 


When a drunken man falls out of a cart, though he may suffer, he 
does not die. His spirit is in a state of security, and therefore he does 
not suffer from contact with objective existences. If such security may 
be gotten from wine, how much more from the spontaneity of Heaven? 


Jesus says: 


The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son 
of Man has nowhere to lay his head. . . . Be not anxious for the 
morrow—what you shall eat, what you shall drink, or how you shall be 
clothed... . Sufficient to the day is the trouble thereof. 


And Lao-tzu: 


Other people seem to have everything, 
And I alone am lacking, 

For I have the mind of a fool 

And am al] muddled and vague. 

The people are so smart and bright, 
While I am just dull and confused. 


Dismemberment Remembered + 203 


They are so competent and confident, 
Whereas I am stupid, 

Careless as the sea, 

Drifting without aim. 


The sage seems to be insane because he does not take 
choosing seriously. Life is not a matter of life or death; it is 
a matter of life and death, and ultimately there is nothing to 
be dreaded. There is nothing outside the universe, against 
which it can crash. The “I” experience, which is just as much 
you as it is myself, keeps on playing hide-and-seek with itself 
in the darkness like the coming and going of myriads of stars 
—one and yet many, immortal and yet endlessly varied, able 
to continue because delivered from boredom by incessant 
death. And the sage does not see himself as a little thing 
thrown into a vast and alien space: for him, the thing-space 
is a unity as inseparable as life-death, up-down, back-front, 
or inside-outside. Because, then, he does not fundamentally 
and seriously take sides, he has to be regarded as a dreamer 
or a madman; otherwise the paint on our masks would begin 
to peel. 

As he transcends metaphysical and moral dualities, he 
also transcends the sexual duality, returning to that primal 
innocence of which monkish and clerical celibacy is, at 
best, a parody. As Lao-tzu says again: 


He who knows the male 

And yet keeps to the female 

Becomes like the space containing the world. 

As space containing the world 

He has the eternal virtue (power) which leaves not, 
And he returns to the state of infancy. 


Mythological images often imply that holiness is herma- 
phroditic, for if holiness is wholeness the complete human 
being is at once male and female—the man who has devel- 


204 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


oped his feminine aspect, and the woman her masculine. 
In Buddhist iconography, therefore, the Bodhisattva is very 
frequently a hermaphrodite. One thinks in particular of the 
Bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara, who, though masculine in name, 
is always feminine or near-feminine in form, especially in 
the Far East, where he appears as Kwan-yin or Kannon—the 
“goddess” of mercy. The traditional thirty-two physical marks 
of a Buddha include the obviously androgynous symbol of 
the retractable penis, and it is not uncommon to find ard- 
hanart or “half-woman” images of Shiva, in which the body 
is female on the left and male on the right. 

In Christianity, likewise, there is preserved the idea that 
God the Son, the Second Person of the Trinity, is Logos- 
Sophia or Word-and-Wisdom, the latter referring back to 
the feminine personification of the Divine Wisdom who 
speaks in the Book of Proverbs.®? What, furthermore, is the 
sense of Jesus’ saying that in the kingdom of heaven we shall 
be ‘‘as the angels, neither marrying nor giving in marriage’? 
In Christian iconography the angel is almost invariably 
feminine in form though masculine in name, and this is 
characteristic equally of Persian (Islamic) and Hindu-Bud- 
dhist angels (deva). 

The “square” or profane interpretation of this imagery 
is that holiness is sexlessness, and, similarly, that transcend- 
ence of the opposites, such as pleasure-and-pain or life-and- 
death, is mere detachment from physical existence. But if 
holiness is wholeness, the meaning of this imagery must be 
plus rather than minus, suggesting that innocence is not the 
absence of the erotic but its fulfillment. In the words of A. K. 
Coomaraswamy: 


»— He ... who merely represses desire, fails.. It is easy not to 
walk, but we have to walk without touching the ground. To re- 


Dismemberment Remembered + 205 


fuse the beauty of the earth—which is our birthright—from fear 
that we may sink to the level of pleasure seekers—that inaction 
would be action, and bind us to the very flesh we seek to evade. 
The virtue of the action of those who are free beings lies in the 
complete coordination of their being—body, soul and spirit, the 
inner and outer man, at one.% 


Hermaphroditic imagery suggests, rather, that there is a state 
of consciousness in which the erotic no longer has to be 
sought or pursued, because it is always present in its totality. 
In this state all relationship and all experience is erotic, for 
the lover and the beloved, the male and the female, the self 
and the other, have become one body. It is the mature adult’s 
reacquisition of what Freud called the polymorphously ‘“‘per- 
verse” body of the child—that is, a body so keenly aware that 
its whole surface and every sense is an erogenous zone, 
restoring, too, the sensation of oneness with the external world 
which we have forgotten in learning to adopt our social roles. 

Every initiation into what lies behind the passing show 
involves, therefore, an unmasking which is the same thing 
as the death of the role or identity that one has assumed in 
the socio-political game. For the individual is almost uni- 
versally unaware that he has learned to confuse himself with 
a political and legal fiction, a theory of the individual with- 
out physical or biological foundation. His identity is thus a 
construct built up through years of self-dramatization be- 
tween himself and his associates, that is, a purely artificial 
status or role. It is this role which he mistakes for his 
essential self and that he fears to lose in death, And because 
the role defines him as a separate individual and an independ- 
ent agent, his identification with it blinds him to his union 
with the external world. 

In almost all cultures there have been ‘“mysteries”— 


206 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


initiations into the world behind the scenes of both the social 
and the cosmic drama. One of the purest forms of such 
initiation is found among the Hopi Amerindians, so much 
so that it is an exemplary archetype of the whole principle of 
initiation, of being able to look behind the scenes and yet 
refrain from giving the show away. A fractious or rebellious 
Hopi child is liable to a sudden visit by a masked goblin or 
kachina, who orders the mother to surrender her unruly brat 
to be taken away and eaten. But the mother pleads with the 
goblin and eventually bribes him with a gift to go away and 
leave the child unharmed. As soon as the goblin has left the 
mother can turn on her child and say, ‘Now do you see what 
it has cost me to save your life because of your naughtiness?”’ 
But as the child approaches puberty the naughty deeds pile 
up one after another. The day comes when the kachina 
goblin will not accept any bribe, and the child is taken away 
to the goblins’ sanctuary. Upon arrival, the child finds that he 
is not alone; he is with a group of his peers, but they are all 
in the clutches of these murderous goblins. The children are 
told that they are going to be eaten, but first they are blind- 
folded and whipped. There is then the terrifying climax in 
which the children hear the sound of bull-roarers coming 
closer and closer, and just as they expect to feel the teeth of 
the goblins in their flesh there is a sudden unmasking. The 
blindfolds are taken off, the Rachina masks are doffed, and 
there are fathers, uncles, and older brothers. Thus initiated, 
the adolescent children join with the kachinas in keeping 
up the pretense for their younger brethren. 

There follow now three different types of initiation 
myth, each involving some sort of death or sleep, and each 
implying that penetration of the Wall of Paradise requires 
an understanding of the ‘‘coincidence of opposites,” or what 


Dismemberment Remembered + 207 


we have called the implicit unity of all poles.* The first is 
Lucius Apuleius’ account of his initiation into the mysteries 
of Isis in The Golden Ass: 


> Refreshed in mind by these and other benevolent injunctions 
of the high goddess, I shook off slumber almost before light of 
day, and hastened immediately to the priest’s abode. I fell in 
with him just as he was coming out of his bedchamber and 
saluted him. I made up my mind to urge my request with greater 
constancy than usual, as an act of obedience due to the sacred 
mysteries. 

But he was the first to speak. “Oh, my Lucius!” he said, as 
soon as he saw me. “How happy, how blessed you are, to whom 
the august divinity condescends so far and bends so propitious 
a willl ... And why,” he went on, “do you now stand idle and 
put delays in your own way? The day on which you have set 
your constant hopes is now at hand. The day on which, through 
the divine commands of the goddess of a thousand names, you 
may be introduced by these hands of mine to her most holy 
and sacred mysteries!” 

The affable old gentleman put his right hand through mine, 
and led me straightway to the portal of the glorious temple. 
Then when the Service of Opening had been celebrated in 
solemn rite and the morning sacrifice had been offered, he 
brought forth from the interior of the sanctuary certain books, 
written in unknown character. This consisted partly of figures 
of animals of various kinds, which suggested in an abbreviated 
form the words that corresponded to the ideas of a discourse, 
and partly of knotted letters, which twirled round in circular 
form and were condensed into corrugations, so as to preserve 
the reading from the curiosity of the profane. He announced to 
me from this book what I should have to get ready for use in 
my initiation ceremony. 


* According to Nicholas Cusanus, De Visione Dei, 9. 11, the coincidentia 
oppositorum is the wall which makes God invisible to man. 


208 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


I set to with a will and a certain amount of liberality and 
procured what was to be bought, partly by myself and partly 
through my associates. 

And now, as the priest said, the time pressed. He led me 
escorted by the religious cohort to the nearest baths, where I was 
first of all treated with ordinary washing, and then, after asking 
leave of the gods, sprayed over with a most pure ablution. I was 
led back to the temple after two parts of the day had already 
passed, and placed at the goddess’ feet. He then enjoined certain 
things upon me secretly, things too holy for utterance, but 
ordained in the hearing of everyone that I should restrain all 
pleasure in meats for ten successive days, eating the flesh of no 
animal and refraining absolutely from wine. 

These days were duly passed in worshipful continence. The 
day approached for the redemption of the divine pledge, and 
the sun bent low to lead in Vesper by the hand. Lo, the congrega- 
tion flowed in from all parts, and according to the ancient mystic 
rite everyone brought a present in my honor. All the profane 
were removed to a distance. I was clothed in a rude vesture of 
linen, and the priest led me by the hand to the very innermost 
sanctuary. 

You may now perchance ask with some anxiety, studious 
reader, what was thereupon said, what done. I should tell you, 
were telling lawful. You should know, if you could lawfully 
hear. But both ears and tongue would incur the like guilt of 
rash curiosity. But I shall not prolong the tortures you may feel 
perchance in the suspense of your religious desire. Hear then, 
but believe what is the truth. 

I neared the confines of death. I trod the threshold of 
Proserpine. I was borne through all the elements and returned. 
In the midst of night I saw the sun beaming in glorious light. I 
stood before the gods of heaven and the gods of the lower world, 
and adored as I stood close to them. 

See, I have told you all, which you may hear but still be in 


Dismemberment Remembered + 209 


ignorance of. Consequently I shall only relate what may be 
announced to the profane intelligence without sin. 


It was morning. The rites were concluded. I walked forth, 
hallowed in twelve stoles, a garb abundantly religious, which I 
am prohibited by no tie from mentioning, for there were many 
present who beheld it. I was set in the very centre of the sacred 
edifice before the image of the goddess, and stood as I was ordered 
upon a wooden tribunal, conspicuous in my garb, which was of 
plain silk, but embroidered in bright colors. There hung from 
my shoulders down my back as far as my heels a costly chlamys.* 
Wherever the eye fell upon me it encountered the varied colors 
of animals with which I was decorated on every side. Here were 
Indian dragons, there hyperborean griffins, which the other world 
brings forth, in semblance like birds with wings. This stole 
bears among the consecrated the name of the Olympiac. In my 
right hand I bore a torch in full flame, while my head was 
gracefully encircled in a crown of shining palm-leaves, which 
stood forward like rays. 

When I was thus adorned to resemble the sun and set up 
there like a statue, the veils were suddenly drawn apart and the 
people wandered in to see the sight.% 


The ‘‘threshold of Proserpine” is of course the entrance 
to Hades, since for six months of the year Proserpine, the 
daughter of Ceres, must stay underground as the bride of 
Pluto, for she is indeed the seed of all plants. The point is 
that through his initiatic death Lucius finds the sun at mid- 
night, light in the depths of darkness. The two are mutual: 
without light there is no darkness, for the blind have no 
knowledge of the dark. Lucius has therefore solved the riddle 
of the Emerald Tablet of Thoth, or Hermes Trismegistus: 


* The chlamys is a long white linen robe, similar to the alb worn by 
Catholic priests. 


210 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


Heaven above, heaven below; 
Stars above, stars below; 

All that is over, under shall show. 
Happy who the riddle reads! 


The Christian tradition, both orthodox and heretical, 
abounds with similar “paradoxes of transformation.” 


Whosoever would save his soul shall lose it. 


Unless a grain of corn fall into the ground and die, it remains no more 
than itself. But if it dies, it brings forth much fruit. 


The last shall be first, and the first last. 


There is the same basic theme of transformation through 
death and the discovery of light in the very depth of dark- 
ness. Hence the Vesper antiphon of Christmas: 


While all things were in quiet silence, and night was in the midst of 
her course, thine almighty Word, O Lord, came down from thy royal 
throne: alleluia! 


On the homeopathic principle of stmilia stmilibus curantur 
—like things are cured by like—death is overcome by death 
and darkness by darkness. Thus the preface of the Mass at 
Passiontide speaks of God 


who didst set the salvation of mankind upon the tree of the cross, so 
that whence came death (i.e., from the Tree of Knowledge), thence 
also life might rise again, and he that by the tree was vanquisher (i.e., 
Satan) , might also on the tree be vanquished. 


There follows, then, as the next initiatic myth, the story of 
the crucifixion of St. Peter from the apocryphal Acts of Peter, 
a Greek text of the third century, which is one of the most 
remarkable examples of this particular use of paradox in 
Christian literature. 


Dismemberment Remembered - 211 


»— ‘I beseech you the executioners, crucify me thus, with the 
head downward and not otherwise: and the reason wherefore, 
I will tell unto them that hear.’ 

And when they had hanged him up after the manner he 
desired, he began again to say: ‘Ye men unto whom it belongeth 
to hear, hearken to that which I shall declare unto you at this 
especial time as I hang here. Learn ye the mystery of all nature, 
and the beginning of all things, what it was. For the first man, 
whose race I bear in mine appearance (07, of the race of whom I 
bear the likeness), fell (was born) head downwards, and showed 
forth a manner of birth such as was not heretofore: for it was 
dead, having no motion. He, then, being pulled down—who also 
cast his first state down upon the earth—established this whole 
disposition of all things, being hanged up an image of the 
creation wherein he made the things of the right hand into left 
hand and the left hand into right hand, and changed about all 
the marks of their nature, so that he thought those things that 
were not fair to be fair, and those that were in truth evil, to be 
good. Concerning which the Lord saith in a mystery: “Unless ye 
make the things of the right hand as those of the left, and those 
of the left as those of the right, and those that are above as those 
below, and those that are behind as those that are before, ye 
shall not have knowledge of the kingdom.” 

‘This thought, therefore, have I declared unto you; and the 
figure wherein ye now see me hanging is the representation of 
that man that first came unto birth. Ye therefore, my beloved, 
and ye that hear me and that shall hear, ought to cease from 
your former error and return back again. For it is right to mount 
upon the cross of Christ, who is the word stretched out, the one 
and only, of whom the spirit saith: For what else is Christ, but 
the word, the sound of God? So that the word is the upright 
beam whereon I am crucified. And the sound is that which 
crosseth it, the nature of man. And the nail which holdeth the 
cross-tree unto the upright in the midst thereof is the conversion 
and repentance of man. 


212 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


‘Now whereas thou hast made known and revealed these 
things unto me, O word of life, called now by me wood (07, word 
called now by me the tree of life), I give thee thanks, not with 
these lips that are nailed unto the cross, nor with thts tongue by 
which truth and falsehood issue forth, nor with this word which 
cometh forth by means of art whose nature is material, but with 
that voice do I give thee thanks, O King, which is perceived 
(understood) in silence, which is not heard openly, which 
proceedeth not forth by organs of the body, which goeth not into 
ears of flesh, which is not heard of corruptible substance, which 
existeth not in the world, neither is sent forth upon earth, nor 
written in books, which is owned by one and not by another: but 
with this, O Jesu Chnst, do I give thee thanks, with the silence 
of a voice, wherewith the spirit that is in me loveth thee, speaketh 
unto thee, seeth thee, and beseecheth thee. Thou art perceived 
of the spirit only, thou art unto me father, thou my mother, thou 
my brother, thou my friend, thou my bondsman, thou my steward: 
thou art the All and the All is in thee: and thou ART, and there 
is nought else that IS save thee only.’* 


The martyrdom here is quite obviously an initiatic 
death, and the text is clearly of a Christian Gnostic type 
similar to the recently discovered Gospel According to 
Thomas, a Coptic text of the second century, which the Acts 
of Peter seems to quote: 


They said to Him: Shall we then, being children, 
enter the Kingdom? Jesus said to them: 

When you make the two one, and 

when you make the inner as the outer 

and the outer as the inner and the above 

as the below, and when 

you make the male and the female into a single one, 
so that the male will not be male and 


Dismemberment Remembered - 213 


the female (not) be female, when you make 

eyes in the place of an eye, and a hand 

in the place of a hand, and a foot in the place 
of a foot, (and) an image in the place of an image, 
then shall you enter [the Kingdom].%7 


And again: 


Jesus said: I am the Light that is above 
them all, I am the All, 

the All came forth from Me and the All 
attained to Me. Cleave a (piece of) wood, I 
am there; lift up the stone and you will 
find Me there.®8 


St. Peter’s interpretation of the symbolism of the Cross 
recalls the vision of the cross of light in another second- 
century text, the apocryphal Acts of John, a vision said to 
have been revealed to St. John at the time of the Crucifixion 
of Jesus. 


»— This cross of light is sometimes called the word by me [Jesus 
is speaking] for your sakes, sometimes mind, sometimes Jesus, 
sometimes Christ, sometimes door, sometimes a way, sometimes 
bread, sometimes seed, sometimes resurrection, sometimes Son, 
sometimes Father, sometimes Spirit, sometimes life, sometimes 
truth, sometimes faith, sometimes grace. And by these names it is 
called as toward men: but that which it is in truth, as conceived of 
in itself and as spoken of unto you, it is the marking-off of all 
things, and the firm uplifting of things fixed out of things unsta- 
ble, and the harmony of wisdom, and indeed wisdom in harmony. 
There are (the places) of the right hand and the left, powers also, 
authorities, lordships and demons, workings, threatenings, wraths, 
devils, Satan, and the lower root whence the nature of the things 
that come into being proceeded. This cross, then, is that which 


214 +» THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


fixed all things apart by the word, and separated off the things 
that are from those that are below, and then also, being one, 
streamed forth into all things (or, compacted all into one.)?® 


There is a glimpse here of God as a cross at once centrifugal 
and centripetal, whereby the opposites—including the angels 
and the demons—are simultaneously set apart and reconciled. 

The third initiation myth is Islamic—the story of the 
Prophet Muhammed’s visit to heaven as quoted in a seven- 
teenth-century Iranian text entitled Dabistan-ul-Mazahab or 
“The School of Religious Doctrines.” 


»— One night I slept in the house of my father’s sister; it was a 
night of thunder and lightning; no animal uttered a sound; no 
bird was singing; no man was awake; and I slept not, but was 
suspended between sleep and waking; the secret meaning of this 
might have been, that it was a long while before I became desirous 
of understanding of divine truth. Under the shield of the night, 
men enjoy greater freedom, as the occupations of the body and 
the dependence of the senses are broken. A sudden night fell then, 
and I was still between sleep and waking; that is, between reason 
and sensuality. I fell into the sea of knowledge; and it was a 
night with thunder and lightning, that is, the seven upper agents 
prevailed, so that the power of human courage and the power of 
imagination sunk from their operation, and inactivity manifested 
its ascendancy over activity. And lo! Jabriil* came down in a 
beautiful form, with much pomp, splendor, and magnificence, so 
that the house became illuminated ... ‘whiter than snow, with 
a lovely face, black hair, and on his forehead the inscription: 
“There is no God but one God”; the light of his eyes charming, 
the eyebrows fine, having seventy thousand curls twisted of red 
rubies, and six hundred thousand pearls of a fine water,’... And 
such were the chamms of the angel that, if one possessed seventy 


* The Iranian form of Gabriel. 


Dismemberment Remembered - 215 


thousand curls, he would not attain to his beauty; and such was 
his rapidity, that thou wouldst have said, he was flying with six 
hundred wings and arms, so that his progress knew neither 
space nor time.* 

What he said came upon me, and he took me to his bosom, 
and gave me kisses between the eyes, and said: ‘O thou sleeper, 
how long sleepest thou? rise!’ That is, when the power of holiness 
came upon me, it caressed me, opened the road of its revelation, 
and exalted me; a certain delight which I cannot describe diffused 
itself in my heart and transported me to devotion. The angel 
then continued; ‘How long sleepest thou?’ that is, ‘why indulgest 
thou in the delusions of falsehood? thou art attached to the 
world, and, as long as thou remainest in it, and before thou 
awakest, knowledge cannot be obtained; but I, from compassion 
toward thee, shall be thy guide on the road. Rise.’ I trembled 
at his words, and from fear jumped up from my place; that is, 
from timid respect for him no reflection remained in my heart 
and mind. He further said: ‘Be calm, I am thy brother, Jabriil’; 
thus, by his kindness and revelation, my terror was appeased. But 
he unfolded more of his mysteries, so that fear returned upon 
me. I then said: ‘O brother, I feel the hand of an enemy.’ He 
replied: ‘I shall not deliver thee into the hand of an enemy.’ I 
asked: ‘Into whose?’ He answered: ‘Rise, and be glad, and keep 
thy heart within thyself’: that is, ‘preserve thy memory clear, and 
show obedience to me, until I shall have removed the difficulties 
before thee.’ And as he spoke I became entranced and transported, 
and I proceeded on the footsteps of Jabriil; that is, I forsook 
the sensual world, and by the aid of natural reason, I followed 
the foosteps of holy grace. 


When I left the mountains, I went on until I reached the 
house of sanctity (Jerusalem); and as I entered it, a person came 
to me, and gave me three cups—the one of wine, the second of 


*In other words an angel is pure thought and travels with the speed of 
thought. 


216 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


water, and the other of milk. I wished to take that of wine, but 
Jabriil forbade it, and pointed to that of milk, which I took 
and drank. ... When I arrived there I entered the mosque, and 
the crier called to prayer; and I stepped forward. I saw an 
assembly of prophets and angels standing to the right and the 
left; every one saluted me, and made a new covenant with me. 
. .. When I became free, I raised my face upward, and I found 
a ladder, one step of which was of silver and the other of gold. 

(Here Jabriil took Muhammed upon his wings and flew 
with him to the gate of Paradise, which was guarded by a legion 
of Angels. In the first heaven he saluted Adam, who sat between 
two gates, and was looking now to the right, now to the left; 
when to the right, he laughed, when to the left, he wept, for 
the right hand led to heaven, the left to hell: the first father’s 
joy or sadness followed his children going to either side.] 

I arrived at the heaven of the universe; the gates yielded and 
I entered. There I saw Ismail seated upon a throne, and a crowd 
before him, with their eyes fixed upon his face. I made my salute, 
looked at him, and went on... I entered the second heaven; 
there I saw an Angel excelling all others; by his perfect beauty, 
he captivated the admiration of the whole creation; one half of 
his body was of ice and the other half of fire; and yet there was 
no counteraction nor enmity between them. He saluted me, and 
said: ‘Be welcome! All things and riches are thine.’ . . . When I 
arrived into the third heaven, I there saw an Angel, equal to 
whom in excellence and beauty I had seen none, placid and 
joyful, he was seated upon a throne; and a circle of angelic 
effulgency was diffused about him. . . . When I entered the 
fourth heaven, I there saw an Angel, surrounded with royal 
pomp, seated upon a throne of light; I made my obeisance, to 
which he replied with entire haughtiness, and, from pride and 
majesty, he bestowed neither word nor smile upon any body 
about him. When he answered my salute, he said: ‘O Muhammed, 
I see all things and riches in thee: glory and happiness to thee.’ 
... When I arrived at, and entered, the fifth heaven, I happened 


Dismemberment Remembered - 217 


to have a view of hell; and I saw a black region, and on its borders 
was seated a terrific and dark Angel, who was engaged in the 
business of punishing bad men... . Moreover, when I entered 
the sixth heaven, I saw an angel sitting upon a throne of light, 
occupied with counting his prayers by beads, and with uttering 
benedictions; he had wings, and curls set with jewels, pearls, and 
rubies. I bowed before him, to which he returned blessings and 
congratulations, and wishes of joy and prosperity, and said: ‘I 
give thee perpetual blessing.’ .. . When I attained the seventh 
heaven, I saw an angel seated upon a throne of red rubies; not 
every one had access to him, but he who approached him found 
a kind treatment. I made my reverence, and he returned an 
answer by blessing me. 

When I proceeded, I arrived at the heavenly mansion of the 
angel Jabriil; I saw a world full of light and splendor, and such 
was the effulgency that my eyes were dazzled. To the right or 
left, to whatever side I turned my looks, they met with angelic 
spirits, engaged in devotion. I said: ‘O Jabriil, who are this class 
of beings?’ He answered: ‘these know of no other fixed business 
but praying, counting their beads, and visiting churches.’. . . I 
saw five mansions greater than anything else, which spread their 
shade over earth and heaven. . .. When I proceeded, I saw four 
seas, the waters of each being of a different color. . . . I saw 
angels much occupied with beads and prayers and all taken up 
with the precious sentence, There is no God but one God”. 

... When I left this assembly, in my progress I arrived at a 
sea without borders; howsoever I strained my sight, I could not 
perceive any boundary or shore; and at this sea I saw a river, 
and an angel who was pouring the sea-water into the river, and 
from thence the water ran to every place. ... On the level of 
that sea, I perceived a great desert, greater than which I had never 
seen any space, so that, in spite of my endeavor, I found neither 
the beginning nor the end of it.... On the level of the sea and the 
desert, I saw an angel surrounded with every grandeur, splendor, 


218 « THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


and pomp, who guarded both halves with facility; he called me 
to him, and having joined him, I asked: ‘What is thy name?’ He 
answered: ‘Mikail:* I am the greatest of all angels; whatever is 
difficult, ask it from me: I will satisfy all thy wishes.’ ... When 
I had set myself free from saluting and questioning, I said: “To 
arrive at this place I experienced much trouble, and my purpose 
in coming here was to attain knowledge, and the sight of God 
Almighty. Grant me guidance, that I may satisfy my desire, and 
then return home.’ .. . That angel took me by the hand, and 
gave me a passage through several thousand curtains into a world, 
where I saw nothing like what I had seen before, until he 
brought me at last near the Lord of glory; then the command 
came to me: ‘Approach.’ .. . In that majesty I immersed my 
sense and motion, and found entire relaxation, contentment, 
and tranquility. ... From fear of the Lord I forgot all things I 
had seen and known before, and I felt such an exaltation, inspira- 
tion, and inward delight, that thou wouldst have said: ‘I am 
intoxicated.’ I felt some impressions of God’s proximity, so that 
I was seized with trembling; and I heard the command: ‘Proceed,’ 
and I proceeded. Then came the word: ‘Fear not nor be dis- 
quieted.’ . . . I trembled at the boldness of my journey, which 
had attained such a height and distance; and I apprehended 
failing in the proof of the unity; but I heard the words: ‘Come 
nearer’; that is: dismiss thy pondering, fear, and terror; for such 
is the proper state of a believer in the unity of God, to be 
continually immersed in a spiritual ecstasy, so that he may never 
fall back into the disgrace of brutishness, and fear and hope 
belong to the state of brutishness. 

Moreover: I drew nearer, and upon me came the blessing 
of the Lord, such as I never had heard before... . Further: The 
command came: ‘Say thy prayer’: I replied: ‘I cannot; for thou 
art thyself such as thou hast said.’... 

The word came to me: ‘What dost thou wish?’ I said: ‘Leave 


* That is, Michael. 


Dismemberment Remembered - 219 


to ask whatever comes into my mind, so that my difficulties may 
be removed... . 

When I had performed all this, and returned home, on 
account of the rapidity of my journey, I found the bed-clothes 
still warm. 


The Prophet finds entrance to the vision in a state 
between sleep and waking, reason and sensuality, and the 
whole journey is undertaken in a flash of time. The great 
Awakening, according to the Hindu-Buddhist tradition, is 
to be found in the interval between two thoughts. This is 
also the theme of Symplegades, of the clashing rocks through 
which Jason sailed the Argo, a theme which appears in a 
surprising variety of forms all over the world. For this is the 
Active Door, the Strait Gate, which is sometimes a port- 
cullis, or the jaws of a beast, or a whirling sword such as is 
said to guard the gates of Paradise. The point is that the 
hero-initiate has to leap through without hesitation, that is, 
without stopping to choose between the opposites. Usually 
the hero loses something in his leap. The Argo lost its rudder, 
and bird or hare heroes get their tails docked. Is it, as Cooma- 
raswamy?°! suggested, that the price of the leap into Paradise 
is the loss of one’s ego? The two aspects of Adam’s face recall 
the haggadah that he was originally two-faced in his her- 
maphroditic state before the creation of Eve. The Angel of the 
Second Heaven combines fire and ice without enmity, 
Michael guards both halves, that is sea and desert, with 
facility, and what concerns Muhammed most in the divine 
presence is to attain the unity of God beyond and above the 
brutish opposites of hope and fear. 

As prophets, visionaries, and seers enter the innermost 
sanctuary of Heaven to behold the ultimate Unity they are 
apt to fall silent. It is not only that the show must not be 


220 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


given away; it is also that the glory is too great for words. 
Dante’s ‘‘vision failed the lofty fantasy”; Muhammed 
described his own peace and ecstasy but said nothing of his 
vision, save that it was unlike anything he had seen before; 
Lucius was under oath not to reveal it; the author of the 
Apocalypse says only that he who sat upon the throne was 
“like unto a jasper and sardine stone.” But the art of the poet 
is Just to say what cannot be said, and to describe what cannot 
be described. 

An unknown Indian, Buddhist, writer living, perhaps, 
in the ist century A.D. had no such lack of tongue. There 
follow certain passages from the Amitayur-dhyana-sutra which 
describe the Pure Land, Sukhavati, presided over by the 
Buddha Amitayus or Amitabha—the personification of 
Boundless Light. Amitabha is, in Buddhist mythology, the 
most popular of the five so-called Dhyani Buddhas—transcen- 
dental beings who represent five aspects of the Universal 
Consciousness in which the worlds are forever appearing and 
disappearing like dreams. Amitabha is thus the nearest thing 
in Buddhism to a God. The devotees of Amitabha believe 
that in some immeasurably distant time he made the vow 
that he would not attain Buddhahood, or perfect enlighten- 
ment, unless—at the mere repetition of his name—any person 
however evil would be transported at death to his Pure Land. 
They believe that the world is now so evil and human psy- 
chology so trapped in vicious circles that even the most 
heroic efforts to attain Buddhahood have become nothing but 
spiritual pride, tightening the knots of karma. There is then 
no hope except trust in Amitabha’s liberating vow—to claim 
no merit for oneself, but simply to say his name and be reborn 
in the Pure Land where the attainment of Buddhahood is so 
simple as to be a certainty. 


Dismemberment Remembered - 221 


Here, then, is the vision of Amitabha, the Sun Buddha, 
described as the highest beatitude to which life can attain 
and yet, simultaneously, as the root and ground of one’s own 
being. The vision belongs to a class of images which have 
been called mandala—the Sanskrit term for symbols of uni- 
versality or wholeness, which Auboyer has described as 
follows: 


An esoteric diagram, consisting of a series of circular or quadrangu- 
lar zones surrounding a mysterious center, residence of the divinity. 
The one who mediates on a mandala must “realize” through mediative 
effort and prayer the divinities belonging to each zone. Progress is 
toward the center, at which point the person meditating attains mysti- 
cal union with the divinity.102 


The passage quoted above from the Acts of John, concern- 
ing the vision of the cross of light, likewise described a 
mandala. The account of the Heavenly City in the Apoc- 
alypse, and Dante’s visions of the Mystic Rose and of the 
Trinity in the Paradiso have also the mandala form. The 
mandala is the typical symbol of reconciliation and harmony, 
of the cosmic order in which all deviations are balanced and 
all conflicts subordinated to a superior unity. It is the arche- 
type par excellence of the implicit, polar unity of opposites. 

The words that follow—instructions for meditating 
upon the Buddha Amitabha—are put into the mouth of 
Gautama, the historical Buddha, as a sermon to Vaidehi, 
the queen of Rajagriha. 


> ‘All beings, if not blind from birth, are uniformly possessed 
of sight, and they all see the setting sun. Thou shouldst sit down 
properly, looking in the western direction, and prepare thy 
thought for a close meditation on the sun; cause thy mind to be 
firmly fixed (on it) so as to have an unwavering perception by 


222 +» THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


the exclusive application (of thy thought), and gaze upon it 
(more particularly) when it is about to set and looks like a 
suspended drum. 

‘After thou hast thus seen the sun, let (that image) remain 
clear and fixed, whether thine eyes be shut or open;—such is the 
perception of the sun, which is the First Meditation. 

‘Next thou shouldst form the perception of water; gaze on 
the water clear and pure, and let (this image) also remain clear 
and fixed (afterwards); never allow thy thought to be scattered 
and lost. 

‘When thou hast thus seen the water thou shouldst form 
the perception of ice. As thou seest the ice shining and trans- 
parent, thou shouldst imagine the appearance of lapis lazuli. 

‘After that has been done, thou wilt see the ground consist- 
ing of lapis lazuli, transparent and shining both within and 
without. Beneath this ground of lapis lazuli there will be seen 
a golden banner with the seven jewels, diamonds and the rest, 
supporting the ground. It extends to the eight points of the 
compass, and thus the eight corners (of the ground) are perfectly 
filled up. Every side of the eight quarters consists of a hundred 
jewels, every jewel has a thousand rays, and every ray has eighty- 
four thousand colours which, when reflected in the ground of 
lapis lazuli, look like a thousand millions of suns, and it is 
difficult to see them all one by one. Over the surface of that 
ground of lapis lazuli there are stretched golden ropes inter- 
twined crosswise; divisions are made by means of (strings of) 
seven jewels with every part clear and distinct. 

‘Each jewel has rays of five hundred colours which look like 
flowers or like the moon and stars. Lodged high up in the open 
sky these rays form a tower of rays, whose storeys and galleries 
are ten millions in number and built of a hundred jewels. Both 
sides of the tower have each a hundred millions of flowery 
banners furnished and decked with numberless musical instru- 
ments. Eight kinds of cool breezes proceed from the brilliant 
rays. When those musical instruments are played, they emit the 


Dismemberment Remembered + 223 


oy ace 


sounds “suffering,” “non-existence,” “impermanence,” and “non- 
self”’;*—such is the perception of the water, which is the Second 
Meditation. 

‘When this perception has been formed, thou shouldst 
Meditate on its (constituents) one by one and make (the images) 
as clear as possible, so that they may never be scattered and lost, 
whether thine eyes be shut or open. Except only during the 
time of thy sleep, thou shouldst always keep this in thy mind. 
One who has reached this (stage of) perception is said to have 
dimly seen the Land of Highest Happiness (Sukhavati). 

‘One who has obtained the Samadhi (the state of super- 
natural calm) is able to see the land (of that Buddha country) 
clearly and distinctly: (this state) is too much to be explained 
fully;—such is the perception of the land, and it is the Third 
Meditation. 

‘Thou shouldst remember, O Ananda, the Buddha words 
of mine, and repeat this law for attaining to the perception of 
the land (of the Buddha country) for the sake of the great mass 
of the people hereafter who may wish to be delivered from their 
sufferings. If any one meditates on the land (of that Buddha 
country), his sins (whieh bind him to) births and deaths during 
eighty millions of kalpast shall be expiated; after the abandon- 
ment of his (present) body, he will assuredly be born in the 
pure land in the following life. The practice of this kind of 
Meditation is called the “right meditation.” If it be of another 
kind it is called “heretical meditation.” ’ 

Buddha then spoke to Ananda and Vaidehi:t When the 
perception of the land (of that Buddha country) has been gained, 
you should next meditate on the jewel-trees (of that country). 
In meditating on the jewel-trees, you should take each by itself 


De ae 


* The terms used by the Buddha for the “marks of becoming”—that is, the 
basic characteristics of life as we live it in the vicious circle of samsara. 

tA day of Brahma, or 4,320,000 years. 

¢ Ananda is the young disciple of the Buddha who has a strong personal 
attachment to the master. Queen Vaidchi is the wife of King Bimbisara of 
Rajagriha, the city in which this discourse is set. 


224 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


and form a perception of the seven rows of trees; every tree is eight 
hundred yoganas high, and all the jewel-trees have flowers and 
leaves consisting of seven jewels all perfect. All flowers and leaves 
have colours like the colours of various jewels:—from the colour 
of lapis lazuli there issues a golden ray; from the colour of crystal, 
a saffron ray; from the colour of agate, a diamond ray; from the 
colour of diamond, a ray of blue pearls. Corals, amber, and all 
other gems are used as ornaments for illumination; nets of 
excellent pearls are spread over the trees, each tree is covered by 
seven sets of nets, and between one set and another there are five 
hundred millions of palaces built of excellent flowers, resembling 
the palace of the Lord Brahman; all heavenly children live there 
quite naturally; every child has a garland consisting of five 
hundred millions of precious gems like those that are fastened on 
Sakra’s (Indra’s) head, the rays of which shine over a hundred 
yoganas, just as if a hundred millions of suns and moons were 
united together; it is difficult to explain them in detail. That 
(garland) is the most excellent among all, as it is the commixture 
of all sorts of jewels. Rows of these jewel-trees touch one another; 
the leaves of the trees also join one another. 

‘Among the dense foliage there blossom various beautiful 
flowers, upon which are miraculously found fruits of seven jewels. 
The leaves of the trees are all exactly equal in length and in 
breadth, measuring twenty-five yoganas each way; every leaf has 
a thousand colours and a hundred different pictures on it, just 
like a heavenly garland. There are many excellent flowers which 
have the colour of Gambunada gold and an appearance of fire- 
wheels in motion, turning between the leaves in a graceful 
fashion. All the fruits are produced just (as easily) as if they 
flowed out from the pitcher of the God Sakra. There is a magnif- 
icent ray which transforms itself into numberless jewelled 
canopies with banners and flags. Within these jewelled canopies 
the works of all the Buddhas of the Great Chilicosm appear 
illuminated; the Buddha countries of the ten quarters also are 
manifested therein. When you have seen these trees you should 


Dismemberment Remembered - 225 


also meditate on them one by one in order. In meditating on 
the trees, trunks, branches, leaves, flowers, and fruits, let them 
all be distinct and clear;—such is the perception of the trees (of 
that Buddha country) , and it is the Fourth Meditation. 

‘Next, you should perceive the water (of that country). The 
perception of the water is as follows:— 

‘In the Land of Highest Happiness there are waters in eight 
lakes; the water in every lake consists of seven jewels which are 
soft and yielding. Deriving its source from the king of jewels 
that fulfills every wish, the water is divided into fourteen streams; 
every stream has the colour of seven jewels; its channel is built 
of gold, the bed of which consists of the sand of variegated 
diamonds. 

‘In the midst of each lake there are sixty millions of lotus- 
flowers, made of seven jewels; all the flowers are perfectly round 
and exactly equal (in circumference), being twelve yoganas. The 
water of jewels flows amidst the flowers and rises and falls by 
the stalks (of the lotus); the sound of the streaming water is 
melodious and pleasing, and propounds all the perfect virtues 
(Paramitas), “suffering,” “non-existence,” “impermanence,” and 
“non-self”; it proclaims also the praise of the signs of perfection, 
and minor marks of excellence of all Buddhas. From the king of 
jewels that fulfills every wish, stream forth the golden-coloured 
rays excessively beautiful, the radiance of which transforms itself 
into birds possessing the colours of a hundred jewels, which 
sing out harmonious notes, sweet and delicious, ever praising the 
remembrance of Buddha, the remembrance of the Law, and the 
remembrance of the Church*—such is the perception of the 
water of eight good qualities, and it is the Fifth Meditation. 

‘Each division of that (Buddha) country, which consists of 
several jewels, has also jewelled storeys and galleries to the 
number of five hundred millions; within each storey and gallery 


* “Church” should be translated “Order” or “Brotherhood,” since it refers to 
the sangha or brotherhood of those who follow the Buddha’s method of 
liberation. 


226 + THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


there are innumerable Devas engaged in playing heavenly music. 
There are some musical instruments that are hung up in the 
open sky, like the jewelled banners of heaven; they emit musical 
sounds without being struck, which, while resounding variously, 
all propound the remembrance of Buddha, of the Law and of 
the Church, Bhikshus,* etc. When this perception is duly 
accomplished, one is said to have dimly seen the jewel-trees, 
jewel-ground, and jewel-lakes of that World of Highest Happi- 
ness (Sukhavati);—such is the perception formed by meditating 
on the general (features of that Land), and it is the Sixth 
Meditation. 

‘If one has experienced this, one has expiated the greatest 
sinful deeds which would (otherwise lead one) to transmigra- 
tion for numberless millions of kalpas; after his death he will 
assuredly be born in that land. 

‘Listen carefully! listen carefully! Think over what you have 
heard! I, Buddha, am about to explain in detail the law of deliver- 
ing one’s self from trouble and torment. Commit this to your 
memory in order to explain it in detail before a great assembly.’ 
While Buddha was uttering these words, Buddha Amitayus stood 
in the midst of the sky with Bodhisattvas Mahasthama and Ava- 
lokitesvara, attending on his right hand and left respectively. 
There was such a bright and dazzling radiance that no one could 
see clearly; the brilliance was a hundred thousand times greater 
than that of gold (Gambunada). Thereupon Vaidehi saw 
Buddha Amitayus and approached the World-Honoured One, 
and worshipped him, touching his feet; and spoke to him as fol- 
lows: ‘O Exalted One! I am now able, by the power of Buddha, 
to see Buddha Amitayus together with the two Bodhisattvas. But 
how shall all the beings of the future meditate on Buddha Ami- 
tayus and the two Bodhisattvas?’ 

Buddha answered: “Those who wish to meditate on that 
Buddha ought first to direct their thought as follows: form the 


* A bhikshu or “monk” is a member of the sangha. 


Dismemberment Remembered + 227 


perception of a lotus-flower on a ground of seven jewels, each leaf 
of that lotus exhibits the colours of a hundred jewels, and has 
eighty-four thousand veins, just like heavenly pictures; each vein 
possesses eighty-four thousand rays, of which each can be clearly 
seen. Every small leaf and flower is two hundred and fifty yoganas 
in length and the same measurement in breadth. Each lotus-flower 
possesses eighty-four thousand leaves, each leaf has the kingly 
pearls to the number of a hundred millions, as ornaments for 
illumination; each pearl shoots out a thousand rays like bright 
canopies. The surface of the ground is entirely covered by a 
mixture of seven jewels. There is a tower built of the gems which 
are like those that are fastened on Sakra’s head. It is inlaid and 
decked with eighty thousand diamonds, Kimsuka jewels, Brahma- 
mani and excellent pear! nets. 

‘On that tower there are miraculously found four posts with 
jewelled banners; each banner looks like a hundred thousand 
millions of Sumeru mountains. 

‘The jewelled veil over these banners is like that of the 
celestial palace of Yama, illuminated with five hundred millions 
of excellent jewels, each jewel has eighty-four thousand rays, each 
ray has various golden colours to the number of eighty-four 
thousand, each golden colour covers the whole jewelled soil, it 
changes and is transformed at various places, every now and then 
exhibiting various appearances; now it becomes a diamond tower, 
now a pearl net, again clouds of mixed flowers, freely changing its 
manifestation in the ten directions it exhibits the state of Buddha; 
—such is the perception of the flowery throne, and it is the 
Seventh Meditation.’ 

Buddha, turning to Ananda, said: “These excellent flowers 
were created originally by the power of the prayer of Bhikshu, 
Dharmakara.* All who wish to exercise the remembrance of that 
Buddha ought first to form the perception of that flowery throne. 
When engaged in it one ought not to perceive vaguely, but fix the 


* The name of Amitabha before he attained Buddhahood. 


228 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


mind upon each detail separately. Leaf, jewel, ray, tower, and 
banner should be clear and distinct, just as one sees the image of 
one’s own face in a mirror. When one has achieved this percep- 
tion, the sins which would produce births and deaths during fifty 
thousand kalpas are expiated, and he is one who will most 
assuredly be born in the World of Highest Happiness. 

‘When you have perceived this, you should next perceive 
Buddha himself. Do you ask how? Every Buddha Tathagata* is 
one whose (spiritual) body is the principle of nature (Darma- 
dhatu-kaya)}, so that he may enter into the mind of any beings. 
Consequently, when you have perceived Buddha, it is indeed 
that mind of yours that possesses those thirty-two signs of 
perfection and eighty minor marks of excellence (which you see 
in Buddha). In fine, it is your mind that becomes Buddha, nay, 
it is your mind that is indeed Buddha. The ocean of true and 
universal knowledge of all the Buddhas derives its source from 
one’s own mind and thought. Therefore you should apply your 
thought with an undivided attention to a careful meditation on 
that Buddha. . . . In forming the perception of that Buddha, 
you should first perceive the image of that Buddha; whether your 
eyes be open or shut, look at an image like Gambunada gold in 
colour, sitting on that flower (throne). 

‘When you have seen the seated figure your mental vision 
will become clear, and you will be able to see clearly and 
distinctly the adornment of that Buddha country, the jewelled 
ground, etc. In seeing these things, let them be clear and fixed 
just as you see the palms of your hands. When you have passed 
through this experience, you should further form (a perception 
of) another great lotus-flower which is on the left side of Buddha, 
and is exactly equal in every way to the above-mentioned lotus- 


* Tathagata, one who comes or goes “thus,” is a usual title for a Buddha. 
Tatha, “thus,” or Tathata, “thusness,” is a Buddhist term for the highest and 
purest reality. 

+ The Dharmadhatu-kaya (lit., “realm-of-Dharma body”) is the universe 
considered as a completely integrated system of relativity. 


Dismemberment Remembered + 229 


flower of Buddha. Still further, you should form (a perception 
of) another lotus-flower which is on the right side of Buddha. 
Perceive that an image of Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara is sitting 
on the left-hand flowery throne, shooting forth golden rays exactly 
like those of Buddha. Perceive then that an image of Bodhisattva 
Mahasthama is sitting on the right-hand flowery throne. 

‘When these perceptions are gained the images of Buddha 
and the Bodhisattvas will all send forth brilliant rays, clearly 
lighting up all the jewel-trees with golden colour. Upon every 
tree there are also three lotus-flowers. On every lotus-flower there 
‘is an image, either of Buddha or of a Bodhisattva; thus (the 
images of the Bodhisattvas and of Buddha) are found everywhere 
in that country. When this perception has been gained, the 
devotee should hear the excellent Law preached by means of a 
stream of water, a brilliant ray of light, several jewel-trees, ducks, 
geese, and swans. Whether he be wrapped in meditation or 
whether he has ceased from it, he should ever hear the excellent 
‘Law.’ 

‘Thou shouldst know, O Ananda, that the body of Buddha 
lAmitayus is a hundred thousand million times as bright as the 
colour of the Gambunada gold of the heavenly abode of Yama; 
the height of that Buddha is six hundred thousand niyutas of 
kotis of yoganas* innumerable as are the sands of the river 
‘Ganga. 

'  *The white twist of hair between the eyebrows all turning 
to the right, is just like the five Sumeru mountains. 

‘The eyes of Buddha are like the water of the four great 
oceans; the blue and the white are quite distinct. 

| ‘All the roots of hair of his body issue forth brilliant rays 
‘which are also like the Sumeru mountains. 

‘The halo of that Buddha is like a hundred millions of the 
‘Great Chiliocosms; in that halo there are Buddhas miraculously 
‘created, to the number of a million of niyutas of kotis innumer- 


*A number denoting the immeasurably vast, but indetcrminate, since the 
niyuta may be 100,000 or 1,000,000 OF even 10,000 X 10,000,000. 


230 - THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


able as the sands of the Ganga; each of these Buddhas has for 
attendants a great assembly of numberless Bodhisattvas who are 
also miraculously created. 

‘Buddha Amitayus has eighty-four thousand signs of per- 
fection, each sign is possessed of eighty-four minor marks of 
excellence, each mark has eighty-four thousand rays, each ray 
extends so far as to shine over the worlds of the ten quarters, 
whereby Buddha embraces and protects all the beings who think 
upon him and does not exclude (any one of them). His rays, 
signs, etc., are difficult to be explained in detail. But in simple 
meditation let the mind’s eye dwell upon them. 

‘If you pass through this experience, you will at the same 
time see all the Buddhas of the ten quarters. Since you see all 
the Buddhas it is called the Samadhi* of the remembrance of 
the Buddhas. 

‘Those who have practised this meditation are said to have 
contemplated the bodies of all the Buddhas. Since they have 
meditated on Buddha’s body, they will also see Buddha’s mind. 
It is great compassion that is called Buddha’s mind. It is by his 
absolute compassion that he receives all beings. 

‘Those who have practised this meditation will, when they 
die, be born in the presence of the Buddhas in another life, and 
obtain a spirit of resignation wherewith to face all the conse. 
quences which shall hereafter arise. 

‘Therefore those who have wisdom should direct their 
thought to the careful meditation upon that Buddha Amitayus. 
Let those who meditate on Buddha Amitayus begin with one 
single sign or mark—let them first meditate on the white twist 
of hair between the eyebrows as clearly as possible; when they 
have done this, the eighty-four thousand signs and marks will 
naturally appear before their eyes. Those who see Amitayus wil! 
also see all the innumerable Buddhas of the ten quarters. Since 


* Samadhi denotes any state of transcendental consciousness in which dual. 
ities (e.g., of subject and object) are resolved. 


Dismemberment Remembered + 231 


they have seen all the innumerable Buddhas, they will receive 
the prophecy of their future destiny (to become Buddha), in the 
presence of all the Buddhas... .’ 

‘If there be any one who commits evil deeds, and even com- 
pletes the ten wicked actions, the five deadly sins and the like; 
that man, being himself stupid and guilty of many crimes, 
deserves to fall into a miserable path of existence and suffer end- 
less pains during many kalpas. On the eve of death he will meet 
a good and learned teacher who will, soothing and encouraging 
him in various ways, preach to him the excellent Law and teach 
him the remembrance of Buddha, but, being harassed by pains, 
he will have no time to think of Buddha. Some good friend will 
then say to him: “Even if thou canst not exercise the remem- 
brance of Buddha, thou mayst, at least, utter the name, ‘Buddha 
Amitayus.’ ” Let him do so serenely with his voice uninterrupted; 
let him be (continually) thinking of Buddha until he has com- 
pleted ten times the thought, repeating (the formula) , “Adora- 
tion to Buddha Amitayus’ (Namo-mitayushe Buddhaya). On 
the strength of (his merit of) uttering Buddha's name he will, 
during every repetition, expiate the sins which involve him in 
births and deaths during eighty millions of kalpas. He will, while 
dying, see a golden lotus-flower like the disk of the sun appearing 
before his eyes; in a moment he will be born in the World of 
Highest Happiness.’103 


Some speculations on the meaning of this vision are cer- 
tainly in order, even though it takes us far beyond the present 
competence of scientific psychology. For the vision is at once 
mythological and psycho-physiological. Its point of depar- 
ture is the instruction to gaze directly into the setting sun, 
and it is well known that many states of paranormal con- 
sciousness may be induced by this type of stimulation. For 
gazing at the sun so excites and energizes the optical nervous 
system that the seeing process becomes, in a special and 


232 » THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


unusual way, aware of itself. Patterns, mosaics, kaleidoscopic 
designs, and sparkling clusters of jewel-forms appear before 
the eyes, and these must undoubtedly correspond to and be 
based upon structures within the eye and the optic nerves. 
The sense of sight is, as it were, turned in upon itself, and 
this kind of intense and concentrated self-awareness is often 
a trigger for visionary and mystical experiences. Compare 
the case of Jacob Boehme: 


— Sitting one day in his room his eyes fell upon a burnished 
pewter dish, which reflected the sunshine with such marvellous 
splendor that he fell into an inward ecstasy, and it seemed to him 
as if he could now look into the principles and deepest founda- 
tion of things. He believed that it was only a fancy, and in order 
to banish it from his mind he went out upon the green. But here 
he remarked that he gazed into the very heart of things, the very 
herbs and grass, and that actual nature harmonized with what he 
had inwardly seen. He said nothing of this to anyone, but praised 
and thanked God in silence.1%4 


Or a more generalized form of turning awareness back upon 
itself, as described by Tennyson: 


»— A kind of waking trance I have frequently had, quite up 
from boyhood, when I have been all alone. This has often come 
upon me through repeating my own name to myself silently, all 
at once, as it were, out of the intensity of the consciousness of 
individuality, the individuality itself seemed to dissolve and fade 
away into boundless being; and this not a confused state, but the 
clearest of the clearest, the surest of the surest, the weirdest of 
the weirdest, utterly beyond words, where death was an almost 
laughable impossibility, the loss of personality but the only true 
life.105 


The marvellously ordered, luminous complexity of the 


Dismemberment Remembered + 233 


Buddhist vision has its parallel in many more recent accounts 
of similar phenomena: 


»— Now came a period of rapture so intense that the universe 
stood still, as if amazed at the unutterable majesty of the specta- 
cle. Only one in all the infinite universe! The All-loving, the 
Perfect One. ... In that same wonderful moment of what might 
be called supernal bliss, came illumination. I saw with intense 
inward vision the atoms or molecules, of which seemingly the 
universe is composed—I know not whether material or spiritual— 
rearranging themselves, as the cosmos (in its continuous, ever- 
lasting life) passes from order to order. What joy when I saw 
there was no break in the chain—not a link left out—everything 
in its place and time. Worlds, systems, all blended in one har- 
monious whole.1¢ 


Or compare this: 


»— Everything “breathed,” but breathed with that “one breath” 
which is the universal inspiration and expiration expressed in the 
cardinal opposites of day and night, male and female, summer 
and winter. Indeed the wonderful and awe-inspiring livingness 
of everything seemed to be part of the interrelatedness of every- 
thing; within the one thing which the entire universe was, the 
multitudinous aspects of it enjoyed a living relationship both 
to one another and to the totality, and this in an extraordinary 
complexity which at the same time was an extraordinary sim- 
plicity. .. . Things were related to one another which to ordinary 
thinking would have no connection whatever, and related to one 
another in ways which we cannot normally conceive. Things 
which we should call far apart, whether in space or time or by 
their nature, here inter-penetrated; things which we should call 
wholly different from one another became one another... . 
One knew and understood this different world as a spectator 


234 +» THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


of it, recognizing it as the object of one’s apprehension, but at 
the same time knew and understood that it existed within one- 
self; thus one was at once the least significant atom in the univer- 
sal whole and that universal whole. .. . The sum of things 
appeared before my inward eyes as a living geometrical figure, 
an infinitely complicated and infinitely simple arrangement of 
continually moving, continually changing golden lines on a back- 
ground of darknesss. ... This living geometrical figure seemed 
to be telling me that everything is in order, that everything works 
according to an ineluctable pattern, and that, since all things are 
under the sun’s almighty eye, nothing need ever be wholly mean- 
ingless, even on earth, where we live so far from the central and 
perfect unity. Provided that we bear the pattern’s existence in 
mind, even pain ... can have meaning; so can death; so can the 
worst that we may have to endure; while the possibility of discern- 
ing this meaning is itself the divine mercy.1°7 


The scientific temperament is biassed toward descrip- 
tions—if not explanations—of these visions in naturalistic 
terms. L. L. Whyte?’ has pointed out that human conscious-: 
ness is a monitoring system with almost the sole function of 
calling attention to unusual changes and disturbances in the: 
environment. It has, therefore, an extremely superficial, 
restricted, and, shall we say, one-sidedly anxious apprehen- 
sion of all that is going on in the organism-environment field. 
In particular, it is ignorant of the unbelievable harmonious- 
ness and perfection of our constant and basic psycho-phy- 
siological functions, and of their exquisitely complex ties 
and balances with the outside universe. It is possible, then, 
that any method of turning the senses back upon themselves 
will restore awareness of this ignored aspect of life, for con- 
sciousness is thereby led back to its own organic roots. The 
extreme subtlety and beauty of these processes thereupon 
invade consciousness like a vision from heaven. 


Dismemberment Remembered «+ 235 


Furthermore, we have seen throughout these pages that 
conscious thinking and attention is ordinarily restricted (a) 
to inspection of “bits” of the world in a one-at-a-time linear 
series, and (b) to symbolic systems, such as language, which 
are clumsy in the expression of polar relationships. It is 
much easier to think in terms of either/or than of both/and, 
of A causing B than of A and B as mutually interdependent. 
But it is obvious that the organism-environment cannot 
function intelligently by any such cumbersome method. 
There is far, far too much going on at once for anything so 
slow as conscious attention to regulate. Again, then, one 
might suggest that when consciousness is turned back upon 
its Own organic basis, it gets some apprehension of that 
“omniscience” which is the body’s total, organizing sen- 
sitivity. In the light of this deeper and more inclusive 
sensitivity, it becomes suddenly clear that things are joined 
together by the boundaries we ordinarily take to separate 
them, and are, indeed, definable as themselves only in terms 
of other things that differ from them. The cosmos is seen as 
a multi-dimensional network of crystals, each one contain- 
ing the reflections of all the others, and the reflections of 
all the others zm those reflections. ... In the heart of each 
there shines, too, the single point of light that every one 
reflects from every other. 

There is a Hassidic saying, “If I am I because you are 
you, and if you are you because I am I, then I am not I, 
and you are not you.” 


NOTES ON THE PLATES 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL 
REFERENCES 


INDEX 


NOTES ON THE PLATES 


PLATE 

1. Lingam and Yoni. Sculpture in stone, at the Pallava 
temple at Panamalai, India. The union of the male 
(Lingam) and female (yoni) principles, the phallus 
and the vagina, seen as from within the body of the 
female—i.e., from within this world. Liberation, the 
attainment of nirvana or moksha, is thus equated by 
analogy with birth and not, as in the Freudian 
mystique, with return to the womb. 


2. Kali. A tenth-century figure from South India, Chola 
Dynasty. The dark, all-devouring Mother who, as 
the consort or shakti of Shiva, represents the very 
abyss of the destructive principle. But for this reason 
she is “‘the darkness before the dawn” and thus the 
Mother of light, and her front right hand is raised 
in the gesture of “Fear not.” The image is somewhat 
unusual. (See text, pp. 93-95.) 


3. Black Madonna. Mosaic by Louisa Jenkins. This is the 
Christian equivalent of Kali, and though the image 
shown here is modern, the Black Madonna has been 
venerated in Europe for many centuries. There are 
some two hundred shrines to her cult in Western 
Europe alone. Although dark, the Black Madonna is 
—like Kali—a symbol of the creative force of the 


240 - Notes on the Plates 


negative. The image reflects certain liturgical texts, 
taken originally from the Song of Songs: 


“Who is she that riseth up as the morning, fair as 
the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army 
with banners?” 

“Iam black, but comely, O ye daughters of Jeru- 
salem; therefore the King delighteth in me, and hath 
brought me into his chambers.” (Antiphons from 
the Roman Breviary, Common of the BVM.) 


4. Yamantaka. Tibetan painting, eighteenth or nine- 
teenth century. Not a devil in the Western and 
Christian sense, but the wrathful form of the Bod- 
hisattva Manjusri, and sometimes of the Buddha 
Amitabha. Yamantaka is also known as Yamari. 
(Tib., gsin-rje gsed. Jap., Dai Itoku Myo-o.) He has 
nine heads, of which the chief is in the form of a 
bull, thirty-four hands, and sixteen feet, and is 
shown here embracing his shaktz, or female counter- 
part, Pashadhari from whose girdle swings a cluster 
of severed heads. The name Yamantaka means 
“Destroyer of the Lord of Death (Yama),” and this 
is the form which Manjusri assumes for penetrating 
the illusion of death. Manjusri stands for prajia, 
the intuitive wisdom of a Buddha, which enables 
him to see through the apparent dualities of ex- 
perience. 


5. St. Michael and the Dragon. Fourteenth century, 
Sienese. We pass now to a series of plates where the 
Image of Darkness appears in the Western form of 
unrelieved diabolism, a thing to be hated and 
crushed without quarter. The emergence of the in- 
formal, realistic techniques of Western painting give 
the artist unparalleled opportunities for elaborating 
images of pure horror. 


6. The Descent of Christ into Hell. Pieter Breughel, six- 
teenth century. Engraving by Hieronymus Cock. In 


Notes on the Plates + 241 


the interval between the Crucifixion and the Resur- 
rection, Jesus is said to have descended into Hades 
to liberate, from Adam on, all those who would have 
followed him had they lived after the founding of 
the Church. Here a master fantast shows Hell, not 
only as a realm of physical agony, but also of terri- 
fied screaming insanity. Note, however, that the art- 
ist draws for his effect upon the ordinary materials 
of nature: the orgiastic postures of the figures in the 
foreground, and the predatory activities of fish and 
reptiles. By contrast (cf. plate g) the figures of Christ 
and his angels in the central capsule are utterly with- 
out verve or interest. 


7. The Inferno. Coppo di Marcovaldo, thirteenth cen- 
tury. It is easier to depict the “face” of evil in terms 
of violence inflicted upon living bodies. And yet 
Satan—chewing Judas with his mouth, and Cassius 
and Brutus with the serpent-heads emerging from 
his thighs—looks curiously detached. He is the duti- 
ful servant of God, carrying out rather distasteful 
orders. Even the serpent heads do not seem to be 
enjoying their meals. The most sinister elements are 
perhaps the frog forms, later to be exploited so hor- 
rendously by Breughel. 


8. Detail from the Temptation of St. Anthony. Mathias 
Griinewald, the Isenheim Altar, fourteenth century. 
The temptation of the desert hermit, St. Anthony, 
has been one of the favorite themes for the painter’s 
display of diabolic imagination. The puzzle—is it 
merely aesthetic or is it also moral—is, can one de- 
pict an absolutely evil countenance? (See the discus- 
sion in the text, pp. 163-164.) Is Griinewald showing 
us evil, in the full theological sense of perfected 
malice, or do we have here merely the grotesque, the 
lunatic, the animal, or even the clownish? 

Plates 1-8 follow page 70. 


242 » Notes on the Plates 


g. The Last Judgment. Hubert van Eyck, fifteenth cen- 
tury. Here again, one must note the astonishing 
contrast between the demure and characterless for- 
mality of the justified saints in Heaven, and the 
squirming vitality and variety of Hell. Above is the 
most stately gathering for Vespers or an ecclesiastical 
convention. Below is a wriggling orgy in which 
naked bodies—some rather shapely—are being eaten 
forever and ever by worms, and it is simply obvious 
that the artist was far more inspired, and, indeed, 
had much more fun, in painting the lower part. If 
this is not a covert work of sadistic pornography 
(cf. also plates 6 and 7), what alternatives can we 
suggest 

Perhaps the artist has considered the possibility 
that eternal pain would be absolute ecstasy. It could 
neither harm nor destroy, for, as Scheeben (pp. 180— 
181) was careful to point out, the mangled and 
seared limbs are everlastingly restored. 


10. Lucifer, King of Hell. Gustave Doré, 1833-1883. 


11. The Saintly Throng in the Form of a Rose. Gustave 
Doré, 1833-1883. (See text, p. 38.) 


12. Vision of the Throne of God. Illumination from a 
Flemish Apocalypse, c. 1400. The scene described in 
Revelation, 4. To the left, St. John is being drawn 
up into the heavenly city by an angel to behold the 
vision of the King of Heaven, surrounded by the 
four cherubim: the Bull of St. Luke (Taurus), the 
Lion of St. Mark (Leo), the Eagle of St. John 
(Scorpio), and the Man of St. Matthew (Aquarius). 
The evangelical cherubim correspond to the four 
Fixed Signs of the Zodiac, here arranged in their 
correct order (which is somewhat rare). The eagle or 
phoenix was anciently an alternative symbol for the 


Notes on the Plates - 243 


scorpion, and represents death-and-resurrection. The 
seven lamps of ‘“‘the Seven Spirits of God’ hang be- 
fore the throne, and around are seated the “four 
and twenty elders’’not identified in the text. But the 
remarkable feature of this illumination is the clarity 
with which it illustrates the polarity of the spiritual 
and the erotic, the heavenly and the earthy. 


13. St. Michael. Andrea della Robbia, fifteenth century. 
The ideal of the androgyne. In the course of spiritual 
evolution the opposition of male and female seems 
to be transcended. (See text, p. 204.) 


14. The Cross as the Tree of Life. Mosaic, fourth century 
with additions, c. 1125. (See text pp. 210-214.) One 
of the most interesting representations of the Tree 
of the Cross as the Axle-Tree of the universe. In the 
original the crucifix is surmounted by an immense 
sunburst, suggesting the Hindu symbolism of the 
spinal tree. According to the cosmic anatomical sys- 
tem of Yoga, the work of spiritual liberation consists 
in the ascent of the spinal tree by the kundalini or 
“‘serpent-power,” which ordinarily lies dormant at its 
base. (Cf. the plate here.) When awakened, the 
kundalini passes up through the various chakras, or 
centers of power believed to be locataed along the 
spine, until it reaches the sahasrara chakra—the 
thousand-petalled lotus in the head, a figure of the 
sun beneath the dome of the sky. The serpent-and- 
tree theme is also found in the Norse myth of the 
worm Nidhug who gnaws at the roots of Yggdrasil, 
and the Hebrew myths of (a) nehushtan, the 
brazen serpent of Moses, and of (b) the Tree of Life 
in the Garden of Paradise, which have always been 
regarded as prophetic “types” of the crucifixion. 
Note, in the accompanying plate, the four streams 
flowing from the base of the Cross, reminiscent of 
the Four Rivers of Eden. 


244 - Notes on the Plates 


15. Indian Tree of Life. Bronze, seventeenth century. 
Compare with the preceding plate. This is probably 
the Mucalinda Tree of Buddhist legend, where the 
Buddha sat in mediation for seven days shortly after 
his great Awakening. This tree was the home of the 
Serpent-King Mucalinda, the five-headed cobra 
here shown, who protected the Buddha from the 
elements with his hood. 


16. Vishnu resting upon the serpent Ananta. L. front and 
R. back views. Bronze. Northern India, probably 
eighteenth century. In the pralaya, or interval be- 
tween manifestations of the universe, the Supreme 
Self, here personified as Vishnu, is said to rest upon 
the thousand-headed serpent Ananta, 2.e., “Endless,” 
the image of eternity. When the time comes for a 
new cycle of manifestation, a golden lotus grows out 
from Vishnu’s navel with Brahma, the creator, seated 
upon it, and once again the play of maya is set in 
motion. See text, pp. 76-78, and 79-82. 

Plates 9-16 follow page 134. 


17.. Amphisbaena. Aztec; mosaic in shell and turquoise. 
The ambivalence of the serpent, who is both poison 
and medicine. The amphisbaena appears also as a 
heraldic emblem in the West, and was mentioned by 
Pliny and Lucanus as a creature actually to be found 
in Libya. The serpent and the tree are both myth- 
ologically associated with the homeopathic prin- 
ciple that “like cures like’—the hair of the dog that 
bit you. On the Tree of Knowledge the serpent is 
Satan, but on the Tree of the Cross it is Christ. ‘‘For 
as Moses lifted up the serpent (nehushtan) in the 
wilderness, so also shall the Son of Man be lifted 
up.” Moses’ serpent was apparently a talisman 
against an infestation of the Israelite camp by 
snakes, and taking this as a prophetic “type” of 
Christ, forms of the crucifix are found showing a 


Notes on the Plates 


18. Symbolic door. Sona Masjid, at Gaur, N. W. Bengal. 


Sixteenth century. The polarity of the double door, 
with one half the mirror-image of the other. This 
exquisite merging of Persian Islamic and Hindu 
styles shows the Door (z.e., the entrance to Heaven, 
fana el fana, or liberation) surmounted (top center) 
by an emblem of the axle-tree of the world—a 
cypress above an inverted (skambha) lotus—since 
the way out is always through the center of the scene, 
not in flight from it. Furthermore, the Door of 
Heaven is usually “active,” like a portcullis or snap- 
ping jaws, or like the whirling sword of fire which 
guards the entrance to the Paradise Garden. Who- 
ever would gain access must jump through “in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye,” for if he stops 
to consider when is the right moment to leap, he is 
always too late. 


19. Brahma. Stone sculpture. South India, Chola Dynasty, 


tenth to eleventh century. (See text pp. go-97). The 
One Actor behind all the manifold parts and roles 
of the universe—not just two-faced, like Janus, but 
four-faced so as to be looking in every direction, 
left and right, before and after. 


20a and 20b. Two forms of the four-faced Brahma. L. 


21. 


stone figure at Elephanta, c. 750 A.D. R. modern 
folk-art figure in bronze. For further elucidation of 
the symbolism of four faces, looking all ways, see 


PP. 99-100. 


Shiva as Nataraja, King of the Dance. Bronze, eleventh 
century. South India, Chola Dynasty. (See text pp. 
75-112.) The upper left hand holds a {iame, symbol of 
creative dissolution and purgation. The upper right 
holds a drum, because the world is a manifestation 
of rhythm and vibration. The lower left hand points 
to the raised left foot, which, seeming to float above 


» 245 


246 - Notes on the Plates 


the ground, represents liberation. The lower right 
hand is in the gesture of abhaya, “Fear not.” The 
right foot presses down upon the demon Apasmara, 
namely, forgetfulness—especially of one’s own true 
nature. The ring of flames signifies the everlasting 
magic (maya) of the physical universe, produced by 
the dance as one creates the illusion of a circle by 
whirling a flaming torch. 


22. Indian map of the world, of Jain origin but uncertain 
date. The world assimiliated to the form of the 
mandala. At once the most preconceived, or unscien- 
tific. and the most profound image of the cosmos. 
The symbolism here is, however, no more geocentric 
than it is egocentric, for the world is centered upon 
an image of the atman, the Self within and beyond 
ego which unites the individual with the universal. 
The center is Mount Meru, the axis mundi, the 
pillar joining heaven and earth. Around it, within 
the first dark circle, is the Jambudvipa, sometimes 
considered as the world of human beings and some- 
times as just the subcontinent of India. The dark, 
ribbon-like markings are rivers, and the. dark rings, 
with their fish, are the oceans. Beyond the Jambud- 
vipa lie two other “continents,” separated by still 
another circular ocean. This is, therefore, not the 
world as seen externally, from the standpoint of the 
geographer, but the world as seen in another kind of 
space, or hierarchy of values, whose center is not ter- 
restrial but metaphysical. 


23. Amitayus Mandala. Tibetan painting, probably eight- 
eenth century. This mandala, or circle of perfection 
and wholeness, has been selected as an appropriate 
illustration for the passages from the Amitayur- 
dhyana Sutra quoted on pp. 221-231. Like all man- 
dalas of this general form, it represents the union 
of the vajradhatu (vajra=diamond-thunderbolt, 


Notes on the Plates - 247 


dhatu=realm or sphere) and the garbhadhatu 
(garbha=womb), that is, of consciousness and form, 
yang and yin, the cosmic male and the cosmic 
female. In the center it shows Amitayus (Amitabha), 
the Dhyani-Buddha of Boundless Life and Light, 
surrounded by eight replicas of himself upon the 
petals of a lotus. In the T-shaped areas at the four 
points of the compass are the four lokapalas, or 
Guardians of the Cardinal Points—Vaishravana to 
the North, Virudhaka to the South, Dhritarashtra 
to the East, and Virupaksha to the West. Between 
the outer circle and the inner square is Sukhavati, 
the Pure Land over which Amitayus presides, with 
its flowers, banners, clouds, Bodhisattvas, and celes- 
tial dancing-girls (apsara). 

Immediately outside the mandala (above) are the 
Eight Glorious Emblems: the banner of victory, the 
conch-shell, the covered vase, the canopy of protec- 
tion from the heat of passions, the two fishes of 
happiness and utility or wisdom and compassion, the 
lotus, the endless knot, and the wheel of the doctrine 
(dharmachakra). Immediately below are the Seven 
Jewels. The five figures at the top are the Bod- 
hisattvas Sitatapatra and Manjusri, the Buddha 
Amitabha, and the Bodhisattvas Shadakshari and 
Ushnishavijaya. The five below are two yi-dam, or 
tutelary gods, Jambhala and Sitajambhala, the 
Guardian God (dharmapala) Hayagriva, protector 
of horses, the y:-dam Kalajambhala, and the female 
Bodhisattva Vasudhara. For the descriptive infor- 
mation I am indebted to Antoinette Gordon’s 
Iconography of Tibetan Lamaism (Charles E. Tuttle 
Co., 1959), esp. pp. 27-28. 

Plates 17-23 follow page 198. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL 
REFERENCES 


1. A. W. Watts, Myth and Ritual in Christianity. Vanguard. New York, 
1954, P- 7- 

2. Mark Schorer, William Blake. Holt. New York, 1946. 

3. Cited by Arthur Machen in Tales of Horror and the Supernatural. 
Knopf. New York, 1948, pp. 301-302. 

4. Thomas Traherne, Centuries of Meditations. Dobell, London, 1948, pp. 
152-153. 

5. H. Ostermann, “The Alaskan Eskimos,” in Joseph Campbell, The Masks 
of God, vol. 1. Viking. New York, 1959, p. 350. 

6. W. Y. Evans Wentz, The Tibetan Book of the Dead. Oxford, 1957, p. 
146. 

7. C. G. Jung, Collected Works, vol. 4, Freud and Psychoanalysis. Bollingen. 
New York, p. 332. 

8. A. K. Coomaraswamy, Hinduism and Buddhism. Philosophical Library. 
New York, 1943, p. 33, D 21. 

g. In G. R. S. Mead, Fragments of a Faith Forgotten. Watkins. London, 
1931, Pp. 223. 

10. Paradiso 33, 142. 

11. Philip Wheelwright, Heraclitus. Princeton, 1959, p. 29. 

12. Dhammapada, 153-154. 

1g. S. Radhakrishnan (tr.), The Upanishads. Allen & Unwin. London, 1953, 
p. 279. Brihadaranyaka, iv. 4. 22. 

14. G. K. Chesterton, Collected Poems. Dodd, Mead. New York, 1932, p. 305. 

15. In Paul Radin, The Trickster. Routledge. London, 1956, p. 185. 

16. Mircea Eliade, “La Coincidentia Oppositorum.” Eranos Jahrbuch, vol. 
XXVII. Rhein-Verlag. Ziirich, 1959, pp. 202-205. 


249 


250 + Bibliographical References 


. S. Freud, On Creativity and the Unconscious. Harper. New York, 1958, 


P- 55. 


. G. R. Taylor, Sex in History. Vanguard. New York, 1954, p. 121. 
. M. Garcon & J. Vinchon, The Devil. Gollancz. London, 1929. Quoted in 


(18), p. 121. 


. K. Kohler, Jewish Theology. Macmillan. New York, 1923, p. 176. 
. Kurt Marek, Yestermorrow, Knopf. New York, 1961, p. 23. 
. Tr. Philip Wheelwright, Heraclitus. Princeton University Press. Prince- 


ton, 1959. 


. Relevation 21, 4. 
. Tao Te Ching 2. Tr. A. W. W. 
. Joseph Needham (tr.) in Science and Civilisation in China, vol. 2. Cam- 


bridge University Press. Cambridge, 1956, p. 326. 


. De Bary, Chan, and Watson (eds.), Sources of the Chinese Tradition. 


Columbia University Press. New York, 1960, pp. 211-212. 


. J. Needham (25), pp. 460-461. 
. A. Forke (tr.) in World Conception of the Chinese. Arthur Probsthain. 


London, 1925, p. 37. 


. A. Forke (28), p. 56. 

. A. Forke (28), p. 68. 

. A. Forke (28), p. 217. 

. A. Forke (28), p. 220. 

. H. A. Giles (tr.) Chuang-tzu. Kelly & Walsh. Shanghai, 1926, p. 228 


Tr. mod. by A. W. W. Chuang-tzu 18. 


. H. A. Giles (33), p. 278. Chuang-tzu 22. 

. H. A. Giles (33), pp. 19-21. Tr. mod. by A. W. W. Chuang-tzu 2. 

. H. A. Giles (33), pp. 211-212. Chuang-tzu 17. 

. J. Needham (25), p. 333. 

. R. Wilhelm & C. G. Jung, The Secret of the Golden Flower. Kegan Pau 


London, 1931, pp. 26-27. T’ai I Chin Hua Taung Chi 2. 


. Wilhelm & Jung (38), p. 36. T’ai I Chin 3. 
. H. A. Giles (33), pp. 43-44. Tr. mod. by A. W. W. Chuang-tzu 4. 
. Bhagavad-Gita, x. 20, 31-34, 36, 38-42, xi. 1-5, 7-21, 23-34. Tr. Swam 


Paramananda. Vedanta Centre Inc., Cohasset, Mass. 


. Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, 1. 4. 1-5. Tr. F. Max Miller in The Upani 


shads, vol. i. Sacred Books of the East, vol. i. Oxford, 1900. 


. Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, 3.6 & 3.8. Tr. R. E. Hume, The Thirtees 


Principal Upanishads. Oxford, 1931, pp. 113-114, 117-119. 


. Kalika Purana, 1. 1-5, 10. Tr. Heinrich Zimmer (ed. Joseph Campbell 


in The King and the Corpse. Pantheon Books, Bollingen Series XI 
New York, 1956, pp. 241-242. 


. H. Zimmer (44), Pp. 243, 245- 
46. 
47. 


H. Zimmer (44), pp. 246-247. 
Swami Nikhilananda (tr.), The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna. Ramakrishna 
Vivekananda Center. New York, 1942, p. 619. 


Bibliographical References + 251 


. Nikhilananda (47), pp. 134-136. 

. Nikhilananda (47), p. 136. 

. H. Zimmer (44). Kalika Purana, 17. 1-9, 13, p. 306. 

. Commentary on Kena Upanishad. In R. Guénon, Man and his Becoming, 


Luzac. London, 1945, p. 114. 


. A. K. Coomaraswamy, “The Vedanta and Western Tradition.” The 


American Scholar, viii. 1939, p. 223. 


. Vishnu Purana, i. 6. Tr. H. A. Wilson in Works, vol. vi. Triibner. Lon- 


don, 1864, pp. 100-104. 


. Vishnu Purana, i. 8. (54), pp. 118-120. 
. Mahabharata, 12. 281. 1 to 282. 20. Tr. Joseph Campbell in The Masks 


of God, vol. ii. Viking. New York, 1962, pp. 184-187. 


. W. Y. Evans Wentz (tr.), The Tibetan Book of the Dead. Oxford, 1957, 


PP- 95-96, 104. 


. Evans Wentz (57), pp. 105-107. 
. Evans Wentz (57), pp. 131, 137, 146-147. 
. E. A. Wallis Budge, From Fetish to God in Ancient Egypt. Oxford, 


1934, PP- 450-452, 452-454, 456-457. Actual trs. by Alan Gardiner. 


. Heinrich Zimmer (tr.) (ed. J. Campbell) in Philosophies of India. 


Pantheon Books (Bollingen Series). New York, 1951, pp. 185-187, 188- 
190, 190-191, 192-193, 195-200, 201-203. 


. Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews. Simon & Schuster for the 


Jewish Publication Society of America. New York, 1961, pp. 54-58. 
(This is an abridged edition of a seven-volume work of the same title 
first published in 1909, giving in detail the rabbinical or patristic 
sources for each incident.) 


. R. H. Charles (tr.), The Book of Enoch. Oxford, 1912, p. 56. 
. Gathas, yasna 30. J. H. Moulton (tr.), in Early Zoroastrianism. Williams 


& Norgate. London, 1913, Pp. 349°351- 


. 'Ulema i Islam, 8-10. In R. C. Zaehner (tr.), Zurvan. Oxford, 1955, Pp. 410. 
. Eznik of Kolb, De Deo. French text in Zaehner (64), tr. A. W. W. 
. Theodore Abu Qurra, On the True Religion. In Zaehner (trs). (64), p. 


429. 


. Selections of Zatspram, 35. In Zaehner (trs.) (64), p. 351. 
. Cambridge Ancient History, vol. 4, pp. 207, 616. 
. J. Scheftclowitz, Die altpersische Religion und das Judentum. Giessen, 


1920. 


. Th. Gaster, The Dead Sea Scriptures. Anchor. New York, 1956. 
. Watts, The Supreme Identity. Pantheon. New York, 1950. Noonday 


(paper). New York, 1958. 


. Watts, Myth and Ritual in Christianity. Vanguard. New York, 1953. 


Grove Press (paper). New York, 1960. 


. L. Ginzberg (62), pp. 34-35. 
. Matthias Joseph Scheeben, Die Mysterien des Christentums. Quotation 


252 - Bibliographical References 


g9- 
100. 


101, 
102, 


tr. by Inge Sammet. Herder & Co., G.m.b.H., Freiburg im Breisgau 
1941, PP. 232-233. 


. Milton, Paradise Lost, v. 577-617. 

. Paradise Lost, v. 657-693. 

. Paradise Lost, v. 743-802. 

. Paradise Lost, vi. 824-877. 

. Paradise Lost, i. 44-74. 

. Paradise Lost, i. 242-270. 

. Arthur Machen, “The White People” in his Tales of Horror and th 


Supernatural. Knopf. New York, 1948, pp. 116-123. 


. Vishnu Purana, vi. 5. Wilson (54), pp. 207-208. 
. M. R. James (tr.), The Apocryphal New Testament. Oxford, 1926, pp 


508-510, 517-518. 


. Robert Cardinal Bellarmine, On the Ascent to God. Tr. T. G. Gent 


1616. London, 1928. 


. M. J. Scheeben (74), pp. 614-616. 
. Dante, Inferno 34. Tr. Lawrence G. White, The Divine Comedy 


Pantheon Books. New York, 1948. 


. Paradise Lost, vi. 4-12. 
. A. G. Brodeur (tr.), Prose Edda, “Gylfaginning,” iv-viii. American 


Scandinavian Foundation. New York, 1916. 


. Cf. Joseph Campbell, The Hero with a Thousand Faces. Pantheon. Nev 


York, 1949, pp. 282-283. 


. Joseph Campbell, The Masks of God, vol. ii, ‘Oriental Mythology.’ 


Viking. New York, 1962. See ch. 1. 


. L. Ginzberg (61), pp. 34-36. 
. Symposium, 189-192. B. Jowett (tr.), The Dialogues of Plato, vol. i 


Scribner. New York, 1889, pp. 483-486. 


. Proverbs 8: 1 to g: 12. 
. A. K. Coomaraswamy, The Dance of Shiva. Noonday Press. New York 


1957, Pp. 130. 


. L. Apuleius, The Golden Ass. Tr. Harold Berman. Privately printed 


1980, pp. 287-289. 


. M. R. James (tr.), The Apocryphal New Testament. Oxford, 1924, pp 


334-335. Acts of Peter, 37 ad fin. to 39. 


. Guillaumont, Puech, Quispel, Till, and ’Abd al Masih (tr.), The Gospe 


According to Thomas. Harper. New York, 1959, pp. 17-19. 

Guillaumont, et al. (97), p. 43. 

M. R. James (96), pp. 254-255. Acts of John, 98-99. 

David Shea and Anthony Troyer (trs.), The Dabistan. Tudor. New York 
1937 (repr.) First edn., 1843, pp. 398-410. 

A. K. Coomaraswamy, “Symplegades.” 

J. Auboyer, “Moudr4 et hasta ou le langage par signes.” Oriental Art, iii 
London, 1951, pp. 153-161. 


103 


104 


Bibliographical References + 253 


. J. Takakusu (tr.), Buddhist Mahayana Texts. Sacred Books of the East, 
vol. xlix. Oxford, 1894, pp. 169-179, 180-181, 197-198. 

. H. L. Martensen, Jacob Boehme: His Life and Teaching. Tr. T. Rhys 
Evans. Hodder & Stoughton. London, 1885. 

. Alfred, Lord Tennyson. A Memoir by his Son. Macmillan. London, 
1897, vol. i, p. 320. 

. R. M. Bucke, Cosmic Consciousness. Dutton. New York, 1923, p. 326. 

. An experience under the influence of nitrous oxide, in R. H. Ward, A 
Drug-Taker’s Notes. Gollancz. London, 1957, pp. 26-31. 

. L. L. Whyte, The Unconscious Before Freud. Basic Books. New York, 


1960, 


Abel, 134-138 
Abel, Carl, 30 
Acts of John, 213-214 
Acts of Peter, 210-213 
Adam, 90, 134 
“Adoration of the Lamb” (van 
Eyck), 38 
Ahriman, 141-145 
Ahura, 140 
Ambivalence, 19, 28 
divine, 27-28 
Hindu, 88-89, 93 
primal language and, 30 
world, 29 
Angel of Evil see Devil 
Antithetical Sense of Primal 
Words (Freud), 30 
Apuleius, Lucius, 207-209, 220 
Aristotle, 11, 52 
Arjuna, 78-82 
Art 
Hindu theme of, 78 
imagery, 6-7, 14 
Arthashastra, 89 
Auboyer, 221 
Ave Marta (Schubert), 39 


Babylonian mythology 
creation by dismemberment, 
191-192 
Bardo Thédol see Book of the 
Dead (Tibetan) 
Bhagavad-Gita, 78-82, 98 
Bodhisattva, 31, 99, 204 
Boehme, Jacob, 232 
Book of Changes, 53-58, 61-62, 
67-68 
Book of the Dead (Tibetan), 11 
Book of Enoch, 139 
Brahma, 26-27, 88-89, 90-91, 92- 
93, 95-96, 97, 100 
nirguna aspect of, 27 
saguna aspect of, 27 
Brihadaranyaka, 83-86, 200 
Buddha, 26, 98-99 


Cain, 134-138 

Cakravartin, 127-128 

Centuries of Meditations (Tra- 
herne), 7-8 

Cervantes, 31 

Ch’en Hsien-wei, 67 

Ch’eng-tzu, 63 


255 


256 + Index 


Chinese mythology 

conflict rooted in harmony, 
61 

creation of life, 62-65 

eight trigrams, 55, 56-58 

hexagrams, 54, 55, 58 

natural elements as interac- 
tion of Yin and Yang, 62-65 

polar concept in, 52-53, 62-63, 
65-66 

primordial pair (see Yin- 
Yang) 

Supreme Ultimate in, 58, 61 

transcendence of dualities, 


31, 69-71 

unity of polar opposites in, 
61, 65-67 

universe as_ self-organizing 
body, 66 


world as system of transforma- 
tion, 64-65, 
See also Yin-Yang 
Ching-chi wen-chi, 63-65 
Chou Tun-yi, 59 
Christ, 18, 202, 204 
Christian mythology 
crucifixion of Saint Peter, 
210-212 
Devil imagery in, 39-40, 41, 
42, 149-163 
dualistic concepts in, 16-18, 
149-188 
Hell, 173-181 
polarity and, 36 
solution to duality, 16 
vision of the cross of light, 
213-214 
Chuang-tzu, 65-67, 202 
Consciousness, 234, 235 


Consciousness (Contd.) 
education and, 9 
expansion of, 43 
Gestalt theory and, 21-23 
ground sensations and, 33 
growth of, 41 
Hindu, 76 
maturity and, 9 

Coomaraswamy, A. K., 204-205, 

219 

Cosmic 
dance, 75-112 
drama, 14-15 
game, 25, 28, 84 


Dancing, Hindu, 75, 88, 89 
Dante, 19, 38, 220 
Devil, 19 
Christian image of, 39-40, 41, 
42, 149-163 
God inverted, 110 
Hebrew, 134, 138 
partnership with God, 29-30 
See also Evil, images of; Hell 
Dismemberment 
creation by, 191-192 
remembrance and, 192 
Doré, Gustave, 38 
Doubt and Certainty in Science 
(Young), 71n. 
Dreams, myth and, 23 
Duality 
metaphysical, 16-17 
problem of, 16-19 
transcendence of, 31, 69-71, 
203 
ultimate, 149-188 
Zoroastrian, 145 


Eastern Orthodox Church, doc- 
trine of creation, 191 
Egyptian mythology, 115-123 
Eliade, 29 
Eve, 134 
creation of, go 
Evil, images of, 36 
alluring characteristics of, 37, 
38-39 
Christian, 39-40, 41, 42, 149- 
163 
dualistic, 17 
Inquisition and, 40 
Machen on, 164-171 
self and, 40 
See also Devil; Hell 


Field, concept of, 5, 21 

Figure/ground, 32-33 
relationship, 21-23 

Freud, Sigmund, 8, 12, 30, 205 

Fu Hsi, 56 


Gestalt 

theory of perception, 21-23 
Ginzberg, Louis, 134 
God, 134-138 

Hebrew, 134-138 

image as human, 139 

partnership with the Devil, 29 
Golden Ass (Apuleius), 207-209 
Good, 37-38 

Devil and, 29-30 

dualistic, 17 

polarity with evil, 43 
Greek mythology 

division of the sexes, 197-200 


Heard, Gerald, 31 
Heaven, 181 
Jaina, 126, 128 


Index + 257 


Hebrew mythology 
division of the sexes, 193-197 
God, 134-138 
Satan, 134, 138 
sibling rivalry in, 134-138 
Hell 
Christian, 173-181 
Jaina, 127, 128, 130-131 
oriental, 172-173 
Heraclitus, 21, 50-52 
Hexagrams, 54, 55, 58 
Hindu mythology, 35 
Arjuna, 78-82 
battle of the Gods, 102-105 
bhakti, 96 
bifurcation of Supreme Self 
into male and female, 83-84 
Bodhisattva, 99 
Brahma, 26-27, 88-89, go-91, 
92-93, 95-96, 97, 100 
Buddha, 26, 98-99 
consciousness, 76 
cosmology, 26-27, 77-112 
creation, 89-90, 91 
creation-and-destruction, 82, 
88-89 
creation of woman, 90 
Daksha, 96 
Dawn, 90, 92 
demonic aspect of divinity in, 
105-112 
dismemberment in, 191 
God of Love, 91-93 
Godhead as hermaphroditic, 
89 
images as comedy, 87-88 
instructions for meditating, 
221-231 
Kali, 93-95, 97 
Kama, 91-92, 93 


258 - Index 


Hindu mythology (Contd.) 
knowledge, 98 


I Ching see Book of Changes 
Imagery, mythological, 17, 23 


lila, 76, 87 

love, 89, 91-93 

male-and-female, 82, 83-84 

maya, 25, 76, 77, 78, 84, 89, 
90, 99, 100 

nirvana, 99 

non-dual (advaita) principle, 
102 

polarities in, 82-89, 100-101 

politics and, 89 

pralaya in, 26 

primal guilt in, 84 

primordial split, 193, 200 

reincarnation, 97 

Sakti, 96-97 

Shak tis, 89, go 

Shiva, 88-89, 92-93, 95-96, 97; 
100 

“Spirits of the Departed,” 93 

Sri Krishna, 78-82, 98 

Supreme Self, 76-77, 78-82, 
83-84, 87, 99, 100, 102 

tandava, 88 

time concept, 87 

unity of opposites, 83-84, 99, 
100, 101, 105-112 

universal mind 
nana), 102 

Vishnu, 101 

world-drama as comedy, 87- 
88 

world-view, 76-78, 82, 84-87, 
98-99 

Yoga, 89, 96 

Hopi Amerindian mythology, 

initiation, 206 


(alaya-vij- 


Horus, 116-123 


ambivalence of, 16 

anthropomorphic, 35 

apprehension and, 31 

characteristics of, 2, 3-4, 6, 10, 
11, 15, 17-18 

Christian, 18, 87 (see also 
Christian mythology, Devil 
imagery in) 

Devil (see Devil) 

Divine Juggler (Hindu), 77, 
78, 84 

Evil (see Evil, images of) 

force of, 6 

hermaphroditic, 89, 203-204, 
205 

Jung and, 13-14 

serpent, 18, 126, 127, 130, 134 

See also Sibling rivalry; Yin- 
Yang 


Initiation myths, 206-219 
Innocence, 204 


Jaina mythology 


doctrine of liberation, 12%, 
133 

heaven, 126, 128 

hell, 127, 130-131, 218 

penance, 132 

polarity, 134 

reincarnation in, 
128, 131 

sibling rivalry in, 123-134 

unity of opposites, 134 


125-126, 


Juggler, Divine (Hindu), 77, 


78, 84 


Jung, Carl, 14, 41 


mythology and, 12-13 


Kamatha, 124 
Kerényi, Karl, 28 
Kundalini-yoga, 122 


Language 
ambivalent, 30 
factual, 4, 5, 6, 15, 17, 23 
mythic, 16 
organic, 16 
poetic, 4, 5-6, 16 
Lao-tzu, 50, 52-53, 61, 202-203 
“Last Judgment” (van Eyck), 38 
Liberation, doctrine of, 127, 


133 
London Walk: Meditations in 
the Streets of the Metropo- 
lis (Hampole), 7 
Lord Parshva, 123, 129, 130, 133 
Lord’s Song see Bhagavad-Gita 
Love 
other, 18, 19 
self, 18, 19 
source of, 19 
Lucifer see Devil 


Machen, Arthur, 7, 36 
Mahabharata, 78, 102-105 
Maori mythology, creation by 
dismemberment, 192 
Marek, Kurt, 44 
Marubhiti, 124 
Maya, 25, 76, 77, 78, 84, 89, 89, 
g0, 99, 110 
Monoimnus, 19 
Muhammed, 214-219, 220 
Music 
diabolism and, 39 
Hindu, 89 
sacred, 39 
Mysticism, 24-25 


Index + 259 


Myth 


Babylonian (see Babylonian 
mythology) 

Brahma’s withdrawal in self, 
26-2 

Buddha’s awakening, 26 

characteristics of, 2, 3-4, 6, 10, 
11, 15, 17-18 

Chinese (see Chinese mythol- 
ogy) 

Christian (see 
mythology 

Egyptian (see Egyptian myth- 
ology) 

Genesis, 9 

genesis of (see Mythogenesis) 

Greek (see Greek mythology) 

Hebrew (see Hebrew mythol- 
ogy) 

Hindu (see Hindu mythol- 
ogy 

Hopi (see Hopi Amerindian 
mythology) 

imagery in, see 
mythological) 

initiation, 206-219 

Jaina (see Jaina mythology) 

language of, 16 

Maori (see Maori mythology) 

mono-plot of, 31-32 

Norse (see Norse mythology) 

partnership of God and 
Devil, 29-30 

prevalent theme of, 6 

primitive philosophy and, 
29-30 

relativity and, 33 

science and, 12, 33-35 

self and, 11 

symbolism in (see Imagery, 
mythological) 


Christian 


Imagery, 


260 + Index 


Myth (Contd.) 
theories of, 2 
vision of, 6-9, 10, 11, 14-15 
Zurvanite (see Zurvanite 
mythology) 
Mythogenesis 
approach to, 20 
difficulty in studying, 20 


Najagneq (Eskimo shaman), 11 

Nielsen, Kay, 39 

Night on Bald Mountain 
(Moussorgsky), 39 

Nirvana, 99 

Norse mythology, creation by 
dismemberment, 192 


Ohrmazd, 141-145 
Omnipotent oneness, 8-9 
Osiris, 120, 121 


Penance, Jaina, 132 
Perception 
Gestalt theory of, 21-23 
primary unit of 21 
Poetry 
images, 2, 4, 5-7, 14, 17, 31 
language of, 4, 5-6, 16 
“pathetic fallacy” in, 5 
Polar opposites 
Chinese concept 52-53, 62-63, 
65-66 
described, 49 
good-and-evil, 36, 43, 134, 
187-188 
Heaven-and-Hell, 
186 
Hindu, 82-89, 100-101 
intuition of, 102 
Jaina, 134 


181, 185- 


Polar opposites (Contd.) 
See also Unity, polar oppo- 
sites as 
Primordial pair (see Yin-Yang) 
Puranas, 89, 90-98 


Reincarnation, Jaina, 125-126, 
128, 131 

Repression, psychological, 23-24 

Ramprasad, 93-94, 95 


Saint Augustine of Hippo, 145 
Saint John, 213-214 
Saint Peter, 210-213 
Satan see Devil 
Schorer, Mark, 3 
School of Religious Doctrines, 
214-219 
Sculpture, Hindu, 75, 89 
Serpent, 18, 126, 127, 130, 134 
Set, 116-123 
Shankara, 98 
Shiva, 88-89, 92-93, 95-95, 97; 
100 
Sibling rivalry 
Hebraic legends and, 134-138 
Jaina, 123-124 
mythology and, 115-146 
polarity concept in, 115-123 
“Skeleton, The’’ (Chesterton), 
27-28 
Sri Krishna, 78-82, 98 
Sri Ramakrishna, 93-94 
Supreme Self (Paramatman), 
76-77, 78-82, 83-84, 87, 99, 
100, 102 
Supreme Ultimate (Chinese), 
58, 61 


Tao, 57, 59 
Taoism 


being in, 70-71 
Chinese, 96 
physical immortality in, 67-68 
transcending polar  differ- 
ences, 69-71 
Taylor, G. R., 39 
Tennyson, Alfred Lord, 232 
Time 
Indian concept, 87 
_ western concept, 87 
Tirthankara, 123 
Tragic drama, 16, 32 
Trickster, role of, 27-28 
Trigrams, 55, 56-58 


Ultimate Dualism, 149-188 
Unconscious mind 
collective, 13-14 
symbolism in, 31 
Unity, polar opposites as, 24, 
87, 134, 139, 203 
Brahma-Shiva, 88-89 
Brahman-Kali, 94 
Chinese, 61, 65-67 
fundamental departure from, 
140 
God and Devil, 110 
Hindu mythology and, 83-84, 
QQ, 100, 101, 105-112 
initiation myths and, 206- 
207, 209-210, 214, 219 
Jaina, 134 
mandala, 221 
Tao, 69-71 
Upanishads, 83-86, 200 


Index «+ 261 


Vedas, 83 
Vishnu, 101 
See also Supreme Self (Para- 
matman) 
Vishnu Purana, 100-101 
Vision 
cosmic, 78 
factual, 6, 10, 15 
mythic, 6-9, 10, 11, 14-15 
polar, 16 


Whyte, L. L., 234 
Wu-neng tzu, 62-63 


Yin-Yang, 55-56, 65-71 
generated by Supreme UIti- 
mate, 58 
hexagrams and, 54 
life generated by, 62-65 
movement constitutes Tao, 
57 
nature as interplay of, 58, 62- 
65 
symbols of, 59, 60 
unity of, 61, 63, 65 
world as system of transform- 
ation of, 64-65 
Ymir, 192 
Yoga, 89, 96, 122 
Young, J. Z., 71n. 


Zoroaster, 140 

See also Zurvanite mythology 
Zoroastrian gathas, 140-141 
Zurvanite mythology, 141-145 


