WAM} 
ut Of The Irap 


MAN’S PLACE IN NATURE 
HISTORICAL BUDDHISM 
PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
TRIBUTE TO CARL JUNG 


OUT OF 
THE TRAP 


OUT OF 
THE TRAP 


Selected Lectures 


of Alan W. Watts 


Edited by 
Mark Watts 


* 


4 


South Bend, Indiana 


OUT OF THE TRAP 
Copyright © 1985 by Mark Watts 


All rights reserved. No part of this book may be 
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, 
recording or by any information storage and retrieval 
system, without permission in writing from the 
publisher. 


and books 
702 South Michigan, South Bend, Indiana 46601 


Library of Congress Catalog Number: 85-0084565 
International Standard Book Number: 0-89708-147-1 
5 6 7 8 9 


Printed in the United States of America 


Cover illustration: Alan Watts’ Buddha, drawn with brush 
and ink, circa 1965. 


Additional copies available: 


the distributors 
702 South Michigan 
South Bend, IN 46601 


Dedicated to Henry ‘Sandy’ Jacobs 


Other books in the series 


LECTURES OF ALAN WATTS 


PLAY TO LIVE 
DIAMOND WEB 


Available from: 
the distributors 


702 S. Michigan 
South Bend, IN 46618 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE 
(Page 9) 


CHAPTER ONE 
Man’s Place In Nature (Page 11) 


CHAPTER TWO 
Out Of The Trap (Page 29) 


CHAPTER THREE 
Yoga Cara (Page 51) 


CHAPTER FOUR 
Psychology of Mystical Experience (Page 69) 


CHAPTER FIVE 
Historical Buddhism (Page 83) 


CHAPTER SIX 
Philosophy of Nature (Page 107) 


CHAPTER SEVEN 
Tribute to Carl Jung (Page 131) 


PREFACE 


The following lectures have been selected from the Alan 
Watts tape library, a collection of many hours of recordings 
made by Alan Watts during the sixties and early seventies. As 
the title Out Of The Trap implies, these selections are 
excellent examples of Watts’ s uncanny ability to point to ideas 
which limit our horizons and keep us perpetually bound with 
the ego-self. Alan Watts saw through the game and was prone 
to laugh at the great hoax that we create for ourselves through 
ignorance of our true nature. And our true nature is not a 
‘higher self’? to be discovered, but rather the true divinity of 
daily life as found—'"‘in all the details.”’ 

In this collection we find a more accurate description of 
nature—not as something separate from man, but in its 
original sense, as the virtues or characteristics of nature, 
including the seemingly senseless expressions of mankind run 
amuck with aimless technology and its resulting inevitable 
alienation. 

Drawing from the philosophies of the Eastern and 
Western world Watts brings us a uniquely balanced way of 
finding out who we really are. Although it may be strange to 


—ix— 


ne LEE EEEEEEEEEEEEEE 


CONTENTS 


say that a timeless philosophy has come of age, I could not help 
but think while preparing this manuscript that my father’s 
words will find a more receptive audience today than in the 
sixties when he was considered by some to be rather ‘far out!’ 
Historical events and scientific advances of the seventies have 
brought us to the realization that indeed man is capable of 
anything, and now perhaps we are possibly better prepared to 
listen to his warm and personal syntheses of the most important 
aspects of religious philosophy and human psychology. 

In perparing this text, great effort has been made io 
preserve the flavor and content of his original talks. For this 
reason you may find the following chapters to differ from his 
written style, but by reading aloud, you may recapture his play 
of words and wisdom. 


Mark Watts 


Comments welcome 


Post Office Box 938 
Point Reyes Station 
California - 94956 


es 


MAN’S PLACE 
IN NATURE 


was talking to you this morning about the basic 

philosophy of nature that underlies Far Eastern 
culture, and explaining why it’s so important for us in the 
West to understand this, so that we can encourage the 
Japanese people to re-understand it—because they are in 
danger of following some of our wildest excesses, and 
doing things that will destroy our environment. You see, 
a great deal of what we have done by way of technological 
development is based on the idea that man is at war with 
nature, and that in turn is based on the idea, which is a 
really a 19th century myth, that intelligence, values, love, 
humane feelings, etc. exist only within the borders of the 
human skin. And that outside those borders the world is 
nothing but a howling waste of blind energy, rampant 
libido, and total stupidity. 


225 3e 


Se a SS 


MAN’S PLACE IN NATURE 


/nnnnnn nnn ee 


This you see, is the extreme accentuation of the 
platonic Christian feeling as man as not belonging in this 
world, of being a spirit imprisoned in matter. And it’s 
reflected in our popular phraseology. ‘I came into this 
world.’’ “I face facts.’? “I encounter reality.’ It’s 
something that goes “boom”’ right against you like that! 

But all this is contrary to the facts. We didn’t come 
into this world—we grew out of it, in the same way that 
apples grow out of an apple tree. And if apples are 
symptomatic of an apple tree, I’m sure that after all, this 
tree apples—when you find a world upon which human 
beings are growing, then this world is humane, because it 
humans. 

Only we seek to deny our Mother, and to renounce 
our origins, as if somehow we were lonely specimens in 
this world, who don’t really belong here, and who are 
aliens in an environment of consisting mostly of rock and 
fire, and mechanical electronic phenomena, which has no 
interest in us whatsoever, except maybe alittle bitin us as 
a whole, as a species. You’ve heard all these phrases, 
‘‘Nature cares nothing for the individual, but only for the 
species.’ ‘‘Nature as in tooth and claw.”’ ‘‘Nature is dog- 
eat-dog,”’ or as the Hindus call it Matsyanaya the Law of 
the Sharks. And so; also a very popular idea of the 19th 
century running over into the common sense of the 20th, 
is that we belong as human beings on some very small, 
unimportant spec of dust, on the outer fringes of a very 
small galaxy, in the middle of millions and millions of 
much more important galaxies. And all this thinking is 
pure mythology. 


sy ee 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


Let me go in a little bit to the history of it, because 
it’s important for us as Westerners to know something 
about the history of the evolution of our own ideas that 
brought this state of mind about. We grew up as aculture 
in a very different idea, where the universe was seen as 
something in which the earth was at the center, and 
everything was arranged around us, in a way that we of 
course as living organisms naturally see the world. We 
see it from the center, and everything surrounds us. And 
so, this geocentric picture of the world was however, one 
in which every human being was fantastically important, 
because you were a child of God, and you were watched 
day in, day out, by your loving and judging father in 
Heaven. And you, because you have an eternal life, are 
infinitely important in the eyes of this God. 

I have a friend who’s a convert to Roman 
Catholicism, and is a very sophisticated and witty 
woman. And in her bathroom she had one of those old- 
fashioned toilets with a pull-tank on the top, and a pipe 
down to the toilet seat. And fastened on this pipe there 
was a little plaque which had on it nothing but an eye. 
And underneath was written in Old English Gothic style 
letters: ‘'Thou God sees me.’’ So everywhere is that 
watching eye, that examines you, and at the same time as 
it knows you, it causes your existence. By knowing you, 
God creates you, because you are an act of His creative 
imagination. And so you are desperately important. 


= [)5— 


NN 


MAN’S PLACE IN NATURE 


to a SS SS 


But Western people gotthis feeling that this became 
too embarrassing. You know how it was as a child, when 
you were working in school, and the teacher walked 
around behind your back, and looked over while you 
were working, and you always felt put off. While the 
teacher is watching you, you are non-plussed. You want 
to finish the work and then show it to the teacher. There is 
a problem. Never show anything unfinished to children 
or to fools. And children feel this very strongly about 
their teachers. They want to finish it before it’s looked at. 

So in exactly the same way, it’s embarrassing to feel 
that your inmost thoughts and your every decision is 
constantly being watched by a critic, however beneficent 
and however loving that critic may be, that you are 
always under judgement. To put this toa person is to bug 
him totally. Indeed, it’s one of the techniques used in Zen 
for putting people into a very strange state of mind. You 
are always under watch. 

It was a great relief for the Western world when we 
could decide that there was no-one watching us. Better a 
universe that is completely stupid than one that is too 
intelligent. And so, it was necessary for our peace of 
mind, and for our relief that during the 19th century 
particularly, we got rid of God, and found then that the 
universe surrounding us was supremely unintelligent, 
and was indeed a universe in which we, as intelligent 
beings, were nothing more than an accident. But then, 
having discovered this to be so, we had to take every 
conceivable step, and muster all possible energy to make 


Ges 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


this accident continue, and to make it dominate the 
show. The price that we paid for getting rid of God was 
rather terrible. It was the price of feeling ourselves to be 
natural flukes, in the middle of cosmos quite other than 
ourselves—cold, alien, and utterly stupid, going along 
rather mechanically, on rather rigid laws, but heartless. 
This attitude provoked in Western man a fury to 
beat nature into submission. And so, we talk about war 
against nature. When we climb a mountain like Everest, 
we have conquered Everest. When we get out enormous 
phallic rockets and boom them out into space, we’re 
conquering space. And all the symbols we use for our 
conquest of nature are hostile: rockets, bulldozers... this 
whole attitude of dominating it, and mastering it. 
Whereas a Chinese person might say, when you 
climb a high mountain, ‘'You conquer it? Why this 
unfriendly feeling? Aren’t you glad the mountain could 
lift you up so high in the air, so as to enjoy the view?’”’ So 
this technology that we have developed, in the hands of 
people who feel hostile to nature is very dangerous. But 
the same technology in the hands of people who felt that 
they belong in this universe could be enormously 
creative. I’m not talking some kind of primitivism, as if 
we should really get rid of all technology, and go back to 
being a kind of primitive people, but rather that, in the 
hands of people who really know that they belong in this 
world, and are not strangers in it, technology could be a 
wonderful thing. For one sees, in the art forms that have 
been developed through this philosophy, that we have a 


4 


a7 


MAN’S PLACE IN NATURE 


combination. My friend Sabro Hasegawa, a great 
Japanese artist of modern times, used to call it the 
“controlled accident.’’ That there is on one hand, the 
unexpected thing that happens of itself that nobody 
could predict—that’s the accident. And there is, on the 
other hand, prediction, control, the possibility of 
directing something along certain lines, just as when the 
sailor moves against the wind, with the power of the 
wind, he is using skill to control the wind. So, in the same 
way our controlling things has a place, but it is with the 
accidental world of nature, rather than against it. 

So then, this is why the philosophy of nature, and 
the civilization of the Far East is immensely important to 
us to understand, with our vast technical powers. And 
again in turn we, understanding that point of view, are 
immensely important to the people of the Far East, so as 
to help them not to be too intoxicated by our way of 
doing things. There’s a long, long story about why 
technology developed in the West first, rather than in the 
Far East, and I’m not going to go into that for the 
moment. But the important thing about this whole 
philosophy of nature, and of man’s place in nature is that 
this Taoist, and later Zen Buddhist, and Shinto feeling 
about man’s place in the world is today corroborated by 
the most advanced thinking in the biological and physical 
sciences. Now, I can’t stress that too much. 

Science is primarily description, accurate 
description of what’s happening, with the idea that if you 
describe what is happening accurately, you’re way of 


= R= 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


describing things will become a way of measuring things. 
And that this in turn will enable you to predict what is 
going to happen. And this will build you some measure 
of control over the world. The people who are most 
expert in describing, and who are most expert in 
predicting are the first people to recognize the limitations 
of what they’re doing. 

First of all, consider what one has to do in science, in 
a very simple experiment, in which you want to study a 
fluid in a test tube, and describe what is in that fluid so 
accurately, that you must isolate that fluid from what are 
called ‘tunmeasurable variables’’. I have a fluid in a test 
tube, and I want to describe it accurately, but every time 
the temperature changes, my fluid changes, so I want to 
keep it free from changes of temperature. This already 
implies an air conditioning system. Also, I don’t want my 
fluid to be jiggled, because that may alter it. So I’ve got to 
protect it from trucks that go by the lab. And sol have to 
build a special bump-proof room, where trucks won’t 
jiggle it. Also, I have to be very careful that when I look at 
this fluid I won’t breathe on it, and affect it in that way. 
And that the temperature of my body, as I approach it 
won’t alter it. And I suddenly discover that this fluid ina 
test tube is the most difficult thing to isolate in all the 
world. Because everything! do about it affects it. | cannot 
take that fluid in a test tube and take it out of the rest of 
the universe, and make it separate and all by itself. 


4 Ox- 


ne 


MAN’S PLACE IN NATURE 


A scientist is the first to notice this. Furthermore, he 
knows not only that it’s his bodily approach that alters 
things, he finally discovers, in studying quantum theory, 
that looking at things changes them. So when we study 
the behavior of electrons, and all those sub-atomic 
particles, we find out that the means we use to observe 
them changes them. What we really want to know is, 
what are they doing when we’re not looking at them? 
Does the light in the refrigerator really go out when you 
close the door? So what will it do when it’s not being 
watched? Because we found out that watching them 
affects them. Why, because of course, in order to 
observe the behavior of sub-nuclear particles, we have to 
shine lights on them, as it were. We have to bombard 
them with other nuclear particles, and this changes them. 
And so we get to the point where we can know the 
velocity of the particle, without knowing its position, or 
know its position without knowing its velocity. You 
can’t know both at the same time. What all that is telling 
us is—we cannot stand aside as an independent observer 
of this world, because you the observer are what you’re 
observing. You’re inseparable from it. 

Let me put it in another way. Science, I said, was 
accurate description. We want to describe the behavior 
of any given organism, whether it’s human, or whether 
it’s an ant, or whatever it is. Now how will you tell, how 
will you say what an ant is doing without describing at the 
same time, the field or the environment in which the ant 
is doing it. You can’t say that an ant is walking, if all you 


OG: 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


can describe is that this ant is just wiggling its legs. You 
have to describe the ground over which the ant is 
walking, to describe walking. You have to set up 
directions, points of the compass, etc. And so, soon you 
have to describe all the ant’s friends and relations. You 
have to describe its food sources. And so you soon 
discover that although you thought you were talking 
about an ant, what you are actually talking about is anant 
environment... a total situation from which the ant is 
inseparable. You’re describing the behavior of the 
environment in which ants are found, and that includes 
the behavior of ants. 

So too, human behavior involves first of all, the 
description of the social context in which human beings 
do things. You can’t describe the behavior of an 
individual, except in the context of a society. You'll have 
to describe his language. Indeed, in making a description 
I have to use language which I didn’t invent. But language 
is a social product. Then beyond human society there is 
the whole environment of the birds, the bees and the 
flowers, the oceans, the air and the stars. And our 
behavior is always in relationship to that enormous 
environment—just like our walking is in relation to the 
ground, and in relation to the form of space, object 
outlines and the shape of a room. 

So then, the result that comes out of it, is that the 
more and more the scientist looks at an organism, he 
knows that he is not looking at an organism in an 
environment, he’s looking at a total process, which is 


ys 


a 


MAN’S PLACE IN NATURE 


called ‘“‘organism’’ out of its environment. But he 
suddenly wakes up and sees that he has a new empathy 
with that which he is studying. He started out to say what 
the organism is doing. He found that he had topasteupa 
few steps, and to realize that his description of the 
behavior of the organism involved, at the same time, a 
description of the behavior of the environment. So that 
although, unlike trees and plants, we are not rooted to 
the ground, but walk about fairly freely inside our bags of 
skins, we are nonetheless as much rooted in the natural 
environment as any flower or tree. 

This gives us at first, as Westerners, a sense of 
frustration, because we say, ‘It sounds fatalistic.’’ It 
sounds as if we were saying, ‘‘You thought you were an 
independent organism—you’re nothing of the kind. 
Your environment pushes you around. But that idea 
simply, if we would express that idea as a result of hearing 
what I’ve just said, it would mean that we didn’t 
understand it. You see, what was high knowledge a 
hundred years ago, is today common sense. And most 
people’s common sense today is based on Newtonian 
mechanics. The universe is a system billiard ball of 
atomic events, and everybody regards his ego as an 
atomic event—a fundamental part, component of the 
universe. All right? So all these billiard balls start going 
clackety-clackety-clack, and knocking each other about. 
And so, you feel yourself to be, perhaps, one billiard ball 
pushed around by the world, or sometimes if you can get 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


enough up inside that billiard ball, you can do some 
pushing of the world around. But mostly it pushes you. 

You read B.F. Skinner, the supreme behaviorist 
psychologist, and he describes all phenomena of nature 
in terms of man being pushed around. But let’s suppose 
that we live in a world where things don’t get pushed 
around, and can’t be pushed around. Supposing there’s 
no puppet. Supposing there is no cause and no effect. 
That instead of things being pushed around, they are just 
happening, the way they do happen. Then you get an 
utterly different view, and this is the view with which we 
are dealing, lying behind this culture. 

As I said this morning, there is no boss. You as a 
human being are not going to push this world around, 
but equally, you are not going to be pushed around by it. 
It goes with you. The external world goes with you, in 
just the same way as a back goes with a front. How would 
you know what you meant by ‘‘yourself,’’ unless you 
knew what you meant by other. How would the sun be 
lignt, if you didn’t have eyes. How would vibrations in 
the air be noisy, if you didn’t have ears? How would rocks 
be hard, if you didn’t have soft skin? How would they be 
heavy, if you didn’t have muscles? It’s only in relation to 
eyes that the sun is light. It’s only in relation to a certain 
kind of nervous system that fire is hot. And it’s only in 
relation to a certain musculature that rocks are heavy. So 
that the way you are constituted, the way your organism 
is formed calls into being the phenomenon of light, and 
sound, and weight, and color, and smell. 


a 


a 


MAN’S PLACE IN NATURE 


There is a koan in Zen Buddhism, ‘‘What is the 
sound of one hand?”’ There is a Chinese proverb that 
says, “One hand does not make a clap. So if two hands 
clap, make the clap. What is the sound of one hand?”’ 
You see, what a silly question. And yet everybody is 
trying to play agame in which one side will win, and there 
can be one hand clapping—to get rid of the opposite. 
Light get rid of darkness. I conquer the universe. In other 
words, I play the game that I am going to get one up on 
them, and hold my position. I am going to dominate the 
other. And as soon as we get into that particular kind of 
contest we become insane. Because what we’re doing is 
pretending that there can be an in-group without an out- 
group. 

Let me just give a few illustrations of this from 
contemporary social situations. You, or most of you 
here, on the whole identify yourself with the nice people. 
In other words, you live fairly respectable lives, and you 
look down upon various other people who are not nice. 
And there are various kinds of not-nice people. 

In Sausalito, where I live, they’re called ‘‘Beatniks’’. 
They are people who wear beards, and who live along the 
waterfront, and who don’t follow the ordinary marriage 
customs, and who probably smoke marijuana instead of 
drinking alcohol, because alcohol is the drug for nice 
people. 

What the nice people don’t realize is, they need the 
nasty people. Think of all the conversation at dinner 
tables that you would miss, if you didn’t have the nasty 


a ee 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


people to talk about. How would you know who you 
were, unless you could compare yourselves with those 
who are on the out? How do those in the church, who are 
saved, know who they are unless they have the damned. 
Why St. Thomas Aquinas let it out of the bag and said 
that in Heaven, the saints would look over the 
battlements of Heaven, and enjoy the just sufferings of 
the souls in Hell. Jolly won’t it be, to watch your sister 
squirming down there, while you’re in bliss. But, that was 
letting the cat out of the bag, because the in-group can’t 
exist without the out-group. 

Now in my community in Sausalito, where the out- 
group is sort of Beatniks, they in their turn know that 
they are the real in-group, and that up on the hill, those 
squares who are so dumb that they waste all their days 
earning money by dull work to buy pseudo-riches, such 
as Cadillacs and houses with mowed lawns, and wall-to- 
wall carpeting, which they despise, they feel very, very 
much collective ego strength by being able to talk against 
the squares. Because the out-group makes itself the in- 
group by putting the in-group in the position of an out- 
group. But both need the other one. This is the meaning 
of saying, ‘‘Love your enemies,” and pray for them that 
despitefully use you, because you need them. You don’t 
know who you are without the contrast. So, love your 
competitors, and pray for them that undercut your 
prices. You go together, you have a_ symbiotic 
relationship, even though it be formally described as a 
conflict of interest. 


meee 


ne nn 


MAN’S PLACE IN NATURE 


Now to see that kind of thing is the essence of this 
philosophy of nature. It goes together with the idea of the 
Yang and the Yin, that we don’t know what the Yang is, 
the positive, the bright side, unless we at the same time, 
know what the Yin is, which is the dark side. These things 
define each other mutually. And to see that, you might 
think at first, was to settle for a view of the world that was 
completely static. Because after all, if white and black, 
good and evil, are equally pitted against one another, 
then so what? It all boils down to nothing. 

But the universe is not arranged that way, because it 
has in it the principle of relativity. Now you would think, 
in a Newtonian and respectable Platonic universe the 
earth would revolve around the sun in terms of the 
perfect circle, but it doesn’t, it’s an ellipse. And if it werea 
perfect circle, the earth wouldn’t revolve, because there 
would be no go to it. See, when you take a string with a 
ball on the end, and you swing it ’round your head, you 
don’t describe a perfect circle. You know what happens? 
There’s one moment in that swing when you have to give 
the thing a little charge of strength, you go whoop, 
whoop, whoomm, whoomm, whoomm,  brrumm, 
brrumm,—and that little pulse sets the thing going. 
Listen to your heart. How does it go? It doesn’t go ‘‘pum, 
pum, pum, pum, pum, pum, pum,”’ but ‘“pum-pum, 
pum-pum, pum-pum.”’ It’s got swing—it’s got jazz! See? 

So it seems a little off. That’s why in all Chinese art, 
there’s not symmetry. There’s not complete balance 
between two sides of the painting, because the moment 


= 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


you have symmetry you have something static. But when 
you’re a little off, then it moves. So in that way, when vou 
study this architecture, you will see that it’s always a little 
off. It would be dead if two sides of a room were just the 
same. They’re always exploiting this!) —Whoo, whoo, 
whoo, whoo, whoo. 

Well now, you and they can understand this 
theoretically. If I say it in words, you can probably follow 
my meaning, and realize that all this is very true from a 
theoretical point of view. But what is much more 
important is, do we feel it to be so? Do we experience this 
relationship of man and nature to be as reliable and as 
true as we experience the ground under our feet, or the 
air coming into our lungs, or the light before our eyes? 
Because if we don’t experience it with that clarity, it’s not 
going to have any effective influence on our conduct. 
We’ll know theoretically that we are one body with the 
world. The world, you might say, is your extended body. 
But this won’t make any real difference to what you do, 
until you know itas surely, indeed more surely, than you 
know anything else. This amounts to a fundamental 
trans-formation of one’s own sensation of existence - of 
coming to be vividly aware, if I may say so: that you’re it! 

As the Hindus say, Tat twam asi. You, or Thou art 
that. Only we feel much too guilty to agree with that. We 
feel that, uh, oh! that’s close to madness. There are 
people in lunatic asylums who say that they’re Jesus 
Christ, or that they’re God. But the trouble with them is, 


77 


MAN’S PLACE IN NATURE 


you see, they claim this for themselves alone. They don’t 
see that this claim goes also for anybody else. And the 
moment they stop making special claims, they feel lost, 
something crazy. But you see, if a Hindu or a Chinese 
person were to say, ‘Well, I’ve discovered that I’m 
God,’’ this wouldn’t have the same implications. People 
say to him rather, “Congratulations, at last you found 
out.’ Because he has an idea of God, or of ultimate reality 
which is not exclusive, which is not something that sets 
itself up as a master technician that knows all the 
answers. 
Well, let’s have a brief intermission. 


_28— 


a) 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


ast night we were gettinginto akind of sticky mess, 

as if one had put molasses in one hand and 
feathers in the other, put the two together, and then 
started to pull off the feathers. I was pointing out that 
relativity is not only the human situation, but the very 
nature of life. It is a sort of balancing act, and rather 
different from the ordinary balancing act, in that the 
system always balances. However far out you may get to 
one side, life eventually comes up with the other. 

But we don’t perceive this for exactly the same 
reason that we ordinarily don’t think that space is real. 
Most people feel that space is nothing. But when you 
begin to consider it carefully, yousee that space and solid 
are relative to each other—that you cannot possibly 
conceive any solid body except in space. And, 
contrariwise, you can’t conceive space except as 


— 3] 


ee 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


occupied by solids. And when physicists begin to talk 
about properties of space—curved space, expanding 
space, and all that kind of thing—it at first strikes the 
layman as nonsensical. Thus he simply cannot conceive 
how nothing can have any properties. 

As Einstein once said, the fish would not, of course, 
be aware of the water. And, in the same way, we are not 
aware of space as being an effective agent of some kind, as 
being really there. 

So then, just as we think solids more real than space, 
so, in the same way, we give weight to positive—the Yang 
aspect of things, rather than Yin—the negative. And we 
are therefore hung up on the quest for those positive 
things in life: the good, the pleasurable, and so on, and 
think that somehow we can possess them away from, and 
apart from, their polar opposites. Never forget that this is 
not simply a case of opposition. Polarity and mere 
opposition are a little different in concept, because when 
we Say that these opposites are polar, we mean that they 
are in fact, the abstract terms, or ends, of a sort of 
continuum that joins them. In the same way, the two 
sides of a coin are Euclidian surfaces of a solid: the coin is 
one; the magnet is one. But the heads and tails are 
different, andthe north and south poles of the magnet are 
different. So, what you have here is the paradoxical 
situation of identical differences—explicitly different, 
but implicitly one. 


= 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


We get into this situation of realizing that there isn’t 
anything I can do to make everything always better. And, 
in fact, the more I try to do so, the more 1am becoming 
blind to the relative situation, to the nature of reality. 
And, because I am trying to do something which, in the 
nature of things, is impossible, I slowly develop a feeling 
of chronic frustration, which is called in Buddhism, 
dukkha, usually translated as suffering, which is too 
imprecise. Dukkha is the chronic frustration of living ina 
squirrel cage where, run as you may to get out, you stay in 
the same place. And this is what is called, in Buddhist 
philosophy, samsara, or the Bhavachakra: bhava means 
becoming, chakra means wheel. And the problem that 
Buddhism sets is: how do we get out of the rat race? The 
Eternal Cycle, or to be more exact, the Everlasting Cycle, 
of the pursuit of one end. Pursuit of one’s own end, as a 
matter of fact. Naturally, if you pursue your own end, 
you'll go round in’ circles. 

This poses a real Gordian Knot question, because 
we find that we are in a circular trap. When you buy a 
little terrapin, and you put it on the lawn, surrounded by 
a ring of chicken wire, it goes around and puts it head 
through every hole. It goes and goes and goes, but there’s 
no way out. So, in this fantastically difficult situation, 
how do we get out? Well, what of course has to be 
understood is that this is the wrong question. What has 
to be understood is that there is a trap only if someone or 
something is trapped. If there isn’t any difference 
between yourself and the trap, then you are not trapped. 


—o 


ne 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


a 


When we regard our experience, we always look 
upon it as a changing panorama of events passing before 
us. And we conceive that there is some constant witness, 
observer, ego, to whom all this happens. And this, of 
course, is a hallucination of the same type as the circle of 
fire created in the darkness by whirling a cigarette 
around. And, as you know, the cause of that illusion is 
very simply that the retinal nerve ends do not become de- 
activated immediately as the point of light moves. They 
retain, jut as a radar screen retains the image of what the 
rotating beam has shown. For the retina is a process that 
is slower than the process of the circling point of flame. 
Because of the relative speeds of various forms of change, 
the slower ones get the impression of a certain 
permanence. 

Or, put it in another way: let’s consider our 
experience as a route, and this includes our sensations, 
our feelings, our thoughts, our constant rhythm of 
vibrations. But in the tremendous variety and 
randomness of these things, there are certain constants. 
As, when we compose music, we will play at the basis of 
something a constant rhythm, as the tamboura makes a 
drone in Indian music, which goes on and on and on all 
the time. Now, in rather the same way, when we examine 
ribonucleic acid, we find a chain of molecular particles in 
a certain order, and that order repeats, so that you havea 
chain of a certain kind. So, in the same way, the total 
order of experience repeats certain things, and this 
repetition gives us memory, and gives us the clue that this 


3A: 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


particular stream has a signature. As in music, there may 
be certain phrases that are constantly repeated, however 
elaborated, for there may be variations on the theme, but 
always at the basis of it there is this repetitious regularity. 

Because of that, we get the sensation that there is a 
constant observer of the panorama. And then, as that 
becomes more and more a fixed impression, we attempt 
to use this observer, or by being this observer, to exercise 
an influence on the stream from a point, as it were, 
virtually outside the stream. And it’s this that sets up 
frustration. 

We get this when we try, under the influence of 
schooling and parents, to alter our feelings. When we feel 
guilty for hating our mothers, or something of that kind, 
or hating someone at all, we say to ourselves: ‘'You 
shouldn’t hate.’? But you do. You say: ‘You should 
love.’’ But you don’t. And, obviously, if you make a great 
effort to love somebody whom you don’t love, then there 
is always detectable a kind of phoniness in your attitude. 
And loving people by force creates resentment and 
hostility in both parties. 

If you love someone, or rather you manifest what 
would be called loving actions out of nothing but a sense 
of duty, the person whom you love in that way feels 
deprived. He feels that your heart isn’t really in it, 
because you are being dishonest with your own feelings. 
But this is the kind of mockery that comes up when we 


=35— 


ne ne 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


are inwardly split into the thinker on one side—the 
thoughts on the other; the feeler on one side—and the 
feelings on the other. 

There are various ways in which this split can be 
described and there are ways in which we can discuss how 
it arises. I gave you one: the regular rhythm pattern. 
Being, as it were, abstracted from the main stream, and 
made a separate constant. Another is perhaps simpler to 
understand, which is that, as we think, thinking is a 
process of symbolization. Among all the things for which 
we have symbols, we have one for I, one for ourselves, 
one for this organism, this center of awareness. And this 
symbol becomes, like so many symbols, confused with 
what it represents, as we confuse money with wealth. 
And, because of that, we try to perform operations with 
the symbol, which would be like trying to do something 
with an hour. You know, we say: ‘'Whatare you going to 
do with your time?”’ As if you could do something with 
time! The time is simply a form of measurement, and 
trying to do something with time is like eating inches. 
Very frustrating, indeed! 

So, as a result of this confusion, we again get the 
sensation of there being an observer. But the funny thing 
is: we can never find it. Do what you will to track down 
this observer—it’s never there. The tail retreats as fast as 
you follow it. 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


Now, on the other hand, if we think in gestalt terms, 
if we think in terms of figure and ground, you would be 
inclined to feel that there is some continuum or medium 
in which experience occurs. Just, in the same way, that 
when you listen to the radio, you’re hearing sounds, but 
all those sounds are on the diaphragm in the speaker: the 
sounds do not proclaim the diaphragrn—they don’t say 
anything about it. That’s taken for granted. The 
announcer does not announce at the beginning of the 
day: “Ladies and gentlemen, from now on all the sounds 
that you hear out of this instrument are in fact vibrations 
of the diaphragm in the speaker.”’ And therefore, just as 
we ignore space and think of it as nothing, we could 
perfectly well ignore the continuum in which experience 
is occurring. But, if so, that continuum does not have the 
same sort of relationship to what is going on in it as does 
the observer to the observed. Because the observer to the 
observed is a function of memory—the repetition. And 
the memory is not the continuum. It’s still vibrations in 
it. So if there is something underlying the changing 
panorama of experience, it is of course completely 
unthinkable, undefinable. We cannot state anything 
about it at all. But that does not however mean that it’s 
impossible to realize its presence, in some other form 
than what we would call ordinary experience, and yet, at 
the same time, not really separate from ordinary 
experience. This would add, therefore, to our awareness 
of everything a kind of new dimension, and we’d have 
great difficulty in pointing it out, because it isn’t hidden. 


a) 


nn 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


You can always point out things that are hidden, but it’s 
very difficult to point out something that everybody’s 
looking at and doesn’t see. 

Take a very simple illustration. Let us suppose that 
you have been brought up to think of the moon as simply 
a plate, a flat disk in the sky. Then one day somebody 
woke up and realized it was a ball. He would have great 
difficulty pointing this out to other people, just as we had 
great difficulty in convincing people that the world was 
round, or that the stars were not supported above us in 
crystal spheres. 

In this sense then, the dimension of the moon, once 
you see it, is perfectly clear. But if you don’t see it, you 
can’t be talked into it. So, in exactly the same way, there 
is this dimension of everyday life which isn’t different 
from everyday life, from everyday consciousness, but we 
just haven’t caught onto it. 

Now, let’s experiment a bit with this. Let’s go back 
to the fundamental point: that there isn’t anything you 
can do to “up” yourself. And if you consider that, you 
feel sort of stuck. So I would say at this point: Never 
mind. So you’re stuck. Therefore, you might say that you 
just have to accept the way it is right now. 

But that isn’t saying enough. Or maybe it’s saying 
too much. Supposing you don’t accept the way things are 
right now? Well, that’s the same thing going along too. 
So, therefore, watch what you’re doing very carefully. 
You can get down to the sensation of what I would call 
the flow of experience. It’s going along... it’s in the sound 


aa ae 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


of my voice... it’s in the sound of the wind... it’s in 
everything your eyes see as you look around. And here it 
is, flowing along. 

Now, what I’m saying is: That’s it. I really don’t 
know what I mean by that, except: Watch it. That’s it. 
And if you find yourself not watching it, or, for example, 
resisting it, that’s it too. 

Just let happen what happens, even if that includes 
resistance to what is happening. Now watch yourself 
carefully as you do that. You see, we are not looking for 
any result; We are here and now. But, if you are looking 
for aresult; if you are ina state of expectation: watch that. 
And follow it. You can’t make a mistake, whatever you 
do. 

This is the same process as learning toridea bicycle. 
Because whichever way you fall, to the left or to the right, 
you turn the wheel into the way you’re falling. It’s the 
same thing that pilots learn in flying planes. And they get 
to a point where they say, well, the plane flies itself, and it 
really does, if you get your hands on the wheel of a good 
plane, it flies itself. So, in the same way, as you follow like 
this the flow of existence, you find that it functions by 
itself. It does. 

At first, then, you may get this rather strange, 
passive feeling that this is happening to me. “It is 
happening to me.’’ As you watch what goes on, you 
won’t discover any ‘‘me’”’ separate from the flow that 
you’re watching. You'll realize if anything is ‘you’, it’s 


That. 


_39_ 


ne LE EEEREEEEEEEE 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


Now, I hope you can follow this. You could doitina 
certain way: by simply listening to all the sound that’s 
going on, only I would say ‘hearing’? rather than 
‘‘listening’’-as one can “‘see’’ distinct from ‘“‘looking”’’, as 
it were. Allow your ears to hear anything they want to 
hear. Simply let these eardrums vibrate to any available 
sound. And in exactly the same way as you do that, let 
your mind think whatever it wants to think. And go with 
it. Go with the flow of thought. You will see that after a 
while it is impossible not to go with it, because even your 
resistance to it is part of the thought stream, and that’s 
still going along with itself. When you discover that the 
resistance, too, is part of the stream—you will see that it 
was redundant to say ‘‘go with it’’—there’s no one 
separate from it to go with it. 

The same thing applies exactly in the consideration 
of the passage of time. What we are doing at the moment 
is that we’ve brought our attention to bear on the flow of 
experience as it is now. And in this sort of consideration, 
this sort of contemplation, you get the feeling of being in 
the present, watching what is going on. Only, 
momentarily, your thoughts may concern themselves 
with the past or the future. You may be concerned about 
something that’s going to happen, and instead of listening 
fully to the sound of my voice, you’re entering thoughts 
about tomorrow. Maybe you’ll check that, you see, and 
say: ‘No, I shouldn’t do that, I should come back to 
‘now’.”’ But the same principle applies exactly as turning 
the wheel of the bicycle: if you fall into the past—turn 


—_40— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


that way; if you fall into the future—turn that way. 
Because your consideration of the past is happening now, 
as is also your consideration of the future. So that just as 
you cannot not go with the stream, you cannot get out of 
the present. There is nowhere else to be. 

At first, the situation I am describing when I say 
‘you cannot”’ sounds like a limitation, a bondage. ‘I am 
trapped. I cannot get out of this.’’ But don’t you see that 
what you are first of all describing as the trap is precisely 
the condition of freedom? If you insist that you’re 
trapped by the present, by the existing flow of thought, 
the way it is, or the existing flow of experience, then of 
course you will resent it. When you discover that you are 
it, and the reason that you can’t get away from it is that it 
is you,—this is a very different state of affairs. There is no 
trap. You are the process. It’s not happening to you. 
You’re not its victim. It’s you. So then, instead of asking, 
“How shall I get out of it’, that question simply 
disappears. 

Let me go back and approach that point from 
another angle. If you say: ‘I want toget out of it’’-—when 
you want something, you pretty much know what you 
want, but people when they’re really challenged on what 
sort of domain they would like to get into other than this 
one, they can only talk a little way ahead. But if they 
follow through that wish to be in some different kind of 
existence, they find it difficult to picture it. Because they 
see it would always lead around to the same place that 
they are now, eventually. This is the truth underlying, 


.; 


nn 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


say, the idea that suicide is no escape, because however 
intolerable a situation may be, the only way out is into the 
center, not away. 

And so it is only by, as we must state it because of 
the limitations of language, at first “going with’’ whatever 
the experience is. Now, supposing the situation is 
horrible. I cannot accept it in the sense of ‘‘liking it’, 
because the situation includes a pain (maybe), and 
ageravating the pain by my extremely strong objections 
to it. Those objections are just as much a part of the 
whole scene as the pain. In fact, they’re really 
inseparable. The pain is not pain unless you object to it. 

So, if you say to yourself: ‘Something is going to 
happen which I dread very much, and, really, if I were a 
spiritually superior human being, I ought not to dread 
it’—that’s really creating fantasy. You must allow 
yourself to dread it. You must allow yourself quite freely 
to worry, because it’s okay. 

When I say, ‘it’s okay’’, it’s like saying, ‘Well, 
that’s it, too.’”’ And we don’t really know what we mean 
by this, except that when I say, ‘‘That’s it’’, that means: 
‘Keep watching.’’ Keep your mind on the mark - that’s 
real concentration. Not just staring at something. Real 
concentration is like following music, dancing to music, 
something like that. It isn’t being all tied up ina knot with 


your mind hypnotized like a chicken with its head toa 
chalk line. 


AD 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


It’s this constant ‘flowing with’’, only to discover 
that you are the stream. And therefore there is no 
problem about flowing with it. You can’t do anything 
else. But that is a statement of freedom, as distinct from a 
statement of bondage. 

So you’re your own trap. And if you want to bite 
yourself with its teeth, it’s a free country. You can do 
that. That’s the game of hide-and-seek, pretending that 
the trap is different from you. ‘Being trapped’’—see if 
you can get out! Because, you see, that’s what people do 
interminably. What do people spend their time with— 
why, with puzzles. You say, ‘‘We’ve got to kill time for 
awhile”’,... what do you do?—you read a mystery story. 
That’s a puzzle, a ‘‘whodunit’’. Or you do a crossword 
puzzle. Or you play a game. You always set yourself a 
problem, and then work it out. Well, that’s what 
everyone is doing. They set themselves a problem, and 
then they work it out. Now we’ve set ourselves a 
whopper. 

Now, what happens? For a moment, you were 
watching this flow going along, this flow of experience. 
But then you find, a few minutes later, you’re off on 
something else. You’re sort of distracted, without 
realizing that this distraction is perfectly okay too. Why 
did you leave the point? Well, obviously because you 
wanted to. Because you get what you want. And I’m 
amazed that all of us rather like being restless. It’s very 
interesting working in a meditation session: you’ll often 
find that after a period of meditation, the director will 


= 


nL a 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


nnn ee 


say, ‘All right, now, everyone can rest.’’ I suddenly 
caught myself doing this one day, and I said instead, 
“Okay, everyone, return to your normal state of 
restlessness.” 

Yet, you see, that normal state of restlessness can’t 
be fought. If you put it down, all you’ll dois you’ll stir it 
up. And so you simply mustallow yourself to be restless. 
But you will see that as soon as you do that, that brings a 
dimension of consciousness into it that wasn’t there 
before. You’re aware of this constantly restless state and, 
being aware of it, you ask the question, “Is that really the 
way I want to be?”’ If you do, you do; if you don’t, then 
you don’t. 

But if you fight it, it'll back up, just like trying to go 
fast through the water ona ship witha blunt prow: You’ll 
back it all up against you. So there isa way of not fighting 
yourself. And even when you’re trying to fight 
yourself—don’t fight with that. 

Now, if we talk about this, we go on and on and on, 
like children playing “hand over hand’’. And we can say: 
Accept it the way it is; and if you don’t accept the way it 
is, accept that. And if you can’t do that - accept that. 
Whenever you get into this sort of infinite regression you 
are on a circular course. That ‘‘haven’t-we-been-here- 
before’’ feeling develops after awhile. It is exactly the 
circular course which indicates that what you are either 
trying to catch on the one hand, or what you’re trying to 
run away from on the other hand, is the fellow that’s 
doing the running. That’s what the circular course 


fey ee 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


means. And the moment you discover that, and you 
know that—the chase stops. Only the chase won’t stop 
while there’s the slightest thought that what you’re 
pursuing is not the pursuer. Or that what you’re fleeing is 
not the fleer. 

Well, you may want to bring the intellect to bear on 
that, for the simple reason that that seems a rather 
outrageous statement tosome people. They say, ‘‘Do you 
mean that everything that’s happening to me, including 
everything going on in the outside world, is myself?” 
Well, indeed it is. But of course not in the ordinary way 
in which we use the word ‘myself’’, meaning the ego. 
But, in a very real sense, which we can demonstrate in all 
kinds of ways, biologically...neurologically... physically, 
the separation (to talk about it in purely physical terms) 
of the body from the outside world isn’t a separation at 
all. It’s true: there is a boundary of human skin which we 
take to be the point of separation. But that is a 
hailucination because, to begin with, the organism and, 
as a matter of fact, anything whatsoever, has the same 
sort of properties as a flame. Now really, there is hardly 
such a thing as a flame. Consider a candle with a flame on 
it. We see that bright little leaf-shaped piece of light, the 
fire, and say, ‘‘a flame’’. It would be more correct to say, 
‘fa flaming’’, because that is a stream of hot gas, and no 
gas stays put in it. If it did, there wouldn’t be a flame. 

In just the same way, everything that exists is a 
stream. But we can see it as a wriggle or a whirlpool in the 


a2AG 


ce 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


stream. But, as everything is flowing through, there is 
certainly no fixed distinction between the outside and the 
inside. And, of course, biologically we know that the skin 
itself is an osmotic membrane: that is to say, a connector 
of the body with the environment, full of tubes and 
extraceptors, nerve-ends which are simply commu- 
nicating constantly the flow of vibration on the outside 
of the skin to the inside of the skin. Think about it a little 
more and you'll realize that you couldn’t have an inside 
without an outside. Here is the same reciprocity, the 
same thing that we get between all the opposites, between 
front and back and everything else. The self—the 
sensation of self—or, I would say, the sensation of here 
and now, goes with “‘other’’, that is to say, the sensation 
of ‘‘there’’ and “‘then’’. 

You cannot possibly conceive the meaning of now 
without the meaning of then... of here without there... or 
self without other. And this inseparability of concepts 
reveals the hidden conspiracy between now and then, of 
the eternity, shall we say, of which now and then are the 
polar aspects...the omnipresence of which here and there 
are polar aspects... the Brahman of which self and other 
are polar aspects. 

We cannot name or describe the unity between the 
poles, because all description is a matter of putting things 
in boxes; it’s classification - pigeon-holing. And when 
you pigeon-hole things, you ask, “Is you is or is you 
ain’t?’’... ‘Do you belong in this box or don’t you? Either 
you belong in it or you don’t. There’s no other place for 


AG. 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


you to go. Either you’re an elephant or you’re a non- 
elephant. And everything that’s not an elephant belongs 
in the box for non-elephants.’’ But what is it that is in 
common between elephants and non-elephants? What is 
in common between the box and the outside of the box? 
Why, obviously, the boundary of the box belongs both 
to the box and to what’s outside the box. It’s the outside 
of the box and the inside of the non-box. They share this 
wall—it belongs to both of them. It is held in common. 

In other words, the dividing line is held in common 
by what it divides. It belongs to both of them. It unites 
them. It makes them identical differences. So, in that 
sense then, what happens to you, is you. 

‘“But,’’ you say, ‘it’s not what I want. It’s not what1 
will. It makes no difference what I do in my head as to 
whether the wind blows now or not. It’s not in my 
control.’’ Well, noris your metabolism... and is that you, 
or isn’t it? That happens. What about your volition? I 
choose to talk or not to talk. It seems that way, but on the 
other hand, I am damned if I know how! do this thing 
called talking. When I really go into it, it happens. Only, 
I’ve got a sort of proprietary sense on it... I’ve labelled it 
‘'mine’’. | doseem to have control, choice, selection. But, 
if I think down into that, you see, I don’t see how it 
works. It’s fantastic that I can make a noise, or even raise 
a hand. I don’t know how it happens. How do you 
decide? How do you manage to be conscious? How do 
you manage to make an effort. Nobody knows—you just 
do it. which is another way of saying, ‘It just happens.’’ 


= yee 


a 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


Now, imagine then getting the sensation of 
something you’re not used to: that everything that goes 
on in the outside world, is also you. And it’s what you’re 
doing. That’s spooky. See, that’s the same feeling you get 
when you are learning to ride the bicycle—it ‘thappens’”’. 
And you feel as if you were suddenly in charge of an 
enormously powerful automobile, as if something’s 
running away with you. 

Somehow, I find that I’m in control of it by not being 
in control of it—like the plane flying itself. Now this is so 
strange that it sends some people crazy. And they get up 
and announce that they are God Almighty, which is what 
Jung calls inflation. And you must watch out for inflation 
if you’re in the habit of encouraging mystical expe- 
riences. Because, if you’re not experienced in what I call 
“spiritual know-how’’, and the only kind of religious 
background you have is Judaeo-Christian, you naturally 
will discover that you’re God. But in the Judaeo- 
Christian tradition, God means ‘‘the Boss of the 
Universe’, and is therefore worshipped under the 
symbol of kingship, the royal father of the world. And 
therefore, since kingship is exclusive, if you say, “I am 
God’’, and start letting it be known to your fellow men 
that you are the king, you’ll be playing ‘I’m the king of 
the castle’... “Get down, you dirty rascal.’’ 

But, you see, if you’re properly educated about 
mystical experience, you will realize that mystical 
experience isn’t really allowed in Christianity. There are 
Christian mystics, but they get by because they really 


—_ 48 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


watch their language. They walk a very, very risky 
tightrope. They’re always in grave danger of falling into 
hideous heresy, or pantheism. And Christians are afraid 
of pantheism because, as I have pointed out, it’s 
democracy in the kingdom of heaven. Everyone’s God. 
And this, to a tyrannical form of government, is an 
intolerable suggestion. 

If you think of all this in terms of quite a different 
mythology, say, Hindu mythology or Buddhist myth- 
ology, this problem then of inflation doesn’t arise, or at 
least not so easily. You can, of course, give yourself airs 
and graces of being a Buddha, being a great rishi, or 
something like that, but society doesn’t resent that so 
intensely as it resents the claim to be in personal charge of 
the whole universe. 

Lots of people in insane asylums get this sensation, 
and nobody knows what to do about them, because 
psychiatrists as a rule don’t know anything about the 
mystical experience. You may be sure, asa matter of fact, 
with certain exceptions, psychiatry, as we know it today, 
particularly the psychiatry of mental hospitals, the army, 
prisons, and many ordinary practitioners, will define any 
state of consciousness that is not quite usual as psychotic. 
It doesn’t matter much what it is. There is a research 
worker at Langley Porter, who has been making electro- 
encephalograms of people in a state of meditation, and 
they get a different kind of alpha rhythm from other 
people. They find that they can control their alpha 
rhythm. When these electroencephalograms are shown 


_49__ 


ne 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


to most psychiatrists, and they are not told under what 
circumstances they were made, they will look at this and 
say, ‘‘Hmm...there’s pathology there.’’ Because you will 
find similar alpha rhythms in some pathological cases, as 
in catatonics: you see, they’re very withdrawn and quiet. 

So, official psychiatry is a frantic paranoia, a frantic 
concern with preserving the consensus of what reality is. 
Reality is what you read in the newspaper... reality is, you 
know, “facing facts.’’ Any experience different from 
that, particularly when any kind of religious significance 
is attached to it, will automatically be called psychotic. If 
you ever get mixed up with a mental hospital, never, 
never say a word about religion. Because according to 
most psychoanalysts, to official psychoanalysis, religion 
is a delusional system anyway, and this feeling is widely 
prevalent in that particular profession, although I must 
acknowledge the exceptions. You see, that’s always what 
lies behind the fear of what we used to call as children, 
‘religious mania.’’ You know, the little old ladies who 
cluster around the church, and arealways in and out—we 
call them religious maniacs. And the ultimate extreme of 
religious mania is to proclaim oneself to be Jesus Christ. 
And so this is something to watch out for, this sort of 
inflationary situation that comes as soon as you see that 
the inside world and the outside world go together—are a 
single field, or process, or whatever you want to call It. 


ae (5 er 


a. 


YOGA CARA 


o then, we’re continuing with the subject of 

Mahayana Buddhism. And, in the last seminar | 
discussed almost entirely, the school of Mahayana, 
which is known as Madyamica in Sanskrit—this word 
meaning, approximately, ‘the middle way.”’ 

Madyamica has been called, in the best books on the 
subject, the central philosophy of Buddhism, and is not, 
what we call in the West, a philosophy at all. It’s a 
method for changing your state of consciousness. In 
other words, it’s not a system of ideas such as 
propounded by Plato, or Kant, or Hegel. It’s a dialectical 
method. That is to say, dialectic being in the sense of a 
discourse between a teacher anda student, the purpose of 
which is not to explain or inculcate a certain set of ideas, 
but to change one’s basic state of feeling, that is to say, to 
change the sensation that you have of your own 
existence. 


YOGA CARA 


All Buddhism is concerned with this. The very crux 
of Buddhism, the thing which is called Bodhi, b-o-d-h-i, 
which means, ‘‘awakening’’. It comes from the same root 
as the word Buddha: B-o-d-h, Bodh, or B-u-d-h, Budh, is 
“to know,” but better, it is ‘to be awake.” 

Some of you have probably exposed yourself to the 
teachings of Giurdjieff, a wonderful old rascal, who used 
to give lectures in which he would keep completely silent 
for a while, and get everybody embarassed, and you 
know, they were all expecting something to happen, and 
he would look individually at everybody in the group, 
and when everybody was feeling awkward, he would say, 
“Wake Up!” “You're all asleep, and if you don’t wake 
up, I won’t give any lecture.’’ And this is a very good 
attitude, actually. 

Zen, aS you know, uses sharp tactics of various 
kinds, and the whole idea then, is that a person who is 
under illusion (Maya), thinks of himself basically as a 
victim, someone caught in a trap, someone subject to 
fate, the will of God, or whatever you want to callit, who 
got involved in life passively. That’s why I use the word, 
‘victim’’, and he has, therefore, the sensation of his 
consciousness as beinga kind of passive, but nevertheless 
very delicate and tender receptor, or participant of 
everything that goes on, so that life in general occurs to 
you—it happens to you, and there’s nothing you can do 
about it. 

And you say, ‘Well, it’s awful. I can’t get myself out 
of this trap.’”’ So, the technique of the philosophical 


G4 =. 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


dialogue that I was describing as Madyamica is to get you 
to drop your defenses. In other words, you can discover 
as practically a physical sensation, that you tend to be on 
the defensive all the time. You are exerting, through 
every muscle practically, a resistance against the world, 
all of which is excessive. You do need a certain resis- 
tance, you need a certain muscular tonus, but your body 
does that for you. You don’t need to will it. 

It’s like if you lie on the floor and relax, you don’t 
need to do anything to hold yourself together, the floor 
will hold you up, and your skin will keep you inside. But 
most people are actually doing things to hold themselves 
together, even in this situation of complete relaxation, 
because they don’t really trust their own life. And that is 
the lack of trust in one’s own life, the perpetual attitude 
of defensiveness, it is a result of a kind of mis-feeling of 
one’s Own existence, as being something alien to the 
universe that endures, as | said, and is simply a passive 
recipient of experience. 

So then, the whole process of a therapeutic dialogue 
which was invented by this marvelous man, Nagaj una— 
in the following of the Buddha—(It’s a strange thing that 
the Buddha was very, very creative towards other people. 
That is to say, the basic idea of Buddhism does not 
preclude other people being just as much Buddha as 
Buddha was.) 

There’s a little difficulty in Christianity about this, 
you see. Everybody harps back to the Christ as the 
unique and only incarnation of God, and so He’s on a 


YOGA CARA 


very special pedestal which nobody else is ever allowed to 
climb up on, and this, of course, makes the teaching and 
work of Jesus completely ineffective. But Buddhism has 
the advantage, they never did that: so that Nagajuna, who 
could come later than Buddha was in a way a wiser man 
than the Buddha himself. But only because he stood on 
the shoulders of Buddha and carried the Buddha’s 
dialogue to, not it’s full conclusion, but to a full 
conclusion. 

We can go further today, you see, this thing hasn’t 
stopped at all. It isn’t something that we go back to as a 
past and say, ‘‘Well, we’re going to tell you all about a 
thing called Buddhism, which is a fixed body of practices 
and beliefs, in which certain people in Asia believe, and if 
you're interested, you can believe in it, too.”’ It’s not like 
that at all! It’s an activity that is going on, and when it gets 
mixed up in the context of Western Civilization, western 
science, western technology—it will do things that the 
Asian people never dreamed of, and might not approve 
of. 

So, it’s very important in approaching this—this is 
one of our difficulties you see. If I were a lecturer on 
Buddhism in the context of the academic world, I would 
have to observe certain game rules. That is to say, | would 
have to discuss the subject as entirely historical—as 
something of the past. And I would be expected to give 
you extremely accurate information about what it was, 
what other people thought, and what they did. 


ae ae 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


The moment that I began to suggest that this thing 
had any vitality to it, and might have some effect on you, | 
would be ruled out as academically unrespectable. They 
would say, “This man is no longer qualified to be a 
professor, because he is advocating these things, and not 
taking an objective point of view to it.’’ You see, it’s very 
funny—all obsolete subjects are studied by the historical 
method. So, if you study in the university religion, it 
comes under the heading of the history of religions. For 
the same reason, the introductory course in philosophy 
is usually the History of Philosophy. Just imagine, 
teaching children mathematics with the introductory 
course being the History of Mathematics, so that they 
would start doing sums in Egyptian and Roman 
numerals, and going through all the procedures that 
ancient man went through to arrive at modern 
mathematics. In the first course of medicine, they 
proceed immediately to practical matters, the most up- 
to-date knowledge of human physiology, and they teach 
that—only when you become a graduate school student 
in the history of medicine, do you run across an elective 
course in the history of medical science? So, this way of 
putting everything at a distance of history is a way of 
castrating it, making it completely ineffective, so that it 
won’t do anything anymore. 

So that’s why I cannot work in the academic world, 
because, although I know their game rules, and how to 
study Buddhism from the historical method—when you 


7 


a 


YOGA CARA 


get involved in that, after a while nobody’s interested and 
it becomes completely boring. You can acquire a huge 
library, and you can go into the facts endlessly, and then 
what? But the one thing that the academicians can 
console themselves with, is the one thing they’re very 
much afraid of—a teacher of religion who’s out to 
convert people. Because that, you see, is imposing upon 
you a particular, individual, and subjective point of view. 
So if, in other words, a person who is teaching 
Christianity should start preaching from his academic 
chair, instead of just saying what Christians did and so 
on, in such and such a period—they would be very 
frightened of that. 

The advantage a Buddhist has, is that he has no 
opinions that he is trying to put over on you. He’s only 
trying to help you get rid of your opinions. That is to say, 
to get rid of any fixed view of the world, and of 
yourself—because we use what are called views, in 
Sanskrit: drish-ti, as methods of clinging to existence. So, 
there is something that is called in Sanskrit, sa-kaya-dris- 
ti, which means “‘the view of separateness.’’ The view of 
your being, this thing that I was talking about—the 
separate, the insular recipient of experience. 

Say, you have feelings. But, the language we speak 
compels you to say you have feelings, as if you were 
something on the one hand, and your feelings were 
something else on the other. You have thoughts, as if the 
thinker stands on the one hand and inspects thoughts on 
the other. So, that one hasa view of life in which there is a 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


panorama of thoughts, of feelings, of sensations going 
along constantly, but one can say constantly because of 
the impression that you are distinct from them, standing 
aside from them as the constant inspector of the 
procession. You get the feeling that you endure, but 
precariously, threatenedly, while the procession of 
thoughts and feelings goes on by you. 

Now you can very easily see that this is the result of 
the memory process, which gives the illusion of 
constancy in the flow, and, therefore, in the same way as 
the famous old Buddhist analogy, that when you rotate a 
burning brand in the darkness, you give the illusion of a 
continuous circle of fire because of the memory of the 
retina, where the impression of the spark doesn’t fade 
out immediately, but lingers. And so, as you see this 
thing in front of your eyes, it seems to form a circle, 
whereas there is no circle. There is only a moment, an 
instant of flame. So Buddhists argue, there is only this 
moment. And actually, you, who come in at the door are 
not the same people who are sitting here. Just as in the 
whirlpool of water, there is no constant water, there is 
only going on a continuous behavior, whirling in the 
water—but no water stays in it. So, in exactly the same 
way, you who came into the door a few minutes ago, and 
are now sitting here, are entirely different, only you are 
clinging to the idea of your continuity. 

Actually, there is only the moment, the instant, 
what is called in Sanskrit, the ksana, life is instantaneous. 
And if you see that, you get a kind of a new angle on St. 


50 = 


YOGA CARA 


Paul’s famous pronouncement that we shall all be 
changed in a moment, in a twinkling of an eye, on the 
morning when the last trumpet sounds. You see, the 
Christian has put everything into chronology—that there 
is going to bea thing called the Last Day, anda trumpet of 
the angels is going to awaken the dead. 

The trumpet’s sounding now, you see, for the 
Buddhists. Wake up! There is this moment! And this is 
eternity. Only you are stringing the moments together, 
and you are creating time out of eternity. You are 
wondering, you are identifying yourself, in other words, 
with all the things that have happened to me. And you’re 
worrying about all the things that will. But actually, you 
are never anywhere but now. This is a very interesting 
discipline, that is given in all systems of Yoga and 
Buddhist meditation. The student is told to live in the 
present completely, to never relax awareness of what you 
are doing now. Be here. So you would say inthe ordinary 
way, I have thoughts about tomorrrow and yesterday, 
I’m distracted, my mind doesn’t stay focused on the 
present. That’s the way it seems, yes. 

What you do instead is, you try to focus your 
attention completely on the present. You find this a very 
difficult thing to do because you don’t know when the 
present is. In other words, you don’t recognize that 
anything happens until it’s already a memory. It has, as it 
were, to be in your consciousness long enough to make 
an impression. And you say, well, in looking at this table, 
(I wish I could find something different from tables to 


60 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


give illustrations from, all lecturers are always talking 
from tables.) In looking at this pipe, I don’t know that it’s 
here until somehow, or other, it has lingered. So, I ask, 
‘‘Am I actually knowing the present pipe, or is it always 
past?”’ 

As you continue to practice this exercise, you get the 
funny feeling that your memory of something past is also 
a present event. You see? You have the memory, it is 
already here, and this begins to bug you, like it did St. 
Augustine. He couldn’t understand memory—he got 
into a terrrible tailspin about it. Because, you see, the 
memory of the past is something always present. So, you 
finally realize the whole exercise you’re undertaking was 
pointless, because there is nowhere else to be but the 
present. 

That was the point in trying to make you do this 
thing—to get you to realize that there is no past, and there 
is no future. There is only now, and you can’t get out of it. 
So, relax, you’re in eternity, in the moment. And this 
flows along, or flows, or doesn’t flow, you know this 
thing of Tennyson’s poem, ‘‘Such a tide of moving seems 
to sleep, to full for sound or foam?’’ The unmoved 
mover. The idea of somehow, motion and stillness going 
together. Activity and peace. The eye of the hurricane. 
You see, everything is really like that. 

Well, now, all that I’ve said hitherto in 
introductory, to going on to this seminar, to discuss the 
second great point of view that is involved in Mahayana 


Buddhism. The first, the Madyamica, the middle way, 


YOGA CARA 


was, as I said, to destroy all your hang-ups, fixed opinions 
about the nature of life so that you don’t use ideas, 
beliefs, religious prejudices, preferences, opinions. You 
don’t usethem tocling. It demolishes every idea of reality 
that you could have. That’s Madyamica, that’s Nagajuna. 
Now, a little later in time, there arose in India, two other 
great Buddhist philosophers, respectively, Asanga, and 
Vasubandhu, and they have been two Vasubandhus, 
either father and son, or teacher and student, who took 
his teacher’s name, and they lived in this vague dating 
that we have. It’s impossible to pin it down, about 400 
A.D. 

They are responsible for what is called the Yoga 
Cara school, sometimes called also, the Gnatimatra, 
which means, ‘“‘The School of Consciousness Only.”’ 
And, it looks deceptively like what we call in Western 
philosophy, Subjective Idealism, as taught, say, by 
Berkeley or Bradley. That, in other words, the only 
reality is your mind. As this is propounded in Western 
philosophy—everything that exists is in your mind. You 
know an external world only in your mind. You know 
the sense of space between yourself and something 
distant from you. That is a mental phenomenon. And so, 
it could be argued that your mind alone exists, and that 
all that you see is an imagination. 

The extreme way of posing this is the doctrine called 
‘Solipscism,’’ that there is only yourself, and that 
everything else is your dream. There has never been any 
way of disproving this, except my idea, which I think 


— 67 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


Imost disproves it, that I would like to present at a 
onference of Solipscists, where they argue as to which 
me of them is the one that is really there. So, the point of 
iew, of say, Berkeley or Bradley, in the Western 
radition of Subjective Idealism, is not solipscistic. But it 
; that everybody has a certain independent existence, 
yut as a mind. And that all particular minds are, as it 
vere, minds in a super mind, which is the mind of God. 

The Western philosopher has, therefore, dealt with 
he problem, ‘‘Does something exist when there’s 
obody around to look at it?’ by saying, ‘'There was a 
nung man, who said, ‘God, I find it exceedingly odd, that a 
ee, as tree, simply ceases to be when there’s no-one around in 
ie quad.’ ‘Young man, your aston-ishment’s odd, I’m always 
round in the quad, so the tree, as a tree, never ceases to be, 
nce observed by yours faithfully, God.’ ”’ 

But, this isn’t the same point of view that we’re going 
> deal with in Oriental philosophy, because we start 
‘om completely different assumptions as to the nature 
f mind and matter. You see, if you don’t get those 
‘raight, you confuse the Yoga Cara school with 
ubjective Idealism. Unfortunately, Professor Tako- 
usu, in his book, The Essentials of Buddhist Philosophy, 
ses Western school names to classify the different types 
f Buddhist philosophy—uses, you know, Nihilism, 
ubjective Idealism, etc., all down the line, and this is 
2ry confusing. Because when you start with the basic 
lea of what is Mind, you don’t begin with the opposition 


ee. ee 


re 


YOGA CARA 


a 


that we begin with, which is Mind/Matter. You begin 
instead with the contrast, Mind and Form. Form is 
furthermore broken down into Name and Form. It is 
called in Sanskrit, Nama Rupa, name-form. And this 
stands, in their system, as distinct from the idea of matter 
meaning “stuff”? in our common sense. 

We begin with this break, that we have the notion 
that there is some kind of heavy, hard substance, and this 
substance is energized by spiritual forces, which, just as 
the potter turns clay into pots, the spiritual forces take 
hold of the unintelligent stuff of matter, and weave it into 
all the various shapes of life. And so, then, when we die, 
here is a person, you see, that is going along, talking, 
chatting, doing his business everyday, and suddenly: 
zingo! his body lies there. Where is he? What’s happened 
to him? 

Of course, the mind has left, and there lies only the 
stuff. So, we’ve got this idea in our minds of the energy, 
which is something impalpable, something un-stuff, you 
see, animating or not animating something that is heavy, 
and hard and dusty. Now that great contrast comes, of 
course, from the book of Genesis, from the idea that the 
Lord, God, formed to the world out of some clay. Adam 
was a clay figurine. 

This idea is not in the same way in Hindu thought, 
but something deceptively like it is in Hindu thought, 
which causes the confusion. For example, Shankir, who 
is the great interpreter of the Upanishads, in the tradition 


=64.- 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


of interpretation which is called the Advita Vedanta, the 
non-dual vedanta, sometimes uses the symbol of gold 
and things made of gold which sounds like the pots and 
the clay, but he uses it in another way than we do. 
Whereas we use the clay as the symbol for the stuff out of 
which things are made, and which is inferior because the 
shape, being spiritual, is more important than the stuff— 
he uses it in exactly the opposite way. All beings are of 
the nature of the divine, just as many different objects 
can be made out of gold. It is all one gold, though the 
shape may change, and he describes the shape as 
ephemeral and impermanent, but it is the gold which is 
the thing that endures. 

Do you see, that’s using the analogy, the metaphor, 
in exactly the opposite way than the way we use clay, or 
stuff, and form in the West? So then, you don’t have at 
the basis of the mind-only philosophy, a conception of 
mind, which is the kind of impalpable spook presiding 
over the hard and heavy stuff. You have to begin 
somewhere else all together. And this is the fascination of 
studying Oriental culture. You have to re-adjust your 
own common sense to get at it. What on earth do these 
people mean? Especially when I don’t really have any 
words in my own language into which! can translate their 
ideas. 

Fortunately, it isn’t all that inaccessible, because 
what we have here is not merely words, if that were all, we 
would be absolutely lost - we have the techniques, the 
meditation disciplines, which you can use, and through 


—6§5— 


YOGA CARA 


using them, find out what it was that they meant, 
experimentally. 

So then, we start basically with the fundamental 
word that is used in Sanskrit for the activity of mind, 
citta. We Romanize this as c-i-t-t-a, the root, c-i-t is basic 
to mind. Now the Sanskrit language has many words for 
mind. We’ve got this one word: mind, which sort of has 
to take care of everything. We’ve got intellect, we’ve got 
vision, consciousness, and so on, but they’re all very 
vague in the way their used. Sanskrit is quite precise. But 
citis the basic term. And reality, itself, is called in vedant 
philosophy Sat-cit-ananda. Sat means, ‘‘real’’. This word, 
the root sa in Sanskrit is, what is manifest and is really 
there. It comes from breathing out. You make the sound, 
sa. And so, it’s really there. 

Cit is, it is conscious, has the quality of 
consciousness, ananda means bliss. Because reality if not 
blissful, would not be. The game has to be worth the 
candle, or it would stop. If the fundamental energy and 
impulse of the universe were not blissful, the whole 
system would have ceased long ago. Even if it involves 
pain, this pain is masochistic. That is to say, it is pain 
being enjoyed fundamentally as a pleasure. Like you can 
have a grievance, and make your whole life a cause 
around your grievance, by being a professionally rejected 
woman, or a failure of some kind, and you can really 
build this up into a big thing. And so, in this funny sort of 
rather trivial human way, you make an ecstasy out of 
suffering. The idea here is that the universe is 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


fundamentally, insofar as it involves suffering, making an 
ecstasy out of it. That is to say, that every element of pain, 
in the whole scheme of things, is the necessary, what willl 
call it, contrasting element that you need in order to bring 
out the fundamental! exuberance and joy of being, that 
you wouldn’t know. In other words, that you were here 
unless something stopped you. 

Mind in this philosophy, what is meant by cit, is 
practically exactly the same thing as we mean by 
existence. When we use the word being, in order to, for 
example, when Dr. Johnson heard of Berkeley’s 
philosophy that everything existed only in your mind, his 
response was to kick a stone—as if to demonstrate, 
“That’s the real world!”’ But it is exactly this sense of 
‘“humph” that is meant by cit. 

That’s why, when a Zen master would be asked, 
“What is the fundamental meaning of Buddhism?’’— 
‘“Ha-a!” You know, this thing, this sense of impact—that 
is what it is. In other words, mind, in this philosophy, is 
as concrete as you can imagine. And so it is called, and 
we, in a future seminar, will go into this from another 
point of view, the word: Vagra, which means diamond, is 
used for it, because the diamond is simultaneously the 
hardest thing there is, and the most transparent. There’s a 
whole philosophy of Buddhism worked around the 
diamond. So what you’ve got here, you see, is a 
conception of mind, which instead of being the 
impalpable ghostly thing that we have had, is the most 


67 


YOGA CARA 


intensely tough reality, adamantine mind. Bang! Hard! 
You. Here. You see, this very strong sense of being. So 
the philosophy of ‘‘it’s all in your mind,”’ has to be hung 
on this as distinct from being hung on something flimsy 
and impalpable. Now we’re going to have an 
intermission. 


= 6s— 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF 
MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


have throughout all my life been a disciple of 

William James, who, as you may know, wrote a book 
called The Varieties of Religious Experience. I have always 
been fascinated by James’ approach to this subject 
because it involves a way in which we might understand 
the dynamics of various people’s differing accounts of 
their visions of God, and of their place in the universe. 
Sometimes these visions sound very different: some 
people seem to experience God as extremely far-out and 
others, as something “‘up there”’ to be venerated, adored, 
and obeyed; but other people seem to experience God as 
something completely inside, as something that is the 
essence of what, when you really come down to it, you 
call yourself. And so it seems that there is a conflict 
between these two forms of experience. But I am very 
suspicious about these varied accounts because | am not 
so sure that they aren’t two different forms of the same 
thing, described in different kinds of language. 


7) 


PSYCHOLOGY OF MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


Speaking from another domain of experience, some 
people will describe a pain as a cold sting, while others 
will describe it as a hot pang—because very, very cold is 
pain, and very, very hot is pain; but when it comes right 
down to it, both are the same kind of pain. 

Then there are other extremes of human experience, 
such as ecstasy. Think of absolute pleasure. It is said that 
when a French girl who is really on to it, is being made 
love to, she will exclaim, ‘Kill me, kill me!’’ to her man. 
Thus, we can describe ecstasy in the language of pleasure, 
and we can describe it in the language of pain. There is a 
domain where pleasure and pain meet, such that we weep 
for joy and shudder with delight. And by this sort of 
reasoning | seek to unify the quarrels between religions. 
On the one hand, | will as eagerly sit in meditation with 
Buddhists, where they cross their legs and look exactly 
like the image of their venerated being, the Buddha; or on 
the other hand, I will, like the Christians, Jews, or 
Muslims, bow before the unseen, transcendent presence, 
I will go with either one. What this entire argument really 
comes down to, and what I think is of vital interest to 
every one of us, is that we are presently, and 
uncomfortably, aware of being alive at the end of time— 
in what the Hindus call Kali Yuga. Things are running 
down, and time is running out. We are haunted by an 
insuperable set of problems—over-population, 
pollution, the nuclear bomb, irreconcilable political 


oy 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


conflicts—and everyone of us has the sense, the haunting 
feeling, that these problems cannot be solved, and that 
probably we have only about thirty or so more years of 
life on this planet. 

Of course, this may not be so. We may muddle 
through. But the fact of the matter remains that within 
zero to seventy years from now, all of us will be dead 
anyway. And we all know this. It is a recurrent, 
disturbing thought in the back of our minds: the end— 
and then what? We all have to face it. We are all going to 
evaporate, and turn into bones and dust. But now, I look 
at this problem with complete fascination. So, instead of 
avoiding this, or looking the other way and saying, ‘'Oh 
well, later,’ let’s look at it. 

What would it be like to go to sleep and never wake 
up? Every child thinks about this. But philosophers 
disdain the question. They say, ‘‘Oh, that’s a meaningless 
speculation. You’re just using words.”’ But for a child, 
wno is an essential person, it is vey real to think about 
this. So, lets face facts. Let us not dream of reincarnation 
or of deva chan or of worlds beyond, but let us suppose 
that it is very real that when you’re dead, you’re dead, 
and that you are never going to wake up again. 

Well, I scratch my head and think, ‘‘That isn’t going 
to be like going into the dark forever, because darkness is 
something I can imagine. And it’s not going to be like 
being buried alive, it is going to be like nothing. It is going 
to be as if I had never existed at all, and that never had 


a 


PSYCHOLOGY OF MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


— 


anything else ever existed—it is just going to be as if | 
never was.’’ And then! think, ‘Well, wasn’t that just the 
way it was before 1 was born?”’ Thinking backwards in 
time, I can remember to a certain distance, and then I 
come to a total blank. And yet, here 1am. I have emerged 
out of that total blank. And so have we all. 

Have you ever tried to realize total blankness? I often 
think that the best way of doing that might be to try and 
look at my head with my own eyes. Because no matter 
how | turn around, | cannot see my own head. It isn’t that 
there is a black spot behind my eyes, but that there is a 
total blank—the same kind of total blank, or 
nothingness, as that out of which I entered this world. At 
night I look at the stars, and I see them as vividly real, 
energetic points of fire scattered all over the sky in the 
middle of black nothingness. Now, how do you think the 
stars would look if there were no space? How would 
space look if there were no stars? You see, the two go 
together. You cannot realize what you mean by “‘is’’ 
unless ycu also have along with it a thing which you 
understand as “‘isn’t.’’ Void goes with form. 

The Buddhist sutra says: ‘That which is form, that 
exactly is emptiness; that which is emptiness, that exactly 


y 


is form.’’ And all mysticism is comprised in this. 
Mysticism, as we use it in English, comes from the Greek 
word mucin, which means, the finger on the lips, quiet, 
‘‘mum’s the word,’’—we cannot really say it. You see, 
there is a secret. There is something that you are not 


supposed to know, but that you really should know for 


sy) 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


your sanity, and we are going to pass it on to you ‘on the 
q.t.”’ In ancient times, it really was ‘‘on the q.t.’’ but 
nowadays nothing is ‘“‘on the q.t.’’—everything has been 
published. All knowledge is available, and there is no 
possibility anymore of there being anything esoteric. 
Everyone has smoked marijuana or taken LSD and 
practiced yoga, and so all this is simply a matter of public 
discussion. It is of the essence of scientific honesty to 
make all information public. And it is also the essence of 
democracy: if we are a republic, where all men are equal, 
then every single citizen of the United States, however 
well or not-well educated, has a right of access to all 
information. 

That is supposedly what we believe in; which is 
another way of saying that you are all God. There is not 
someone else who is God, like some sort of boss over 
you, because that would be a monarchy and not a 
republic. But the trouble with the United States is that it 
is a republic peopled by those who believe that the 
universe is a monarchy. Therefore, they take an attitude 
which is paternalistic and authoritarian, and yet this is in 
direct conflict with the basic ideas upon which people 
like Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Franklin founded 
this republic. This is the basic social conflict which we 
have to face; but let us go back to our more universal 
problem, called death. 

We can see by a very simple process that when we 
die, we go into a negative dimension of consciousness, as 
we do when we sleep every night. Sleep is a very little 


75 = 


PSYCHOLOGY OF MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


understood phenomenon by psychologists, but what is 
obvious to us all is that sleep refreshes us. It is curious, 
but being unconscious for a while, being nowhere, brings 
us back to life. Of course it does! Because we wouldn’t 
know we were alive unless we had once been dead, or 
unless we occasionally went to sleep. We wouldn’t have 
the feeling of reality, of here-ness, of now-ness, of 
sensitivity, unless it could be contrasted with nowhere, 
or nothingness. 

All knowledge, and all energy, is a phenomenon of 
contrasts. Like a wave. All energy is basically a wave 
phenomenon—there is the crest and the trough. It is at 
times upstanding, or convex, and at other times, down- 
standing, or concave. This is the difference between male 
and female. And if we understand this, we are not going 
to have anymore fights about women’s lib. The male is 
upstanding, the female is hollow; and you cannot realize 
the one without the other. This is absolutely basic. You 
cannot see the figure without the ground, and you cannot 
understand what is important without what | is 
unimportant. All logic, all discourse, all thought, all 
imagination, all consciousness, depends upon this 
contrast. And the secret of it is that the two go together. 
And this is what I was talking about as ‘‘mum’s the 
word,”’ muein—that what appears to be things opposed, 
unrelated, fighting (as in the various religions of the 
world), are really things that cannot do without each 
other. 


= 9G es 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


Just before he died in 1958, I was visiting Carl Jung 
at his summer house on the edge of Lake Zurich. We 
were walking alongside the lake, with swans swimming 
nearby, and at the end of our talk I said to him, “‘Is it true 
that swans are monogamous?” And he said, ‘‘Why yes, it 
is curious that they are monogamous. And do you know, 
another interesting fact about swans is that when the 
male and female begin to make love to each other they 
start by fighting until they discover what they are 
supposed to be doing.” Then he said, ‘‘This has been of 
great help to some of my female homosexual patients;”’ 
but he didn’t explain it any further, he just dropped it and 
left it at that. 

So you see, ‘‘make love, not war,’ 
statement, not of an ideal, but of a necessity. It is 
something that we are going to have to do whether we like 
it or not, because the opposite, the things that we seem to 


b) 


is a very great 


see as in absolute conflict—consciousness and un- 
consciousness, life and death, black and white—are 
absolutely essential to each other. And we can suddenly 
flip this into any dimension of human experience. 

Let us take black people and white people—which is 
purely a caricature, because there really aren’t black 
people and white people, there are brown people and 
greyish-pink people—but nevertheless, we’ll call them 
black and white. And what I hope you see by this is that 
we can only realize the richness of experience because 
there is this differentiation. For instance, the way black 
people swing and behave wouldn’t be recognizable unless 


PSYCHOLOGY OF MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


—_—_—_—___ 


it were in contrast with the way white people behave. The 
two groups should learn to be thankful to each other for 
their differences. So too, with man and woman, Vive la 
petite difference!. Long live the difference! 

I might also express my point by asking you to 
consider all in-groups. Those people who see themselves 
as elect and saved, like the church, must realize that they 
can only understand themselves in contrast to an out- 
group—those who are the damned, all those awful 
people who live on the other side of the tracks, or in hell. 
Even St. Thomas Aquinas gave away the secret when he 
said that the saints in heaven occasionally walk to the 
edge of the battlements and look down at the squirming, 
burning, sufferings of the damned in hell and give praise 
to God for the administration of divine justice. He said 
that! In this way, the saints, by contrast with the 
sufferings of the damned, know in what bliss they are. 

Now, I hope you realize that I am sort of making 
jokes and giving parables to express the point that we 
only know what reality is, or what it is to be alive and to 
exist, by contrast with nothingness, space, emptiness, 
and death. The one generates the other. and you might 
also understand this by considering the word “‘clarity.”’ 
What do you think of when you say ‘‘clear’? Well, you 
might think of clear in the sense of wiped clean, 
transparent, or empty space; or as a finely polished 
mirror, or perfect, flawless lens. But the next thing you 
think of as clear might be a completely articulate form— 
something with outlines that are perfectly definite and 


eat 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


totally in focus. Now, isn’t it fascinating that in the idea 
of clarity, we have both emptiness and form in perfect 
expression? This is the meaning of the Buddhist saying 
which I referred to earlier: ‘emptiness is form, form is 
emptiness’’—all is embraced in the idea of clarity. 

Another fundamental contrast in our experience, 
like form and space, is the voluntary and the 
involuntary—what you do on the one hand, and what 
happens to you on the other. This is absolutely basic to 
most of us. We know, or we think we know, that there is 
a thing called ‘‘what I am doing” along with my influence 
on it while on the other hand there is its influence on 
me—self and other. And our big struggle is to make 
‘self’? win over ‘other’. This is what we call the 
conquest of nature. Collectively, humanity, as self, wants 
to subdue, beat down and control, what is called 
‘other’. But do we really want that? If we succeeded in 
that enterprise, that is, if we put the element of 
experience—the things that happen to us which are not in 
our control—in our complete control, we would be 
bored to death. It would be like screwing a plastic 
woman. Nobody wants that. When you love someone 
you want them to come at you in an unexpected, or 
spontaneous, way. You want to feel that there is 
something out there that is different, that will surprise 
you. 

In exactly the same way, you would not be able to 
experience the situation that you call “‘self,’’ as being a 
source of action more or less in control, unless it had the 


79= 


PSYCHOLOGY OF MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


contrasting field of something ‘‘other’”’ that is not in its 
control. Thus, you never know what that is going to be, 
and yet these two sensations go together, they are back 
and front of the same coin. 

Following this line of reasoning, have you ever 
considered the possibility that the whole technological 
enterprise of the West, which is designed to control the 
universe by technological methods, is in the final analysis 
not sufficiently conscious of itself to know where it is 
going. 

We do not comprehend our direction because it is 
not part of our education that we understand the 
relationship between opposites. We are so frantic to 
survive, and so terrified of night, and of death, that we are 
going to destroy the planet out of our anxiety to survive. 
The whole colossal military enterprise is wasting the 
energies of the earth in the most appalling way. The 
Americans, the Russians, and the Chinese are 
squandering their substance in the creating of so-called 
defensive technology—instruments intended to protect 
themselves from each other—which can only destroy us 
all. They can do nothing else. They protect no one. ‘Join 
the Air Force, and be safe’ —you’ll be the only ones who 
will be. Women and children can go hang; no one is going 
to protect them anymore. The whole technology of the 
military world is completely wasteful and destructive, 
and it is all being financed by you in the name of survival! 
In other words, you want to survive so badly that you are 
going to have to commit suicide. 


—80— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


So the point is: we do not need to survive. Let’s get 
that into our heads! We don’t really have to go on living, 
because the nothingness of death, being the opposite of 
life, simply generates it. The empty space of the sky is 
what is generating the stars, and the hollowness of the 
womb is what generates living beings. The emptiness is 
the form. But this is not in our logic, it was left out of our 
education. We never saw it, and therefore, we have 
anxiety all the time. We think: ‘‘To be or not to be, that is 
the question’’—but it isn’t. To be is not to be, and not to 
be is to be. They imply each other. They are the 
background. And so..., stop worrying! 

Now, please understand, I am not saying all this just 
to be some kind of sophist, who enjoys throwing funny 
ideas at you. I am here to suggest that it is very important 
at this time in our evolution that we human beings cool it. 
That we reduce the volume of our anxiety and learn to 
take things easier. That we eat less, run around less, fuss 
less, and worry less about being there. I seriously do 
suggest this. 

Now look, a lot of people do not know they are alive 
unless they are making a tremendous vibration. A lot of 
people need to get behind the wheel of a car or plane that 
goes vvvrrooooomm! And then they really know they are 
there: ‘(Oh my, I’m a man!”’ And this is fouling the 
atmosphere, and creating an immense noise—it is 
making a great impression. Yes, but seriously, do you 
really have to? Do you have to expend all that energy to 
realize you are there? Are you like some people who 


PSYCHOLOGY OF MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE 


always have to get into a fight, who’ve got to hitsomeone 
to know that ‘I can knock you down, and that tells me 
that I’m real’’? Is that really necessary? 

I would like to suggest that you can just as equally 
well know that you are real by humming to yourself. 
Instead of making a colossal din or a spectacle of prize 
fighting, you can know reality, and its energy, by simply 
humming to yourself or with other people—you know, 
we could all have a mutual hum: oommmmmmm, 
oommmmmmm, oommmmmmm... and you can dig that, you 
can get with it, you can get right into it. You can feel that 
soft, deep energy, and you won’t have to go roaring 
around, knocking people over the head, and so on. 

If youcan just get with this, you’ll see that this is the 
life thing going, this is God. And you can hold hands, and 
sit around in a circle, and go oommmmm, oommmmmmm, 
oommmmmmm....... and I realize this sounds silly to 
Americans. They will say, ‘What will happen to progress 
if people do that?” Well, as G.K. Chesterton once said: 
‘Progress is finding a good place to stop.” 


189 


ee 


HISTORICAL BUDDHISM 


M ahayana Buddhism was India’s principal export 
to the civilization of Asia, and quite basically, it’s 
an attitude to life, based on complete non-fear, or you 
could call it, ‘SNot clinging to things.’’ It’s based on the 
realization that you are not just your organism, your 
physical body, or your own particularized psyche. But 
that you, even if you don’t know it consciously, (just as 
you don’t know consciously how to grow your hair), you 
are fundamental reality, which is beyond any limitation 
of time or space—you’re It. You’re what there is. 

The Hindus have a symbol for this thing that they 
call the Brahmin, the Atman, the Self. The Buddhists 
simply modify this by saying if you have a symbol of it, 
which is something that you believe in, as one might say, 
believe in God, or believe in Heaven, or life after death, 


HISTORICAL BUDDHISM 


or in an immortal soul; the fact that you believe is still an 

act of attachment or clinging—which is unnecessary. 
And so, an unnecessary thing is what we would call, 

‘Gilding the lily,”’ or they use a wonderful phrase in Zen 


””) 


Buddhism, ‘‘Putting legs on a snake.’’ Now, legs 
embarass a snake—it needs no legs. And gilt kills the lily. 
So, the Buddhists have worked out a religion of no 
religion, that is to say, in not believing in anything at all— 
not because they believe that reality is nothingness, but 
because believing is unnecessary. It’s gilding the lily. So, 
this was the fundamental! idea of this morning’s lecture. 

Now, I want to go on this afternoon and put some of 
this in a kind of systemmatic and historical perspective, 
so that you all know where we are in time, and in space, 
and what this is all about, and how it came to be. Though 
the funny thing is that the Indians have no sense of 
history whatsoever. This is one of the fundamental gripes 
of Western scholars. That when they read all the 
documents of Indian literature, there is no historical 
consciousness running in it, and so, you don’t know what 
period it comes from. 

To begin with, they didn’t start writing anything 
down until about two centuries B.C., maybe a little 
before. Prior to that, everything was transmitted orally, 
and nobody has the faintest idea how far back it goes. The 
average educated guess today is that the Upanishads go 
back to about 800 B.C., and they are poems which 
represent the standpoint of Vedanta. Vedanta means: 
danta—almost our word for end or completion, of veda. 


__86— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


Veda is our word video, videre—to see. Vid is knowledge. 
And so, the most ancient scriptures of India are called 
veda, or vision, you see. They are poems in a 
mythological form, and the Upanishads constitute veda- 
anta, that is to say, ‘‘The completion of the vision,” and 
they tell you the secret—the inner meaning that underlies 
the mythology. 

So, let us presume that the most educated guess of 
scholars today is that the text called the Vedas are about 
1500 B.C., and the text called Upanishads run from 
approximately 800 to considerably later—80O0 to at least 
100, and some even later than that. But the major 
Upanishads such as the Brihadaranyaka, the Kana, the 
Isha and the Mondioku Upanishad, all are relatively 
early, so they will be anywhere from 800 to 600, prior to 
the time of Buddha. But still, you see, we’re very vague 
about when all this started, because the Vedic tradition 
was brought to India from somewhere in central Asia. 

The Arians who constitute the castes, the ruling 
people of India (and have done so for hundreds and 
hundreds of years) came from somewhere to the north, 
and have common ancestry linguistically with our 
European languages, but they had no sense of history. 

If you write a story about a certain king who was 
involved with a certain sage, you alter the name of the 
king every time you re-tell the story—you simply make 
him the king of the present time, because then it becomes 
relevant... so nobody knows. The Jews, on the other 
hand, had a sense of history, and were very particular 


87 


HISTORICAL BUDDHISM 


about when, and where, and what happened. So, it’s far 
easier to make clear dates about the Old Testament, and 
compare them with archeological remains, than it is with 
anything from India, especially. India is a tropical 
country where everything decays quickly. It is a kind of 
swarming, lively, slimy turnover of life, so no one can be 
sure when all this started. So, to even Buddhism being a 
relatively late phenomenon out of Indian culture, the 
dates are a little bit more certain than they are with 
Hinduism. 

So, we know that Gautama, the Buddha, lived 
shortly after 600 B.C.—but we are very, very uncertain 
as to what he taught. There are two great sections of 
Buddhist scriptures: One is written in the Pali language, 
and the other in Sanskrit. Although most of the Sanskrit 
texts no longer exist, and have to be studied in either 
Tibetan or Chinese translations, Western scholars are 
largely of the opinion that the Pali books represent more 
definitely the authentic teaching of the Buddha than the 
Sanskrit ones. Although, there’s room for debate on this 
still. Pali is a sort of colloquial, south Indian form of 
Sanskrit. For example, if you say ‘'Nirvana’’ in Sanskrit, 
you say Nibana in Pali; if you say ‘‘Karma’”’ in Sanskrit, 
you say Kama in Pali. It’s softened. So, all southern 
Buddhists, Theravadens, Inayana, make the Pali text 
their authority. And the earliest Pali texts we have are 
written on strips of palm leaf like this, just about so long, 
with characters which look like they are almost 
indistinguishable from the figure eight, unless you look 


—88— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


very closely.... And they have holes in the middle of the 
leaves so that they can be strung together, and set 
between two boards of wood. 

Well, now when you look at this record of the 
Buddhist teaching, you raise questions, because no 
human being sitting around in conversation with other 
people could have ever spoken this way. It simply is not 
natural conversation. What it is, is a highly tabulated 
form of instruction, tabulated in order to be memorized, 
so that it is easy to remember things if you classify them 
under one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 
ten. Buddhism is all numbers. 

There are three characteristics of being: Duca— 
suffering, Anitia—impermanence, and Atna—no self. 
There are Four Steps. There are Four Noble Truths. 
There are Eight stages of the Noble Eightfold Path. There 
are Ten Fetas. There are Twelve Elements of the Chain of 
Dependent Origination. Everything is numbered. And 
this, therefore, takes us back to a time before writing, 
when everything had to be committed to memory. 

Now, it is conceivable that if 1 were going to talk to 
you, and | were going to examine you later, to be sure that 
you understood everything I said, that 1 would number 
my remarks, and say, ‘Now, you’ve got to remember 
first this, second that, third that,’’ and I would talk back 
to you, and say, ‘‘What was the first thing, what was the 
second thing, what was the third thing? But the style of 
those Pali scriptures is so artificial, and everything is 
repeated again, and again and again, so that it’s, quite 


HISTORICAL BUDDHISM 


honestly, something that monks put together on a wet 
afternoon, with nothing better to do. Itis terribly boring, 
and I simply don’t advise anybody, (except a serious 
scholar who wants to comb it all out, and get the results) 
ever to bother reading the Pali scriptures. 

The advantage of the Christians, you see, is they 
have this inimitably beautiful English bible, translated 
under the reign of King James, and it is so exquisitely 
done.... And the Jews were great poets, and it is very 
readable. Buddhist scriptures are boring to the extreme, 
with exceptions. 

There is this body of Pali literature which is called 
Tipitika. Tipitika means, ‘Three baskets,’’ because the 
palm leaf manuscripts were stored in baskets, and three 
big baskets constitute the tradition of Hinayana, or 
Therabada Buddhism. In addition to this, there is the 
Mahayana Canon, or body of scriptures, which is one of 
the single biggest bodies of literature in the world. It is 
somewhat larger than the Encyclopedia Brittanica, and 
the official edition, existing today, is called the 
Tishodizokio, which is the Japanesse edition of the 
Chinese texts; and the other is called the Tung-jur, which 
is the Tibetan edition—but that’s not so easily come by. 
But the standard edition of the Tishodizokio is a great, 
vast collection of volumes, all in Chinese, translating the 
Sanskrit scriptures. 

Now again, the general opinion of scholars is that 
the Mahayana sutras are from a later time than the 
Buddha, the important texts in this collection, range in 


0p — 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


origin from 100 B.C., approximately to about 400 A.D. 
And so, according to the standards of Western 
scholarship, these are forgeries. They are attributed to 
the Buddha, but were actually composed by individuals 
living a lor later. 

Our morals, our literary morals, would say this is 
forgery, and that has a bad intent, but this is a modern 
idea. If we go back to Western scriptures, for example, 
you will see a book inthe Apocrypha called the Wisdom 
of Solomon, The Song of Songs, attributed to Solomon, the 
book of Proverbs in the Old Testament, attributed to 
Solomon. It is absolutely inconceivable that Solomon 
wrote these books. The book of Deuteronomy is 
attributed to Moses. It is absolutely impossible that 
Moses wrote the book of Deuteronomy. But why is it 
attributed to Moses? Because the actual writer of this 
book was too modest to give it his own name, and he 
would therefore say,.‘‘I feel that I have been into a center 
of my consciousness that is beyond me, and I am 
reporting things from a level of my being which I! cannot 
claim as my own. Therefore, I have to ascribe the 
authorship to a person who is archetypal.” 

Solomon represents wisdom, so certain Hebrew 
writers, at certain periods of history, when they felt that 
they were in touch with real wisdom, would feel it 
immoral tosay, “I, Ishmael Ben Ezra, will put this forth in 
my own name. On the contrary, that would be very 
immodest. | say, this is a revelation from Solomon.” In 
those days, before copyright it was considered the ethical 
thing to do. 


_9]— 


HISTORICAL BUDDHISM 


So, in exactly the same way, Indian Buddhists, living 
long after the Buddha, living, say in the University of 
Malanda, around the beginning of the Christian era. No, 
Malanda is later than that, Malanda takes usto200A.D., 
specifically to a man called Nagajuna, who lived about 
200 A.D., who was the blinking genius of the whole 
Mahayana movement (we don’t know whether Nagajuna 
wrote the scriptures he commented on, or only wrote the 
commentaries). But there’s a huge body of literature in 
Sanskrit, and is known to us mainly through it’s Tibetan 
and Chinese translations, called Pragnaparamita. Pragna, 
as I explained to you, means “‘intuitive wisdom’’. 
Paramita—‘‘a going across’’, that is to say, to the ‘other 
shore’’. Wisdom for crossing to the other shore. 

Almost all of this literature has been translated into 
English by Edward Conzy, and you can get selections 
from it in his book, which is now available in paperback 
in the Harper Torch Book series, Buddhist Texts Through 
the Ages. For the average person who does not want to be 
a specialist scholar, but wants to get a good idea about 
what all this is about, this is it. It has excellent selections 
from all types of Buddhist literature, and especially this 
class. 

It is conceivable that Nagajuna wrote the scriptures, 
in the name of the Buddha. And others did, too. But they 
were simply, by their standards, too modest to say, ‘This 
is mine.’’ They are saying, ‘It comes from a deeper level 
of consciousness than my ego, and therefore is the 
Buddha’s.’’ Now, you see, in our morals, that’s forgery. 
In their morals, it’s not. 


=O) 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


In Buddhism, you don’t have the same problem that 
you have in Christianity. In Christianity, we want to 
know, what were the very words of Jesus? And what was a 
late edition? The authority is so peculiarly involved in the 
historical Jesus. In Buddhism this is not the case. The 
Buddhists, in general, feel that Buddhism is like a tree. 
Buddha planted the seed, and later the tree grows. Very 
definitely. You see, in Christianity, Jesus is the only 
incarnation of God. The Christian, orthodox Christians, 
will on the whole argue—there will never be, there was 
never, another incarnation of God. 

But in Buddhism, it is of the essence of the thing that 
Buddhas can appear in the world again, and again and 
again. Anyone of you can become a Buddha. So there 
isn’t this fastening of authority to a particular historical 
time and place. So then, the Buddhist scriptures 
represent, although they are all attributed to the Buddha, 
they represent an, uncovering of questions which the 
Buddha raised. 

For this purpose, it’s important to understand one 
thing that is not made clear in almost all the books on 
Buddhism that I have ever read. Buddhism is absolutely, 
fundamentally a dialogue. And this dialogue, which is an 
interchange between a teacher and an inquirer, (as were 
the teachings of Socrates) is quite different from an 
authoritative pronouncement. There are no teachings of 
Buddhism. Everything you will find stated as a teaching 
of Buddhism, is actually a question, not a teaching. 


=203-= 


HISTORICAL BUDDHISM 


Let’s go to a very fundamental point. Buddhism 
deals with the problem of suffering. Because after all, 
suffering is the problem, that’s what we mean by the 
whole idea of a problem. | suffer. I have a problem. So, if 
you don’t like suffering, you say, ‘SHow do! not suffer?”’ 
And you go to a wise guy and say, ‘I am in pain. I’m 
anxious, I’m afraid, I’m this, that and the other. Howdol 
not do it?’’ So the Buddha answers to this question, “You 
suffer because you desire. If you didn’t desire, your 
desires would never be frustrated, and so you wouldn’t 
suffer. So, what would happen if you didn’t desire?”’ 

This is not a teaching. It is not saying, ‘SYou ought 
not to desire.”’ It is a request for making an experiment. 
Could you possibly not desire? So the inquirer goes away 
and he makes this experiment. He says, can! possibly get 
rid of my desires? And he discovers in the course of 
making this experiment that he is desiring to get rid of his 
desires. And so, he returns to the teacher, and says, ‘It is 
impossible not to desire, because in trying not to desire, 
I’m desiring.’”’ And the teacher says, ‘‘You’re getting 
warmer.’’ You see, in every respect, everything that the 
Buddha ever suggested that his followers should do, was 
by nature of an experiment. Buddhism never uttered it’s 
final teaching. What it was actually after, all it describes 
are various experiments you can make to get on the road 
to it. 

It is of the nature of it that it is a dialogue. Indeed, 
many of the books of the Pali scriptures are called 


_94__ 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


Dialogues of the Buddha. This is very, very important to 
understand—that all these records and scriptures are 
interchanges. 

One of the first things, for example, when I was 
starting to study Buddhism in my teens, was that I met a 
wonderful Japanese Sanskrit professor, and he explained 
to me: ‘Buddha taught three kinds of being: Duca—the 
world as we live it is suffering, Amitia—impermanent, 
and Atman—without self.’’ And he said, ‘‘Buddha teach 
duca, to contradict wrong view, duca. Buddha teach 
amitia, contradict wrong view amitia.”’ 

This is wonderful. The whole idea, you see is, you 
don’t, you can’t say what the truth is. So there is no 
dogma. All you do is, you get going a dialogue, the effect 
of which is to counterbalance people’s wrong view, or 
partial view. All Buddhism is view, the way you look at it. 
See? 

So, the first step of the Noble Eightfold Path is 
called, Samyadrishti, which means: Sumya—perfect, our 
word sum, summation, it comes eventually from the 
Sanskrit, samyag, meaning perfect view. 

There’s a wonderful story about Suzuki, who was 
giving a course on Buddhism at the University of Hawaii, 
and he was going through the Four Noble Truths, andhe 
got to the fourth one, and he was lazing around ona hot 
afternoon with a group of students, half-asleep, as he is 
often as an old man, and he said, “First step of Noble 
Eightfold Path is Sho-ken, mean right view, complete 
view. All Buddhism is view. You have right view, you 


OG 


HISTORICAL BUDDHISM 


have all Buddhism. Right view is no special view. Second 
step of Noble Eightfold Path... I forget second step. You 
look it up in the book.’ So, I told this story to Sabro 
Hasegawa of Kioto, and he said, ‘‘First step of Noble 
Eightfold Path, in Japanese, sho-kien, sho means correct, 
kien means view, he said is ssh.”’ 

What you have to understand then, simply, is that 
you can’t look up the teachings of Buddhism in the same 
way that you can look up the teachings of Hegel, Kant, 
Spinoza, Jesus Christ, Thomas Aquinas, Aristotle, and so 
on. They don’t exist—they’ve never been written down. 
All that has been written down is the dialogue that leads 
up to the understanding. 

Somebody raised the question in this morning’s 
discussion about whether you needed other people. Was 
it you, Virginia? And in a way you do, because this is the 
need of the guru. Now the guru is not necessarily 
somebody who is a qualified master. The guru is 
something against which you bounce. It may be abook. It 
may be your own reflection in the mirror, said I to 
myself, said I? 

But this dialogue is the way in Buddhism. Question. 
Answer. That’s why all those Zen stories are mondo 
which means question-answer. The whole body of 
literature is simply a feeling out of a question. So then, 
what's tne question? ‘‘What’s going on?”’ As I said, the 
basic question, the way Buddhism approaches it is: ‘‘I 
suffer, what shall I do about it?’’ Answer: ‘You suffer 
because you desire, try not to desire.’’ Next question: 


_96— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


‘But I’m desiring not to desire.’’ Next answer: ‘‘Try not 
even to desire not to desire.’ 

Or, put it in this way—don’t desire not to desire any 
more than you can manage. In other words, accept the 
facts as they are. But then, | find! can’t help desiring toa 
certain extent that always makes me uncomfortable. 
Well, the question comes back, ‘Who is it that’s 
uncomfortable? Who’s complaining? Who are you?”’ 

This is always what it gets down to. Who raises the 
question? Who, in other words, is in conflict with the 
universe? Find out who you are, and this is always 
peculiarly difficult, because it’s like trying to look at your 
own eyes without using a mirror, or to bite your own 
teeth—to define yourself. 

And so, all this literature is really the gyrations of 
somebody trying to find who.-he is, which will never 
succeed. And that is why it’s called the Doctrine of the 
Void. That one really has to be reconciled, not only 
reconciled to, but delighted with—the fact that you, 
yourself, are basically indefinable. If you were definable, 
you would be a mortal thing like anything else. And you 
would just dissolve. But so long as you’re not definable, 
you’re eternal. As much of youas you can’t catch hold of, 
is the real you. But the price you pay for this, the privilege 
of being eternal, is that you don’t know it. Youcan’t grab 
onto it! See? 

This comes out of sorrows. In the Buddhism that we 
have in the Pali Canon, the dialogue goes as far as all the 
techniques for renouncing desire, so that the general 


=o 


HISTORICAL BUDDHISM 


trend of Saravata Buddhism is ascetic. But what 
happened historically was, that many of those monks 
who practiced all the ascetic exercises, started to ask 
themselves the question, ‘‘Why are we doing this?’”’ And 
they discovered that the reason they were practicing the 
ascetic exercises was that they were scared of life, and 
wanted to get out of it, which nullifies the effect of those 
exercises. In other words, they were acting in an unselfish 
way, for selfish reasons. And all those monks who were 
simply naive and perceptive enough to recognize this, 
then moved on into the Mahayana stage of development. 

You can go through a tough meditation discipline 
where you try to control your thoughts completely, and 
not think anything lustful, or harmful, or selfish, and so 
on, but you are eventually compelled to come to the 
question, ‘‘Why are you doing this?”’ And the answer is, 
of course, the same old reason | started with. ‘I desire.’’ 
And this is still desire. So, then the dialogue has to be 
carried on from that point, in such a way, that the 
problem is increasingly thrown back at the source of the 
question. ‘‘'Who’s asking? Why asking?’’ Until, you see 
what they call in Zen that you are raising waves when no 
wind is blowing. You are making the problem. 

And this comes back, you see, to the most 
fundamental, original ideas of Buddhism, which Sir 
Edwin Arnold expresses in his poem about the teaching 
of the Buddha, ‘‘Ye suffer from yourselves, None else 
compels, None other holds you that you live and die, 


_98— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


And whir upon the wheel, And hug and kiss its spokes of 
agony, its tire of tears, its nave of nothingness.’ 

But, you see, the whole game we play with ourselves 
is, “I’m not responsible.’’ A person can turn back to their 
parents, and say, ‘You got me in this mess. You two 
males and females were having fun in bed together, and as 
a result of this, you irresponsibly created me. And you 
didn’t provide for me properly. You were economically 
unsound or something, and! blame you for all this.’ See? 
What an alibi that is, and all life is based on this game. 
And nobody will admit, you see, that the evil gleam in 
your father’s eye when he was after your mother, was you! 
That same surge of life was just the same as you are. See? 

You started the problem. And you can’t just blame 
somebody else, because if you blame your parents, and 
they are in any way blameworthy, they can always blame 
their parents, for getting them in the mess, and on it goes 
way back to Adam and Eve. And you know what 
happened then? When the trouble started, God came 
around and said to Adam, ‘“‘Man, what have you done?”’ 
And he said, ‘*This woman that Thou gavest, she tempted 
me, and I did eat.’’ And then God went and looked at 
Eve. And she said, ‘‘The serpent gave it to me.”’ And then 
God looked at the serpent, and the serpent didn’t say 
anything, because the serpent knew all too well what the 
story was, but wasn’t gonna let on. 

You see, because the serpent is the unacknowledged 
part of God, only it mustn’t be. Let not your left hand 
know what your right hand doeth. Especially let not your 


_99_ 


HISTORICAL BUDDHISM 


right hand know what your left hand doeth because the 
right hand is the hand that’s honest. Shake hands with the 
right hand, eat with the right hand. But the left hand is the 
inauspicious hand. With that you clean up messes, and 
you eat with the other see, so you don’t get the two 
mixed. Mustn’t get your head mixed up with your tail. So 
this is called the Seen Hand, and this is the Obscene 
Hand. This is inpropitious, this is propitious, 
unpropitious, propitious. So, keep that going see, don’t 
let go, don’t give away the secret of these two hands, or 
that the two ends are all one. 

In Mythology, the serpent Ouroborus is eating it’s 
own tail. Now this actually means it’s nourishing itself on 
its own excrement. But it doesn’t know it. If it did know 
it, it wouldn’t. So there is, just behind the serpent’s head 
an unconscious place. You see, your eyes look out this 
way, they don’t look back that way, and by virtue of that, 
you make a block of unconsciousness in the circle, so 
that you don’t know what you’re getting is what comes 
from you. And so long as you don’t know, you keep it 
up. 

If you say, ‘Well I, after all, realize this is nothing 
but me.’’ And they say, ‘'Well, why bother? It’s just 
going round and around.”’ And that’s why total 
omnipotence or omniscience would have no future in 
it—because you could do nothing, you could know 
nothing except what you already know, and you’d know 
all of that. There would be no surprises. And the 
moment there isn’t a surprise, that means there isn’t 


—100— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


something unconscious, then you won’t have any life. So 
it all depends that anything happens atall, on there being, 
besides being, besides power, besides consciousness, 
besides pleasure, non-being, impotence, unknowing, 
pain. Without this nothing happens. 

So then, if you say, ““Oh, but! want to get rid of that 
side of things which is non-being, unknowing, im- 
potence, pain’’—the teacher is trying to show you by the 
dialogue that you don’t understand the way you have 
stated your own question. You haven’t thought it 
through. You are, in other words, desiring something 
that you don’t want. 

Let’s suppose a very simple illustration of this. I 
don’t want to die. O.K! You have the problem of the 
Wandering Jew, who cannot die, who’s condemned to 
life, so that when he throws himself into the ocean, it 
throws him out. He casts himself into the fire, and the fire 
shrivels. You cannot die. And you realize what a horror 
this state is, because you can’t forget. You must go on 
accumulating memories forever, and ever, and ever, and 
ever, until you become sick, you get indigestion with the 
multiplicity of memories. But people don’t ordinarily 
think this through. They say, ‘‘I’d like to go on living 
always, please, I don’t want to die, not yet, no.”’ For they 
don’t think it through. They say, ‘I want to go to Heaven. 
I want to be reunited with all my friends and relations, 
and be happy forever, and ever, and ever.”’ 

They don’t realize what an absolute bore this state 
could be! You would be horrified if you don’t think it 


—101— 


HISTORICAL BUDDHISM 


through. The point of the dialogue is that the teacher 
forces you to think through all your desires. Be careful of 
what you desire, you may get it! 

And you know, this is the story about the three 
wishes. There was, once upon a time, a person who 
discovered the ear of the statue of the Oracle, Adelphi, in 
Greece. It was found in an antique shop, wrapped in a 
little sliver of paper which said, ‘‘Be back by 3”’. 

This came into the hands of two very intelligent 
gentlemen. (I’m repeating a story that Gerald Hurd told) 
These very intelligent gentlemen had a dinner party one 
evening in the presence of this ear, and they discussed 
what .it meant. They said, ‘‘Look, this ear is probably a 
wishing ear, you whisper things into it. Let’s try and work 
it Out.” 

So, you know how people are when they get in the 
presence of magic, they always ask it to do something 
trivial—they said, ‘‘Make this vase turn upside-down. 
This is our first wish.”’ How stupid can you get, you 
know? So, they did that. 

Well, apparently nothing happened. But in a little 
while they all began to feel funny, and they felt more 
comfortable with their arms up in the air, than lying on 
the table. What had happened was, indeed, their gravity 
was reversed from the gravity of the vase. And they were 
very uncomfortable about this. So, with what did they 
have now? Two wishes left. (There are always three 
wishes. ) 


—102— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


What was the second wish? Obviously to undo the 
first. So they said, ‘Let everything be as it was before we 
wished.”’ And they were comfortable again. 

Now they had but one wish left, with no possibility 
of reverting it. And one of the men said, ‘‘Let’s not take 
it, let’s just abandon the whole thing.’’ But the other was 
an adventurous man, and he grabbed the ear and said, ‘I 
wish not to wish”’. 

At that moment, the stone ear leapt out of his hand 
and fell on the hearth, and hissed in flame, and dissolved. 
But suddenly they found themselves sitting there in 
peace. Everything was just right the way it was, because 
they had wished not to wish. 

So, to desire not to desire must finally include the 
fact you see, that you do desire. And that this is a feature 
of your nature, in just the same way as blue is a feature of 
the sky, that feet have five toes each onthem. You desire, 
and if you desire not to desire, that is to say you desire 
not to be a human being, you’re fighting the facts, which 
as a matter of fact, are your own facts. 

The whole secret of the matter is that we construct 
our psychology so that we experience a whole segment of 
Our experience as something that’s put on us. It’s the 
same thing as you blame your parents by saying, “You 
brought me into this world”’, or ‘‘ Water is wet, fire is hot, 
and I did not bargain for this, I didn’t arrange it.’’ So by 
having a whole segment of our experience that we don’t 


—103— 


HISTORICAL BUDDHISM 


assume responsibility for, and we say, ‘‘You did it!’ Then 
it’s not my fault! You see, this is, it is this that creates the 
problem. 


QO. May I interject a question? 

A. Yes. 

©. How do you explain the Buddhist monk’s vow of um, to 
free himself from desire? Isn’t that one of the vows? 

A. Yes of course. Where he says in the Mahayana 
Vows, ‘However innumerable the hang-ups are, | 
vow to conquer them all.’’ Kesha in Sanskrit, the 
hang-ups. 

©. How do I vow to keep myself from the passions. 

A. Yes, they’re the Kesha. Yes. 

QO. But yet, a true Mahayana Buddhist would assume that 
you are the passions. You could not be you without these 
passions. 

A. Right, right. 

©. So how can you free yourself? 

A. So, you set your self the infinite task. 

©. I’ve been perplexed by that. Could it possibly be that 
the, could the keyword be that you won’t be deluded by the 
whole problem of passion? 

A. See again, that the vows must be understood in the 
context of the dialogue. Undertaking these vows is 
part of being involved in a dialogue with a teacher, 
and the teacher suggests that you undertake these 
vows—which are ridiculous. 


=164— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


QO. Well, that’s my objection! 

A. Sure, but you won’t find out that they’re 
ridiculous unless you try them. 

Q. But, they’re magical, in a certain sense—I’m speaking 
personally. 

A. Oh, sure they are! Well, look, we’re going to have 
an intermission. 


—105— 


a 


PHILOSOPHY 
OF NATURE 


] want to talk to you a bit about the general purpose 
of this tour. 1 might say that I’m interested in Japanese 
materialism, because contrary to popular belief, 
Americans are not materialists. We are not people who 
love material, but our culture is by and large, devoted to 
the transformation of material into junk, as rapidly as 
possible. God’s own junkyard! And therefore it’s a very, 
very important lesson for a wealthy nation, and for arich 
people. And we are all colossally rich by the standards of 
the rest of the world. It’s very important for such people 
to learn and see what happens to material in the hands of 
people who love it. 

And so, you might say that in Japan, and in China, 
but in Japan in a peculiar way, the underlying philosophy 
of life is a spiritual materialism. There is not the divorce 
between soul and body, between spirit and matter, 


—109— 


PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 


between spirit and nature, or God and nature, which 
there is inthe West. And therefore, there is notthe same 
kind of contempt for material things. We regard matter 
as something that gets in our way, something whose 
limitations are to be abolished as fast as possible, and 
therefore we have bulldozers and every kind of technical 
device for knocking it out of the way. And we like to do 
as much obliteration of time and space as possible. We 
talk about killing time, and getting there as fast as 
possible, but of course, as you notice in Tokyo, and as 
your noticing here, the nearer it gets to you by time, by 
the abolition of distance, the more it’s the same place 
from which you started. 

This is one of the great difficulties—what is going to 
happen to this city, and this country when it becomes the 
same place as California. In the same way, in other words, 
you could take a streetcar from one end of town to 
another, and it’s the same town. So, if you can take a jet 
plane from one city to another (and everybody’s doing it, 
not just the privileged few), then they’re going to be the 
same town. 

So, to preserve the whole world from indefinite Los 
Angelization, pardon me, those of you from Southern 
California, but, we have to learn in the United States, 
how to enjoy material, and to be true materialists, instead 
of exploiters of material. And so, this is the main reason 
for going into philosophy of the Far East, and how it 


—110— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


relates to every day life—to architecture, to gardens, to 
clothes, and to the higher arts of painting, tea ceremony, 
music, sculpture, ritual, and so on. 

Well now, basic to all this is the philosophy of 
nature. And the Japanese philosophy of nature is 
probably founded historically in the Chinese philosophy 
of nature, and that’s what I want to go into to start with. 
To let the cat out of the bag, right at the beginning, the 
assumptions underlying Far Eastern culture, (and this is 
true as far west as India, also) is that the whole cosmos, 
the whole universe, is one being. 

It is not a collection of many different beings, who 
somehow floated together like alot of flotsam and jetsam 
from the ends of space, and ended up as athing called the 
universe. They look at the world as one, eternal activity, 
and that’s the only real self that you have. You are 
theworks—only what we call you, as a distinct organism, is 
simply a manifestation of the whole thing. Just as the 
ocean when it waves, it’s the whole ocean waving when it 
waves. And the whole ocean, when it waves, it says, ‘‘ Yoo- 
Hoo, I’m here!”’, you see. So’each one of us is a wave of all 
that there is, of the whole works. And they don’t, you see 
this is, in this culture, not something that is just a 
theory—not just an idea, like you would have, I have my 
ideas, you have your ideas, in other words, you’re a 
Christian Scientist, I’m a Baptist, or something like that. 
No, or I’m a Republican, and you’re a Democrat, and I’m 
a Bircher, and you’re a communist. It isn’t that kind of 
thing—it’s not an opinion, it’s a feeling. 


—111— 


PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 


And so, the great, the great men of this culture (not 
everybody), but the great men, the great masters, of 
whatever sphere they’re in, are fundamentally of this 
feeling that what you are is the thing that always was, is 
and will be, only it’s playing the game called, “Mr. 
Tocano,” or ‘Mr. Lee,” or ‘‘Mr. Mukapadya.”’ That’s a 
special game it’s playing, just like there’s the fish game, 
the grass game, the bamboo game, the pine tree game, 
they’re all ways of going ‘‘Hoochie-koochie-doochie- 
doochie-doochie-doo.’’ You see everything’s doing a 
dance, only it’s doing it according to the nature of the 
dance. The universe is fundamentally all these dances, 
whether human, fish, bird, cloud, sky dance, star dance, 
etc., they are all one fundamental dance. Or dancer. Only 
in Chinese, you don’t distinguish the subject from the 
verb, I mean, you don’t distinguish the noun from the 
verb in the same way that we do. A noun can become a 
verb, a verb can become a noun. But, that’s the business. 

A civilized, cultured, above all, an enlightened 
person, in this culture, is one who knows that his so- 
called ‘‘separate personality,’ his ego, is an illusion. 
Illusion doesn’t mean a bad thing, it just means a play, 
from the Latin word, ludere, we get English illusion. 
Ludere means to play. So, the Sanskrit word, maya, 
meaning illusion, also means magic, skill, art, and this 
Sanskrit conception comes through China to Japan with 
the transmission of Buddhism. 


—112— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


The world as a Maya, or sometimes as it’s called in 
Sanskrit: lila, (our word ‘lilt’); Lila, is play. So, all 
individual manifestations are games, dances, sympho- 
nies, musical forms, being put on by the whole show. 
And everyone is basically the whole show, so that’s the 
fundamental feeling. 

But Nature, Nature as the word is used in the Far 
East doesn’t mean quite the same as the word Nature in 
the West. In Chinese, nature, the word we translate 
nature, zitran, or in Japanese, shizen, is made up of two 
characters. That first one means “of itself,’’ and the 
second one means ‘‘so’’. What is so, of itself. This is a 
rather difficult word to translate well into English. We 
might -say, automatic,’ but automatic suggests 
something mechanical. 

When a Chinese coolie was supposed to have seen a 
tram car for the first time, he said, ‘No pushee, no 
pulley, go like mad!” But, uh, this mechanical idea of the 
automatic won’t properly translate this word zitran, in 
Chinese, shizen in Japanese. Of itself so, what happens, or 
as we say, what comes naturally. It’s in that sense of our 
word nature, to be natural, to act in accordance with 
one’s nature, not to strive for things, not to force things, 
that they use the word natural. So, when your hair grows, 
it grows without your telling it to, and you don’t have to 
force it to grow. So, in the same way, when the color of 
your eyes, whether it’s blue or brown, or whatever, the 


—113— 


nnn 


PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 


eyes color themselves, and you don’t tell them how todo 
it. When your bones grow a certain way, they do it all of 
themselves. 

And so, in the same way, I remember a Zen master 
once, he was a beautiful man, he used to teach in New 
York. His name was Mr. Sazaki. One evening, he was 
sitting in his golden robes, in a very formal throne-like 
chair, with a fan in his hand, he had one of those fly- 
whisks made of a white horse’s tail. And he was looking 
very, very dignified—incense burning on the table in 
front of him, there was a little desk with one of the 
scriptures on it that he was explaining. And he said, “All 
nature has no_ purpose. Purposelessness most 
fundamental principle of Buddhism, purposelessness. 
Ahhh, when you drop fart, you don’t say, ‘At nine 
o’clock I dropped fart,’ it just happen.’ ”’ 

So then, it’s fundamental to this idea of nature, that 
the world has no boss. In, this is very important, 
especially if you’re going to understand Shinto. Because, 
we translate, kami, or shin as God, but it’s not God in that 
sense. God, in much of the Western meaning of the 
word, means ‘the controller,’’ ‘‘the boss of the world.”’ 
And the model that we use for nature tends to be the 
model of the carpenter, or the potter, or the king. That, 
just as the carpenter takes wood and makes a table out of 
it, or as the potter takes inert clay, and with the 
intelligence of his hands evokes a form in it, or as the king 
is the law-giver who, from above, tells people what order 
they shall move in, and how they shall behave, it is 


=114— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


ingrained into the Western mind to think that the 
universe is a behavior which is responding to somebody 
in charge, and understands it all. 

When I was a little boy, andI used to ask my mother 
many questions, sometimes she’d get fed up with me, and 
say, ‘‘My dear, there are some things in this life that we 
are not just meant to know.”’ And so! said, ‘Well, what 
about it? Will we ever know?” ‘'Well,”’ she said, ‘tyes, 
when you die, and you go to Heaven, God will make it all 
clear.’’ 

And I used to think, that maybe, on wet afternoons 
in Heaven, we’d all sit around God’s throne and say, 
‘“Heavenly Father, why are the leaves green?’’ And he 
would say, ‘Because of the chlorophyll!’’ And we would 
say, ‘‘Oh!”’. 

Well, that idea, you see, of the world as an artifact 
could prompt achild in our culture to say to it’s mother, 
‘How was I made?’’ And it seems very natural. So when 
it’s explained that God made you, the child naturally goes 
on and says, ‘But who made God?”’ But, I don’t think a 
Chinese child would ask that question at all, ‘‘How was | 
made?’’ Because the Chinese mind does not look at the 
world of nature as something manufactured, but rather 
grown. 

The character for coming into being in Chinese is 
based on a symbol of a growing plant. Now growing and 
making are two different things. When you make 
something, you assemble parts, or you take a piece of 
wood and you carve it, working gradually from the 


—115— 


PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 


outside inwards, cutting away until you’ve got the shape 
you want. But when you watch something grow, it isn’t 
going like that. 

If you see, for example, a fast motion movie of a rose 
growing, you will see that the process goes from the 
inside to the outside—it is, as it were, something 
expanding from the center. And that, so far from being 
an addition of parts, it all grows together, all moves all 
over itself at once. And the same is true when you’re 
watching the formation of crystals, or even if you’re 
watching a photographic plate being developed. 
Suddenly, all over the area of the plate, over the field, 
shall we call it, like a magnetic field, it all arises. 

That idea of the world as growing, and as not 
obeying any laws, because there is in Chinese philosophy 
no difference between the Tao (that is the word t-a-o), the 
Japanese do, there is—no difference between the Way, 
the power of Nature, and the things in Nature. 

It isn’t, you see, when | stir up wind with this fan, it 
isn’t simply that the wind obeys the fan. There wouldn’t 
be a fan in my hand unless there were wind around. 
Unless there were air, no fan. So the air brings the fan 
into being as much as the fan brings the air into being. So, 
they don’t think in this way of obeying all the time— 
masters and slaves, lord and servant. 

Lao-Tse, who is supposed to have written the Tao Te 
Ching, the fundamental book of the Taoist philosophy, 
lived probably, a little before 300 B.C. Although 


tradition makes him a contemporary of Confucius, who 


—116— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


lived closer to 600, he says in his book, ‘‘The great Tao 
flows everywhere, to the left and to the right. It loves and 
nourishes all things, but does not lord it over them. And 
when merits are attained, it makes no claim to them.’’ 

The corollary of that is, that if this is the way nature 
is run, not by government, but by, as it were, letting 
everything follow its course, then the skillful man or 
woman, or the skillful ruler, or the sage interferes as little 
as possible with the course of things. Of course you can’t 
help interfering. Every time you look at something, you 
change it. Your existence is, ina way, an interference, but 
if you think of yourself as something separate from the 
rest of the world, then you will think of interference or 
not-interference. But if you know that you’re not 
separate from it, that you are just as much in and of 
nature as the wind or the clouds, then who interferes with 
them? 

In general, the notion is that life is most skillfully 
lived when one sails a boat, rather than rowing it. You see 
it’s more intelligent to sail than to row. With oars I have 
to use my muscles and my effort to drag myself along the 
water, but with a sail, I let the wind do the work for me. 
More skillful still, when I learn to tack, and let the wind 
blow me against the direction of the wind. Now, that’s 
the whole philosophy of the Tao. It’s called in Chinese, 
wu-wel, wu-non, wei—striving. Mui is Japanese at 
pronouncing the Chinese wei. Mu is Chinese wu. Mui, as 


—117— 


PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 


distinct from ui. Ui means to use effort—to go against the 
grain, to force things. Mui—not to go against the grain, to 
go with the grain. 

And so, you will see around you, in every direction, 
examples of mui—of the intelligent handling of nature, 
So as to go with it rather than against it. For example, the 
famous art of Judo is entirely based on this. When you 
are attacked, don’t simply oppose the force used against 
you, but go in the same direction as it’s going, and lead it 
to its own downfall. 

So it is said, in the winter, there’s a tough pine tree, 
which has a branch like this, and muscles. And the snow 
piles up and piles up, and this unyielding branch 
eventually has this huge weight of snow, and it cracks. 
Whereas the willow tree has a springy, supple branch, 
and a little snow comes on it, and the branch just goes 
down, and the snow falls off, and whoops, the branch 
goes up again. 

Lao-Tse said, ‘‘Man, at his birth is supple and 
tender, but in death, he is rigid and hard. Plants when 
they are young, are soft and supple, but in death they are 
brittle and hard. So, suppleness and tenderness are the 
characteristics of life, and rigidity and hardness the 
characteristics of death.’? He made many references to 
water. He said, “Of all things in the world, nothing is 
more soft than water, and yet it wears away the hardest 
rocks. Furthermore, water is humble, it always seeks the 
low level, which men abhor. But yet, water finally 
overcomes everything.’ 


—118— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


When you watch water take the line of least 
resistance, you watch for example, water poured out on 
the ground, then you see it, as it were, ejecting fingers 
from itself, and some of those fingers stop. But, one 
finger goes on—it’s found the lowest level. Now, you say, 
“Oh, but that’s not the water, the water didn’t do 
anything, that’s just the contours of the land, and because 
of the contours of the land, the water goes where the land 
makes it go.’? Think again. 

Does the sailing boat go where the wind makes it go? 
I never forget once, I was out in the countryside, and a 
piece of thistle-down flew out of the blue. It came right 
down near me, and! put out a finger, and 1 caught it by 
one of its little tendrils. And it behaved just like catching 
a daddy long-legs, you know, when you catch one by one 
leg it naturally struggles to get away. Well, this thing 
behaved just like that, and 1 thought well, ‘It was just the 
wind doing that, it only appears to look as if it was doing 
it.’” Then I thought again, ‘‘Wait a minute! It is the wind, 
yes, but, it’s also that this has the intelligence to grow 
itself, so as to use the wind.’’ You see that? That is 
intelligence. That little structure of thistle-down is a form 
of intelligence, just as surely, as the construction of a 
house is a manifestation of intelligence. But it uses the 
wind. 

In the same way, the water uses the conformations 
of the ground. Water isn’t just dead stuff. It’s not just 
being pushed around. Nothing is being pushed around in 
the Chinese view of nature. Because you see, my first 


—119— 


PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 


point as I’ve been saying, is what they mean by nature; 
that it is something that happens of itself—that it has no 
boss. The second point is that it does not. In the sense 
that it doesn’t have a boss, somebody giving orders, 
somebody obeying orders, that leads further to an 
entirely different conception of cause and effect. Cause 
and effect is based on giving orders. When you say, 
‘Something made this happen.” It had to happen 
because of what happened before. The Chinese don’t 
think like that. His idea of causality is called, or the 
concept which does duty for our idea of causality is called 
“mutual arsing.’’ 

Let’s take the relationship between the back and the 
front of anything. Is the back the cause of the front, or is 
the front the cause of the back? What a silly question! If 
things don’t have fronts, then they can’t have backs. If 
they don’t have backs, they can’t have fronts. Front and 
back always go together, that is to say, they come into 
being together. And so, in just the same way as the front 
and the back arise together, the basic sort of Chinese 
Taoist philosophy sees everything in the world coming 
together. 

This is called the Philosophy of Mutual Inter- 
penetration. In Japanese, gi-gi-muge. We’ll go into this in 
detail when we get to nara, because nara is the center of 
Kegon Buddhism, and so, this is the particular 
philosophy which developed gi-gi-muge. But still, it goes 
way back into the history of the Chinese idea of nature. 


—120— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


Now look at it very simply. Let us suppose that you 
had never seen a cat, and one day you were looking 
through a very narrow slit in a fence, and a cat walks by. 
First you see the cat’s head, then there’s a rather non- 
descript fuzzy interval, and a tail follows. And you say, 
‘Marvelous!’’ Then the cat turns ’round and walks back. 
You see the head, and then after a little interval, the tail. 
You say, ‘‘Incredible!’? The cat turns around and walks 
back again, and you see first the head, and then the tail, 
and you say, ‘‘This begins to look like a regularity, there 
must be some order in this phenomenon, because 
whenever I see the thing which I’ve labelled head, | later 
see the thing I’ve labelled tail.”’ 

Therefore, where there is an event which I call head, 
and it’s invariably followed by another event that I call 
tail, obviously head is the cause of tail, and the tail is the 
effect. Now, we think that way about everything. But of 
course, if you suddenly widened up the crack in the 
fence, so that you saw that the head and the tail were all 
one cat, and that the head, and when a cat is born, it’s 
born with a head anda tail, it isn’t that there is a head, and 
then later, a tail. 

So, in exactly the same way, the events that we seem 
to call, ‘separate events,”’ are really all one event, only we 
chop it into pieces to describe it. Like we say, ‘‘The head 
of the cat, and the tail of the cat,”’ although it’s all one cat. 
When we’ve chopped it to pieces, then we suddenly 
forget we did that, and try to explain how they fit 


—121— 


PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 


together—and we invent a myth called “‘causality”’ to 
explain how they do. The reason we chop the world into 
bits is simply for purposes of intellectual convenience. 

For example, our world is through and through 
wiggly, and you notice that very much, how these people, 
although they have models, symmetry and use of space in 
the construction of houses, they love wigglings and their 
garden, you see, is very fundamentally wiggly. They 
appreciate wiggly rocks. I remember so much as a child, 
wondering why Chinese houses all had wiggly roofs, the 
way they were curved. And why the people looked more 
wiggly than our people look. Cause the world is wiggly! 
Now, what are you gonna do witha wiggly world? You’ve 
gotta straighten it out! So we notice that the initial 
solution is to try and straighten it out. 

People, of course, are very wiggly indeed. Only 
because we all appear together, do we look regular. You 
know, we have two eyes, one nose, one mouth, and two 
ears, and so on... We look regular so we make sense. But 
if somebody had never seen a person before, they’d say, 
‘““What’s this extraordinary, amazing, wiggly phen- 
omenon?”’ We are—the world is—wiggly. 

One of the wiggliest things in the world is a fish. 
Somebody once found out they could use a net and catch 
a fish. Then they thought out a much better idea than 
that—they could catch the world with a net. A wiggly 
world. But what happens? Hang up a net in front of the 
world and look through it. What happens? You can 
count the wiggles, by saying, this wiggle goes so many 


—122— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


holes across, so many holes down, so many holes across, 
so many to the left, so many to the right, so many up, so 
many down... What do you have? You have the genesis of 
the calculus. And your net, as it were, breaks up the 
world into countable bits, as we now say in information 
theory, ‘‘We have so many bits of information to 
process.”’ 

In the same way, a bit is a bite. You go to eat chicken, 
you can’t swallow the whole chicken at once, so you’ve 
got to take it in bites. But you don’t get a cut up fryer out 
of the egg. So in the same way the real universe has no 
bits. It’s all one thing, it’s noc alot of things. In order to 
digest it with your mind, which thinks of one thing at a 
time, you’ve got to make a calculus, you’ve got to chop 
the universe into bits, so as to think about it, and talk 
about it. 

You can see this whole fan at once, but if you want to 
talk about it, you have to talk about it bit by bit. Describe 
it, go into the details. What details? Well, so with the 
world. If you don’t realize that’s what you’ve done, that 
you’ve ‘bitted’ the world in order to think about it, it 
isn’t really bitted at all. If you don’t realize that, then you 
have troubles, because then you’ve got to explain how 
the bits go together. How they connect with each other— 
so you invent all sorts of ghosts, called ‘‘Cause and 
Effect”, and influences. The word influence, you know— 
How do | influence you? As if I was something different 
from you. So influences, and ghosts and spooks, all these 


—123— 


PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 


things come into being if we forget that we made the 
initial step of breaking the unity into pieces in order to 
discuss it. 

So then, stepping back again, we have these very, 
very basic principles then. The world as nature, what 
happens of itself, is looked upon asa living organism, and 
it doesn’t have a boss because things are not behaving in 
response to something that pushes them around. They 
are just behaving. And it’s all one, big behavior. Only if 
you want to look at it from certain points of view, you 
can see it as if something else were making something 
happen. But you do that only because you divide the 
thing up. 

‘So now,”’ you say, “final question. Is their nature 
chaotic? Is there no law around here?”’ There is not one 
single Chinese word that means the Law of Nature, as we 
use it. The only word in Chinese that means law as we use 
it is a word tse, and this word is a character which 
represents a cauldron witha knife beside it. And this goes 
back to the fact that in very ancient times, whena certain 
emperor made laws for the people, he had the laws etched 
on the sacrificial cauldrons, so that when the people 
brought the sacrifices they would read what was written 
on the cauldrons. And so this word, tse. But the sages, 
who were of a Taoist feeling at the time that this emperor 
lived said, ‘‘You shouldn’t have done that, sir. Because 
the moment the people know what the law is, they 
develop a little dis-spirit. And they’ll say, ‘Well now, did 


=i24= 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


you mean this precisely, did you mean that precisely. 
And we'll find a way of wrangling around it.’ ’’ So they 
said that the nature of nature, Tao, is wut-se, which means 
lawless, but in that sense of law. 

But to say that nature is lawless is not to say that it's 
chaotic. Now the Chinese word here for the order of 
nature is called in Japanese ri, Chinese li. Ri, is a curious 
word, it originally meant ‘the markings in jade, the grain 
in wood, or the fibre in muscle.’’ Now when you look at 
jade, you see it has this wonderful, mottled markings in 
it. And you know, somehow and you can’t explain why, 
those mottlings are not chaotic. When you look at the 
patterns of clouds, or the patterns of foam on the water, 
isn’t it astounding, they never, never make an aesthetic 
mistake. 

Look at the way the stars are arranged, or they’re not 
arranged! They’re just like, they seem to be scattered 
through the sky like spray. But would you ever criticize 
the stars for being in poor taste? When you look at a 
mountain range—it’s perfect. But somehow, this 
spontaneous, wiggly arrangement of nature is quite 
different from anything we would call a mess. 

Look at an ashtray, full of cigarette butts and 
screwed bits of paper. Look at some modern painting, 
where people have gone out of their way to create the 
expensive messes. You see, they’re different. And this is 
the joke, that we can’t put our finger on what the 
difference is, although we jolly well know it. We can’t 
define it. If we could define it... in other words, if we 


—125— 


PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 


could define aesthetic beauty, it would cease to be 
interesting. In other words, if we could have a method 
that would automatically produce great artists, anybody 
could goto school and become a great artist. Their work 
would be the most boring kind of kittsch. But just 
because you don’t know how it’s done, that gives it an 
excitement. 

And so it is with this. There is no formula, that is to 
say, no tse—no rule according to which all this happens. 
And yet it’s not a mess. So this idea of ri, (you can 
translate the word ri as organic pattern). And this riis the 
word that they use for the order of nature, instead of our 
idea of law, where the things are obeying something. If 
they are not obeying a governor, inthe sense of God, they 
are obeying principles, like a streetcar. Do you know that 
limerick? 

There was a young man who said, ‘‘Damn!”’ 

For it certainly seems that I am 

A creature that moves, in determinate grooves 

I’m not even a bus, I’m a tram! 

So that idea of the iron rails, along which the course 
of life goes is absent here. And that is why basically, this 
accounts for Chinese and Japanese humanism. And here 
(this is very important), there’s a basic humanism to this 
culture. The people in this culture, Chinese and Japanese 
don’t feel guilty ever. They feel ashamed, yes.. of 
something. Ashamed because they have transgressed 
social requirements. But they are incapable of a sense of 


—126— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


“Sin’’. They don’t feel, in other words that you are guilty 
because you exist, you Owe your existence to the Lord 
God, and you were a mistake anyway! You know? They 
don’t feel that. They have social shame, but not 
metaphysical guilt, and that leads to a great relaxation. 
And you can sense it if you’re sensitive, just walking 
around the streets. You realize that these people have not 
been tarred with that terrible monotheistic brush which 
gives them the sense of guilt. 

They work on the supposition that human nature, 
like all nature is basically good. It consists in it’s good- 
bad. It consists in the passions as much as the virtues. In 
Chinese there’s a word un. I don’t know how it’s 
pronounced in Japanese. I’ll write it backwards. How do 
pronounce that in Japanese? This means human- 
heartedness, humane-ness. Not in the sense of being 
humane in the sense of being kind necessarily, but of 
being human. So I'say, ‘Oh, he’s a great human being,”’ 
means that’s the kind of person who’s notastuffed shirt, 
who is able to come off it, who can talk with you ona 
man-to-man basis, who recognizes along with you that he 
is a rascal, too. And so people, men for example, when 
they each affectionately call a friend of theirs, ‘SHi, you 
old bastard, how you getting on?” This is a term of 
endearment, because they know that he shares with them 
what I call the ‘'Element of Irreducible Rascality’’—that 
we all have. 


—127— 


a 


PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 


So then, if a person has this attitude, he is never 
going to be an over-weaning goody-goody. Confucius 
said, ‘‘Goody-goodies are the thieves of virtue.’’ Because 
you see, if lam right, then you are wrong. And we get into 
a fight. WhatI am is a crusader against the wrong, and I’m 
going to obliterate you, or I’m going to demand your 
unconditional surrender. But if I say, ‘‘No, I’m not right, 
and you’re not wrong but | happen to want to carry off 
your women. You know, you've got the most beautiful 
girls and I’m going to fight you for them. If I had done 
that, I would be very careful not to kill the girls.”’ 

In modern war we don’t care. The only people who 
are safe are in the Air Force! They’re way up there, you 
know, or else they’ve got subterranean caves they’re in— 
women and children be gone! They can be frizzled with a 
Hiroshima bomb. But we sit in the plane and be safe. 
Now this is inhumane because we are fighting 
ideologically, instead of for practical things like food, 
and possessions, and being greedy. So that’s why the 
Confucian would say he trusts human passions more 
than he trusts human virtues: righteousness, goodness, 
principles, and all that high-fallutin’ abstractions. Let’s 
get down to earth, let’s come off it. 

So then, this is why the kind of man in whom the 
kind of nature, the kind of human nature in which trust is 
put. Because you see, look, if you are like the Christians 
and the Jews—not so much the Jews, but mostly the 
Christians—who don’t trust human nature, who say, 


—128— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


“It’s fallen, it’s evil, it’s perverse,’’ that puts you ina very 
funny position. Because if you say, ‘‘Human nature is not 
to be trusted,’ you can’t even trust the fact that you don’t 
trust it! See where you’ll end out? You’ll end out in a 
hopelessness! 

Now it’s true, human nature is not always 
trustworthy, but you must proceed on the gamble that 
it’s trustworthy most of the time, or even 51% of the 
time. Because if you don’t, what’s your alternative? You 
have to have a police state. Everybody has to be watched 
and controlled, and then who’s going to watch the police? 
And so, you end up this way, in China just before 250 
B.C., there was a short-lived dynasty called the Ching 
Dynasty that lasted fifteen years. And the man decided 
who was the emperor of there, that he would rule 
everybody. Everything would be completely controlled, 
and his dynasty would last for a thousand years. And it 
was a mess. So the Hun Dynasty, which lasted from 250 
B.C. to 250 A.D. came into being, and the first thing they 
did was to abolish all laws, except about two. Q, What 
were those? A. You know, elementary violence... you 
mustn’t go around killing people and things like that, or 
robbing, but all the complexity of law. And this Hun 
Dynasty marked the height of Chinese civilization—the 
real period of great, great sophistication and peace... 
China’s Golden Age. I may be over-simplifying it of 
course, but all historians do. But this, this was a 
marvelous thing you see. It’s based on this whole idea of 


—129— 


PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 


the humanism of the Far East—that although human 
beings are skalliwags, they are no more so than cats, and 
dogs, and birds and you must trust human nature. 
Because if you can’t, you’re apt to starve. 

I’ve talked for long enough. What I suggest is, in 
these seminars that we havea brief intermissionso we can 
stretch for five minutes or so, and then we finish this at 1 
o’clock, but you can come back and ask questions in 
about 5 minutes time. 


—130— 


a; 


TRIBUTE TO 
CARL JUNG 


] am sitting late at night, in a lonely cottage in the 
country, surrounded by many favorite books which 
I’ve collected over a number of years. And asI look up at 
the shelves I see that there’s a very large space occupied 
by the volumes of one man—Carl Gustav Jung, who left 
this world not more than a few weeks ago. I’d like to talk 
tonight about some of the great things that I feel Jung has 
done for me, and also the things which I feel to be his 
enduring contributions toward the science of psych- 
ology, of which he was such a great master. 

I began to read Jung when I first began to study 
Eastern philosophy in my late adolescence, and I’m 
eternally grateful to him for what I would call a sort of 
balancing influence on the development of my thought. 
As an adolescent, in rebellion against the sterile 
Christianity in which I was brought up, | was liable to go 
absolutely overboard for exotic and foreign ideas until | 


—133— 


TRIBUTE TO CARL JUNG 


read the extraordinarily wise commentary that he wrote 
to Richard Wilhelm’s translation of the Chinese Taoist 
text called, The Secret of the Golden Flower. It was Jung 
who helped me to remind myself that I was, by 
upbringing and by tradition, always a Westerner, and | 
couldn’t escape from my own cultural conditioning. This 
inability to escape was not a kind of prison, but was the 
endowment of one’s being with certain capacities, like 
one’s arms and legs, and mouth, and teeth, and brain, 
which could always be used constructively. I feel it’s for 
this reason that I have always remained, for myself, in the 
position of the comparative philosopher, wanting to 
balance East and West rather than to go overboard with 
enthusiasm for exotic imports. There are aspects of 
Jung’s work far beyond this that I want to discuss. 
First of all, I want to call attention to one 
fundamental principle that underlies all his work, and 
that was most extraordinarily exemplified in Jung, 
himself, as a person. This is what I would call his 
recognition of the polarity of life. That is to say, his 
resistance to what is, to my mind, the disastrous and 
absurd hypothesis that there is in this universe, a radical 
and absolute conflict between good and evil—light and 
darkness that can never, never, never be harmonized. 
Obviously, when certain crimes and catastrophes 
occur, human emotions are deeply and rightly aroused. 
And | would, for myself say, that were I in any situation 
where inhuman acts were occuring, I would be roused to 


it 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


a degree of fury that I can hardly imagine in my present 
existence. But I know it would come out from me. | 
would oppose those sorts of atrocities with all the energy 
that I have, and if I was trapped in such a situation, I 
would fight it to the end. But at the same time, I would 
recognize the relativity of my own _ emotional 
involvement. I would know that I was fighting in the 
same way, Shall we say, that a spider figts a wasp, insects 
which naturally prey upon one another, and fight one 
another. But as a human being I would not be able to 
regard my adversary as a metaphysical devil—that is to 
say, one who represented the principle of absolute and 
unresolvable evil. 

I think this isthe most important thing in Jung—that 
he was able to point out that to the degree that you 
condemn others, and find evil in others, you are, to that 
degree, unconscious of the same thing in yourself—or at 
least of the potentiality of it. There can be dictators and 
tyrants, just because there are people who are 
unconscious of their own dark sides, and they project 
that darkness outward to whatever enemy there may be. 
And they say, ‘‘There is the darkness. It is not in me, and 
therefore because the darkness is not in me, I am justified 
in annihilating this enemy whether it be with atom 
bombs or gas chambers, or what-not.’”’ To the degree that 
a person becomes conscious that the evil is as much in 
himself as in the other, to this same degree he is not likely 
to project it on to some scapegoat, and commit the 
criminal acts of violence upon other people. 


—135— 


TRIBUTE TO CARL JUNG 


Now this is to me the primary thing that Jung saw: 
that in order to admit, and really accept and understand 
the evil in oneself, one had to be able to do it without 
being an enemy to it. As he put it, you had to accept your 
own dark side. And he had this preeminently in his own 
character. 

I had a long talk with him back in 1958, and I was 
enormously impressed with one who’s obviously very 
great, but at the same time with whom everyone could be 
completely at ease. There are so many great people, great 
in knowledge, or great in what is called holiness, with 
whom the ordinary individual feels rather embarrassed. 
He feels inclined to sit on the edge of his chair, and feel 
immediately judged by this person’s wisdom or sanctity. 

Jung managed to have wisdom, and I think also 
sanctity, in such a way that when other people came into 
it’s presence they didn’t feel judged. They felt enhanced, 
encouraged, and invited to share in a common life. And 
there was a sort of twinkle in Jung’s eye that gave me the 
impression that he knew himself to be just as much a 
villain as everybody else. There’s a nice German word, 
hintergedanker, which means, athought in the very far, far 
back of your mind. Jung had a hintergedanker in the back 
of his mind which showed in the twinkle in his eye. It 
showed that he knew and recognized what I sometimes 
call, ‘The Element of Irreducible Rascality” in himself. 
And he knew it so strongly, and so clearly, and in a way, 
so lovingly, that he would not condemn the same thing in 
others, and therefore would not be led into those 


—136— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


thoughts, feelings, and acts of violence towards others, 
which are always characteristic of the people who project 
the devil in themselves upon the outside, upon 
somebody else, upon the scapegoat. 

Now this made Jung a very integrated character. In 
other words, he was a man who was thoroughly with 
himself. Having seen and accepted his own nature 
profoundly, he had a kind of unity and absence of 
conflict in his own nature, which had this additional 
complication that I find so fascinating. He was the sort of 
man who could feel anxious, and afraid, and guilty, 
without being ashamed of feeling this way. In other 
words, he understood that an integrated person is not a 
person who simply eliminated the sense of guilt, or the 
sense of anxiety from his life—who is fearless, and 
wooden, and a kind of sage of stone. He’s a person who 
feels all these things, but has no recrimination against 
himself for feeling them. 

This is to my mind a profound kind of humor. As 
you know, in humor, there’s always a certain element of 
malice. There was atalk givenonthe Pacifica stations just 
a little while ago, which was an interview with Al Capp, 
who made the point that he felt that all humor was 
fundamentally malicious. Now there’s a very high kind of 
humor, which is to laugh at oneself. The real humor is 
not jokes at the expense of others, it’s always jokes at the 
expense of oneself, and of course it has an element of 
malice in it. It has malice towards oneself: the recognition 
of the fact that behind the social role that you assume— 


—137— 


TRIBUTE TO CARL JUNG 


behind all your pretentions to being either a good citizen, 
or a fine scholar, or a great scientist, or a leading 
politician, or physician, or whatever you happen to be— 
behind this facade, there is a certain element of the 
unreconstructed bum. Not as something to be 
condemned and wailed over, but as something to be 
recognized as contributive to one’s greatness, and to 
one’s positive aspect, in the same way that manure is 
contributive to the perfume of the rose. Jung saw this, 
and Jung accepted this. 

I want to read a passage from one of his lectures, 
which I think is one of the greatest things he ever wrote, 
and which has been a very marvelous thing for me. It was 
in a lecture he delivered to a group of clergy in 
Switzerland, a considerable number of years ago, and he 
writes as follows: 

“People forget that even doctors have moral 
scruples, and that certain patients’ confessions are hard, 
even for a doctor to swallow, yet the patient does not feel 
himself accepted unless the very worst in him is accepted 
too. No one can bring this about by mere words, it comes 
only through reflection, and through the doctor’s 
attitude towards himself, and his own dark side. 

If the doctor wants to guide another, or even 
accompany him a step of the way, he must feel with that 
person’s psyche. He never feels it when he passes 
judgement. Whether he puts his judgements into words, 
or keeps them to himself makes not the slightest 


- —138— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


difference. To take the opposite position, and to agree 
with the person offhand, is also of no use, but estranges 
him as much as condemnation. 

Feeling comes only through unprejudiced 
objectivity. This sounds almost like a scientific precept, 
and it could be confused with a purely intellectual, 
abstract attitude of mind, but what 1 mean is something 
quite different. It is a human quality, a kind of deep 
respect for the facts, for the man who suffers from them, 
and for the riddle of such a man’s life. The truly religious 
person has this attitude. He knows that God has brought 
all sorts of strange and inconceivable things to pass, and 
seeks in the most curious ways to enter a man’s heart. He 
therefore senses in everything the unseen presence of the 
Divine Will. This is what I mean by “Unprejudiced 
Objectivity.” It is a moral achievement on the part of the 
doctor, who ought not to let himself be repelled by 
sickness and corruption. 

We cannot change anything unless we accept it. 
Condemnation does not liberate—it oppresses. And 1am 
the oppressor of the person I condemn, not his friend 
and fellow sufferer. I do not in the least mean to say that 
we must never pass judgement when we desire to help 
and improve, but if the doctor wishes to help a human 
being, he must be able to accept him as he is, and he can 
do this in reality, only when he has already seen and 
accepted himself as he is. Perhaps this sounds very 
simple, but simple things are always the most difficult. In 


—139— 


TRIBUTE TO CARL JUNG 


actual life, it requires the greatest art to be simple, and so 
acceptance of oneself is the essence of the moral 
problem, and the acid test of one’s whole outlook on life. 

That I feed the beggar, that I forgive an insult, that I 
love my enemy in the name of Christ—all these are 
undoubtedly great virtues. What I do unto the least of 
my brethren, that I do unto Christ. But what if I should 
discover that the least among them all, the poorest of all 
beggars, the most impudent of all offenders, yea, the very 
fiend himself, that these are within me, and that I myself 
stand in need of the arms of my own kindness, that I 
myself am the enemy who must be loved. What then? 
Then, as a rule, the whole truth of Christianity is 
reversed. There is then, no more talk of love and long- 
suffering. We say to the brother within us, ‘‘Rerrr...’’, 
and condemn and rage against ourselves. We hide him 
from world, we deny ever having met this least among the 
lowly in ourselves, and had it been God himself who 
drew near to us in this despicable form, we should have 
denied him a thousand times before a single cock had 
crowed.”’ 

Well, you may think the metaphors rather strong, 
but I feel that they are not so needlessly, this is a very, 
very forceful passage—and a memorable one in all Jung’s 
works. Trying to heal this insanity from which our 
culture in particular has suffered, of thinking that a 
human being can become hail, healthy, and holy by being 
divided against himself in inner conflict, paralleling the 


—140— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


conception of a cosmic conflict between an absolute 
good and an absolute evil, which cannot be reduced to 
any prior and underlying unity. 

In other words, our rage, and our very proper rage, 
against evil things which occur in this world must not 
over-step itself. For if we require, as a justification for 
our rage, a fundamental and metaphysical division 
between good and evil, we have an insane, and in acertain 
sense, schizophrenic universe, of which no_ sense 
whatsoever can be made. All conflict, Jung was saying, all 
opposition has its resolution in an underlying unity. You 
cannot understand the meaning of ‘'to be,’”’ unless you 
understand the meaning of ‘‘not to be.’’ You cannot 
understand the meaning of good, unless you understand 
the meaning of evil. Even St. Thomas Aquinas saw this. 
For he said that just as the silent pause which gives 
sweetness to the chant, so it is suffering, and so it is evil 
which makes possible the recognition of virtue. This is 
not, as Jung tries to explain, a philosophy of condoning 
the evil. To take the opposite position, he said, to agree 
with the patient off-hand is also of no use. That estranges 
him, the doctor, and estranges him, the patient, as much 
as condemnation. 

Let me continue further reading from. this 
extraordinary passage. ‘Healing may be called,’’ Jung 
says, ‘‘a religious problem. In the sphere of social or 
national relations, the state of suffering may be civil war, 
and this state is to be cured by the Christian virtue of 
forgiveness and love of one’s enemies. That which we 


=141=— 


TRIBUTE TO CARL JUNG 


recommend, with the conviction of good Christians, is 
applicable to external situations. We must also apply it 
inwardly in the treatment of neurosis. This is why 
modern man has heard enough about guilt and sin. He is 
sorely beset by his own bad conscience, and wants rather, 
to know how he is to reconcile himself with his own 
nature—how he is to love the enemy in his own heart, 
and call the wolf his brother. The modern man does not 
want to know in what way he can imitate Christ, but in 
what way he can live his own individual life, however 
meager and uninteresting it may be. 

It is because every form of imitation seems to him 
deadening and sterile, that he rebels against the force of 
tradition that would hold him to well-trodden ways. All 
such roads, to him, lead in the wrong direction. He may 
not know it, but he behaves as if his own individual life 
were God’s special will which must be fulfilled at all 
costs. This is the source of his egoism, which is one of the 
most tangible evils of the neurotic state. But the person 
who tells him he is too egoistic has already lost his 
confidence, and rightly so, for that person has driven him 
still further into his neurosis. If 1 wish to effect a cure for 
my patients, I am forced to acknowledge the deep 
significance of their egoism. 

I should be blind indeed if I did not recognize it as a 
true will of God. I must even help the person to prevail in 
his egoism. If he succeeds in this, he estranges himself 
from other people—he drives them away, andthey come 
to themselves, as they should—for they were seeking to 


[497 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


rob him of his sacred egoism. This must be left to him, 
for it is his strongest and healthiest power. It is, as ] have 
said, a true will of God, which sometimes drives him into 
complete isolation. However wretched this state may be, 
it also stands him in good stead for inthis way alone, can 
he get to know himself, and learn what an invaluable 
treasure is the love of his fellow beings. It is, moreover, 
only in the state of complete abandonment and 
loneliness that we experience the helpful powers of our 
own natures.’”’ End of quote. 

This is a very striking example of Jung’s power to 
comprehend and integrate points of view, as well as 
psychological attitudes that seem on the surface to be 
completely antithetical. For example, even in his own 
work, when devoting himself to the study of Eastern 
philosophy, he had some difficulty in comprehending 
the, let’s say, Buddhistic denial of the reality of the ego. 
But you can see that in practice what he was actually 
trying to get at, was moving towards the same position 
that was intended in both the Hindu and the Buddhist 
philosophy about the nature of the ego. 

Just for example, as the Hindu will say that the ‘‘I’’ 
principle in man, it is not really a separate ego, but an 
expression of the universal life of Brahman, or the God- 
head. So Jung is saying here, that the development of the 
ego in man is a true will of God. And it is only by 
following the ego and developing it to its full extent, that 
one fulfills the function which, you might say, is a 
temporary illusion in man’s psychic life. He goes on and 


—143— 


TRIBUTE TO CARL JUNG 


says: ‘‘When one has several times seen this development 
at work, one can no longer deny that what was evil has 
turned to good, and that which seemed good has kept 
alive the forces of evil. The arch-demon of egoism leads 
us along the royal road to that in-gathering which 
religious experience demands. What we observe here is a 
fundamental law of life. And it is this that makes possible 
the reunion of the warring halves of the personality, and 
thereby brings the civil war to an end.”’ End of quote. 

In other words, he was seeing that, as Blake said, “A 
fool who persists in his folly will become wise.’’ That the 
development of egoism in man is not something to be 
overcome or better integrated by opposition to it, but by 
following it. It’s almost, isn’t it, the principle of Judo— 
not overcoming what appears to be a hostile force by 
opposing it, but by swinging with the punch, or rolling 
with the punch. And so, by following the ego, the ego 
transcends itself, and in this moment of insight the great 
Westerner, who comes out of the whole tradition of 
human personality, which centers it upon the ego, upon 
individual separateness, by going along consistently with 
this principle, comes to the same position as the 
Easterner. That is to say, to the point of view where one 
sees conflict, which at first sight had seemed absolute, as 
resting upon a primordial unity, and thereby attaining a 
profound, unshakeable, peace of the heart, which can 
nevertheless contain conflict, not a peace that is simply 
static and lifeless, but a peace that passes understanding. 


=144= 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


Jung began to see them, | think, in a primitive way. I 
think his archetypes are perhaps still not at the deepest 
level of the patterns that underly the world—and it’s 
interesting that in the C.G. Jung commentary, that he 
wrote to a translation of a Chinese classic by Richard 
Wilhelm, called, The Secret of the Golden Flower. You may 
remember that in that commentary he takes out the very 
fascinating problem of the dangers inherent in the 
adoption of Oriental ways of life by Westerners—but 
more particularly, the adoption of Oriental spiritual 
practices such as Yoga. I remember | learned a great deal 
from that essay, and appreciated it very much in ever so 
many ways, because even in my own fascination with 
forms of Oriental philosophy, I’ve never been tempted to 
forget that I’m a Westerner. But, as I think this essay 
over, I’m not sure that Jung discouraged the practice of 
Yoga for quite the right reasons. 

I’ve found so often, the difficulty in Jung’s ideas lies 
in his theory of history, which is, I feel, a hang-over from 
19th century theories of history encouraged by 
Darwinism. Namely that there’s a sort of orderly 
progression from the ape, through the primitive, to the 
civilized man. And of course, naturally, at that time, that 
was all hitched in with the theory of progress. It was 
highly convenient for the cultures of Western Europe, 
which were then one up on everybody else, to consider 
themselves in the line of progress. When they visited the 
natives of Borneo and Australia, and so on, they would 


145 


TRIBUTE TO CARL JUNG 


feel that they were perfectly justified in appropriating 
their lands, and dominating them, because they were 
giving them the benefits of the last word in evolution. 

Therefore, under the influence of that sort of theory 
of history, which is felt in the work of both Freud and 
Jung, one gets the feeling of there being a kind of 
progressive development of human consciousness. Jung 
is charitable enough to assume that because the Chinese 
and Indian are immeasurably older than ours, they’ve 
had the possibility of far more sophistication in psychic 
development, even though he feels, and probably rightly, 
that there are things they can learn from us. But the 
reason why he discourages the Westerner from the 
practice of Yoga is, he says, ‘‘This is a discipline for a far 
older culture than ours, which along certain lines, has 
progressed much further, and has learned certain things 
that we haven’t mastered at all yet.’’ And as he points out, 
when somebody embraces Vedanta, or Theosophy, or 
any Yoga school in the West, and tries to master a 
discipline of concentration in which they have to oust 
from their consciousness all wandering thoughts, he says 
that this, fora Westerner, may be a very dangerous thing 
indeed—because just exactly what the Westerner may 
need to do, is to allow free reign to his wandering 
thoughts, and his imagination, and his fantasy. Because 
it’s only in this way that he can get in touch with his 
unconscious, and that his unconscious will not leave him 
in peace until he gets in touch with it. And Jung assumes 
the members of Oriental cultures have done this long 
before they went in for Yoga practice. 


46 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


Now I don’t think this is quite true. But I do think 
there are other reasons why Western people need to 
exercise a good deal of discrimination and caution in 
adopting Eastern disciplines and ways of life. In other 
words, it’s rather like the problem of taking medicine. 
You know, if you don’t feel very well, and you go toa 
friend’s medicine cabinet, and you sort of look it over, 
and you see bottles of medicine in there, and you say, 
‘I’m sick, I need medicine.’’ So you take some medicine, 
any medicine will do—but it won’t. And according to 
what’s the matter with you, so the medicine has to be 
prescribed. 

I don’t think that the things which some of the 
Eastern disciplines are designed to cure are quite the 
same things that we need. It’s fundamental to my view of 
the nature of such forms of discipline as Buddhism and 
Taoism, that there are ways of liberation from a specific 
kind of confinement. That is to say, there are ways of 
liberation from what I’ve sometimes called the social 
hypnosis. 

Every culture and every society as a group of people 
in communication with each other has certain rules of 
communication, and from culture to culture these rules 
differ in just the same way that languages differ. And a 
culture can hold together on very, very different kinds of 
rules. I won’t say any kinds of rules, but very different 
kinds of rules, always provided that the members agree 
about them, whether they’re forced to agree, whether 


=iAT= 


TRIBUTE TO CARL JUNG 


they agree tacitly, or whatever the reason may be. These 
rules are, in a way, very much like the rules of a game. In 
other words, take a game like chess. You can have the 
kind of chess we play, with an eight-square board, or you 
can have the kind of chess that the Japanese play with a 
nine-square board. It doesn’t make any difference, so 
long as you both play on the same board and by the same 
rules. Chess is a game, and in the same way the 
development of humancultures is also ina way agame— 
that is to say, the elaboration of a form of life and the fun 
of it, in a way, is the fun of elaborating it in just some 
interesting form, as the same is the fun of a game. The fun 
of a game is that it has a certain interest. But it doesn’t 
follow that the rules of the game correspond to the actual 
structure of human nature, or to the laws of the universe. 
Because in every culture it’s necessary to impress upon 
especially its younger members that these rules jolly well 
have to be kept, they are usually, in some way or other 
connected with the laws of the universe, and given some 
sort of divine sanction. There are indeed cultures in 
which the senior members of the group realize that that’s 
a hoax, that that’s as if it’s made-up, and is doneto terrify 
the young. When they become senior members of the 
culture themselves, they see through the thing, but they 
don’t let on, they keep it quiet. They don’t let out to 
those who are supposed to be impressed that this was 
really a hoax to get them to behave. 


—148— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


Well anyway, after a great deal of careful study I’ve 
come to the conclusion that the function of these ways of 
liberation is basically to make it possible for those who 
have the determination (and we’ll see why in a while), to 
be free from the social hypnosis. 

If you were a member of the culture of India at 
almost any time between maybe 900 B.C. and 1800 
A.D., it would be, for you, a matter of common sense, 
about which everybody agreed, that you were under the 
control of a process called Karma. Not exactly a law of 
cause and effect, but a process of cosmic justice whereby 
every fortune that occurred to you would be the result of 
some action in the past that was good, and every 
misfortune that occurred to you would be the result of 
some action in the past that was evil. Furthermore, that 
this action in the past might not have been done in this 
present life, but in a former life. It was simply axiomatic 
to those people that they were involved in a long, long 
process of reincarnation, reaping the rewards and 
punishments. There was not only the possibility of being 
reincarnated again in the human form, but if you were 
exceedingly good, you might be born in one of the 
heavens, the paradises, and if you were exceedingly bad 
you might be born for an insufferable period of years, not 
forever, in a purgatory. The purgatories of the Hindus 
and Buddhists are just as ingeniously horrible as those of 
the Christians. 


= 440 


TRIBUTE TO CARL JUNG 


Well, of course, everybody knows, I mean anybody 
who seems to have any sense, that all this imagination of 
post-mortem courts of justice is a way of telling people, 
“Well, if the secular police don’t catch you, the celestial 
police will, and therefore you had better behave!”’ It’s an 
ingenious device for encouraging ethical conduct. 

Now remember, for a person brought up in that 
climate of feeling where everybody believes this to be 
true, it seems a matter of sheer common sense that it’s so, 
and it’s very difficult for a person so brought up not to 
believe that is the state of affairs. Take an equivalent 
situation in our own culture. It’s still enormously 
difficult for most people to believe that space may not be 
Newtonian space, that is to say, a three-dimensional 
continuum that extends indefinitely forever. The idea of 
a four-dimensional curve seems absolutely fantastic, and 
can’t even be conceived by people unversed in the 
mathematics of modern physics. Or again as I’ve often 
pointed out, it’s very difficult for us to believe that the 
forms of nature are not made of some stuff called matter. 
That’s a very unnecessary idea from a strictly scientific 
point of view, but it’s awfully difficult for us to believe it. 
To believe, in other words, that there isn’t this 
underlying stuff. Not so long ago it was practically 
impossible for people to conceive that the planets did not 
revolve around the earth encased in crystalline spheres. It 
took a very considerable shaking of the imagination 
when astronomers began to point out that this need not 
necessarily be so. 


—150— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


All right, so now let’s go back to the problem of 
somebody living in the culture of ancient India. Here it is, 
it’s a matter of common sense, you see, that he is going to 
be reborn. Now, for some perhaps exceedingly intelligent 
person, who for one reason or another discovers that this 
idea is not so. After all, when you get such disciplines as 
Vedanta and Buddhism, they say that the ultimate goal of 
the discipline is a release from the rounds of rebirth, and 
incidentally also (which is fundamental to it), a release 
from the illusion that you are a separate individual 
confined to this body. But so far as both of these things 
are concerned, they also say that the person who is 
liberated from the round of rebirth, as well as from the 
illusion of being an ego, sees that when he is liberated, the 
process of rebirth and the whole cosmology of 
reincarnation and karma, as well as the individual ego, 
are in a way illusions. That is to say, he sees that they are 
maya. 

I would like to translate maya at this moment, not so 
much illusion as a playful construct, a social institution. 
So he sees, you see, that those things are not so, they are 
only pretended to be so. And you see, he ceases to believe 
in karma and reincarnation and all that in exactly the 
same way thata modern agnostic no longer believes in the 
resurrection of the body on the Day of Judgement. | 
know this to be so because, although you will get very 
many Hindus and Buddhists who say that they believe in 
reincarnation and come over here and teachas part of the 
doctrine of Vedanta or Buddhism, the most 


—151— 


TRIBUTE TO CARL JUNG 


sophisticated and the most profound (I’ll say perhaps 
profound, rather than sophisticated) Buddhists that I 
have known, have said that they don’t believe in it 
literally at all. And so! could say, those that do believe in 
it, believe in it simply because it’s part of their culture, 
and they’ve not yet been able to be liberated from it. It 
seems to me very funny indeed when Western people 
who become interested in Vedanta or Buddhism—in 
forms of discipline to liberate Hindus and Chinese 
people from certain social institutions— Western people 
adopt it, and then also adopt the ideas of reincarnation 
and karma—from which these systems were designed to 
liberate them! Of course they adopt them because they 
feel it’s consoling that one will go on living. That wasn’t 
the point at all. Or, that it explains something—that why 
one suffered in this life was not because the universe was 
unjust, but because you committed some misdeed in the 
past. 

And so, Westerners who take up the Oriental 
doctrines in that spirit, unfortunately take up the very 
illusions ‘from which these documents were supposed to 
be ways of deliverance. Now that may be difficult to see, 
just because so many practicing Hindus and Buddhists 
say they believe in reincarnation, and this whole process 
of the cycles of karma and so on. They after all, are 
practicing it, and they should know. When I look here, 
there’s a certain good reason why they shouldn’t. Of 
course I’m making an exception of the Indian or Chinese 
who’s been educated in Western style. He ceases to 


—152— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


believe maybe in the cosmologies of his own culture, but 
he’s not liberated in the Buddhist sense, because in 
receiving a Western education he’s become a victim of 
our social institutions instead, and then he’s just 
exchanged, as it were, one trouble for another. But, when 
you take the situation as it stands, or as it did stand in 
India, isolated from Western culture, obviously no 
society can tolerate within its own borders the existence 
of a way of liberation, a way of seeing through its 
institutions, without feeling that such a way constitutes a 
threat to Law and Order. 

Anybody who sees through the institutions of 
society, and sees them for, as it were, created fictions, (in 
the same way as a novel or a work of art is a created 
fiction). Anybody who sees that, of course could be 
regarded by the society as a potential menace. But then 
you may ask, ‘‘But if Buddhism and Vedanta, and so on 
were indeed ways of liberation, how could Indian or 
Cninese society, or Burmese society have tolerated their 
presence?”’ Well, the answer lies simply in the much 
misunderstood esotericism of these disciplines. In other 
words, those who taught them, the Masters of these 
disciplines, made it incredibly difficult for uninitiated 
people to get in on the inside. 

Their method of initiating them, in a way, was to put 
them through trap, after trap, after trap, to see if they 
could find their way through. Such a master would not 
dream of beginning by disabusing the neophyte, and 
saying, ‘Well you know, all these things you heard from 


—153— 


TRIBUTE TO CARL JUNG 


your father and mother and teachers and so on were 
fairytales.’? Oh no, indeed! He would do what is called in 
Buddhism, exercise the use of Upaya. It’s aSanskrit word 
meaning, ‘skillful devices,’ or ‘skillful means,’ some- 
times described as giving a child a yellow leaf to stop it 
crying for gold. After all, when you approach one of 
these ways of liberation from the outside, it looks like 
something very, very fantastic. 

Here you are literally going to be released from a 
literally, true and physical cycle of endless incarnations 
in Heavens, and Hells and all kinds of states. Therefore, 
naturally to do that the neophyte is ready for almost 
anything. And what an undertaking that must be. Whata 
wonderful, extraordinary person you’ve got to become. 
The teacher, because the fundamental problem in this 
whole thing is for him to get rid of the illusion, you see, 
that he’s a separate ego. If there’s no separate ego, or sort 
of soul, then there’s nothing to be reincarnated. The 
teacher has all kinds of complicated ways of doing it, but 
all that he really says to him is: ‘'Well now, if you will 
look deeply into your ego you will find out that it is a 
non-ego, that yourself is the Universal Self,’’ as he might 
say if he were a Vedantist. Or, if he were a Buddhist he 
might say, ‘If you look for your ego, you won’t find it— 
so look for it, and see, and really go into it.’”’ And so he 
gets the man meditating, and trying by his ego to get rid of 
his ego. 


64 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


Well, that is a beautiful trap. It can last forever— 
until one sees through it. In other words, this is like 
trying to, you know, sweep the darkness out of a room 
with a broom. Chuang-Tse had a nice figure for it: 
‘‘beating a drum in search of a fugitive.’’ That’s tosay you 
know, when the police go out because they had a 
telephone call that was a burglar. They come racing to the 
house with the siren, full blast, and the burglar hears it 
and runs away. Because, of course, to try and get rid of 
the ego for one’s advantage in some way, is an egotistic 
enterprise, and you can’t do it. And so of course, the 
student gets to the point where he begins to realize that 
everything he does to get rid of his ego is egotistic. This is 
the kind of trap in which the teacher gets him—until of 
course, he comes to the point of seeing that his supposed 
division from himself into say, ‘I’? and ‘me’’, the 
controller controlling part of me, and the controlled part 
of me, the knower’and the known, and all that, is phony. 

There’s no way of standing aside from yourself, in 
other words and as it were, ‘‘changing yourself”’ in that 
way. But he discovers this finally, and at the same time he 
discovers, almost at the last minute you might say, the 
fallacy, (or rather the fantasy nature), the game-like 
nature of the system of cosmology which has existed to 
give the basic form of the social institutions of his 
particular culture or society. 

In other words, you may put it in another way. One 
of the basic things which all social rules of convention 
conceal is what 1 would call the fundamental fellowship 


—155— 


TRIBUTE TO CARL JUNG 


between yes and no. Say in the Chinese symbolism of the 
positive and the negative, the Yang and the Yin, (you 
know you’ve seen that symbol of them together like two 
interlocked fishes), well, the great game, the whole 
pretense of most societies is that these two fishes are 
involved in a battle. There’s the up fish and the down 
fish, the good fish and the bad fish. And they’re out for 
killing. And the white fish is one of these days gonna slay 
the black fish. But when you see into it clearly, you realize 
that the white fish and the black fish go together. They’re 
twins, they’re really not fighting each other—they’re 
dancing with each other. 

That you see though, is a difficult thing to realize in a 
set of rules in which yes and no are the basic, and 
formally opposed terms. When it is explicit in a set of 
rules that yes and no, or positive and negative are the 
fundamental principles. It is implicit, but not explicit, 
that there is this fundamental bondage, or fellowship 
between the two. The theory is, you see, that if people 
find that out, they won’t play the game anymore. I! mean, 
supposing a certain social group finds out thatits’ enemy 
group, which it’s supposed to fight, is really symbiotic to 
it. That is to say, the enemy group fosters the survival of 
the group, by pruning its population. It would never do 
to admit that! It would never, never do to admit the 
advantage of the enemy, just as George Orwell pointed 
out in his fantasy of the future 1984, that a dictatorial 


—156— 


OUT OF THE TRAP 


government has to have an enemy, and if there isn’t one, 
it has to invent one. By this means, by having something 
to fight, you see, by having something to compete 
against, the energy of society to go on doing its job is 
stirred up. What the Buddha, or Bodhisattva type of 
person fundamentally is, is one who’s seen through that, 
who doesn’t have to be stirred up by hatred, and fear, and 
competition to go on with the game of life. 


—157— 


