THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


Essays and Lectures on the Transformation of the Self 


% 


ALAN WATTS 


THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


If you think 
by sitting 


you can become a buddha... 


THE WAY OF 
LIBERATION 


Essays and Lectures 
on the 


Transf« ormation 


of the Self 


ALAN WATTS 


edited and transcribed by 
Mark Watts and Rebecca Shropshire 


(°) WEA THERHILL 
New York & Tokyo 


Reproduced on the title page is 
a Zen painting by Sengai (1750-1837) 
from the collection of the Idemitsu Art Gallery. 


First edition, 1983 
Fourth printing, 1987 


Published by John Weatherhill, Inc., 

of New York and Tokyo, 

with editorial offices at 

7—6-13 Roppongi, Minato-ku, Tokyo 106, Japan. 
Protected by copyright under terms of 

the International Copyright Union; 

all rights reserved. 

Printed in Japan. 


Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data: 
Watts, Alan, 1915-73. 

aah and lectures on the transformation of the self. 
Contents: The way of liberation in Zen Buddhism— 
Play and survival— 

The relevance of Criental philosophy—[etc.} 

1, Philosophy, Oriental—Addresses, essays, lectures. 
2. Salvation—Addresses, essays, lectures. 

3. Meditation—Addresses, essays, lectures. 

I, Watts, Mark. Il. Shropshire, Rebecca. Ill. Title. 
B945.W321 1983 128 82-21917 
ISBN 0-8348-0181-7 © 


TO 
OUR FATHERS 
AND 


OUR MOTHERS 


CONTENTS 


Preface, by Mark Watts ix 
Foreword, by George Ingles xi 


The Way of Liberation in Zen Buddhism 3 

2 Play and Survival: Are They in Necessary 
Contradiction? 23 

3 The Relevance of Oriental Philosophy 39 

Suspension of Judgment: The Tangles of 
Transformation 55 


5 Chuang-tzu: Wisdom of the Ridiculous 73 


The Practice of Meditation 91] 


Notes 97 


CONTENTS vil 


PREFACE 


Te FOLLOWING chapters hold for the reader a 
rich selection of literary works and transcribed lec- 
tures by the late Alan Watts. They comprise a representative 
view of his career, from his first essay on Zen Buddhism 
to his final seminar given only weeks before he died in 1973. 
Herein, one will find an overview of the formative in- 
fluences which shaped Watts’s philosophy, and which 
in turn offer the reader a unique insight into the process of 
realization that, through his works, has given the Western 
world an unprecedented perspective of Eastern thought. 

The opening essay, ‘‘The Way of Liberation in Zen 
Buddhism,”’ was written in 1955, prior to Watts’s more 
extensive work on the subject, The Way of Zen. Although 
The Way of Zen contains many of the same concepts as 
presented in this essay, the essay offers a refreshingly 
concise and inspired approach to Zen by Watts. 

In juxtaposition to the first essay, the subsequent tran- 
scription of Watts’s last seminar, “‘Play and Survival,”’ 


PREFACE ix 


shows how his thought evolved through all that followed. 
The flowering of his inquiry into Eastern philosophy is 
perceived as culminating in a playful synthesis of philosoph- 
ical insight. This interaction is crystallized in the next 
selection, ‘‘The Relevance of Oriental Philosophy,”’ in 
which Watts discusses the fundamental questions posed by 
Eastern religions to Westerners of a Christian background. 

The next chapter is a lecture transcription, “Suspension 
of Judgment,’’ in which Watts addresses the inevitable 
questions and conflicts that arise from the Western man’s 
attempts at self-improvement, and reconciles these with 
the Eastern concept of wu wei, or of letting go, and of 
non-interference with the way the world is. 

In the next chapter, ‘“‘Chuang-tzu: Wisdom of the Ridi- 
culous,’’ Watts introduces the Chinese philosopher who 
he feels is most unique in the whole history of philosophy. 
He presents Chuang-tzu’s humorous approach to the pur- 
poselessness of existence, and, in doing so, points out that 
all activity directed toward future goals is meaningless with- 
out the continuous, fully embraced realization of the pre- 
sent moment. 

How to “‘live in the present’’ is delightfully discussed in 
“The Practice of Meditation,’ presented here in Watts’s 
own calligraphy and illustrated by one of his drawings of 
Bodhidharma. 

In the developing of this work, I am extremely grateful 
to Rebecca Shropshire for transcribing and editing the 
spoken lectures, and to George Ingles for his literary 
assistance and scholarly advice. 


Mark WatTTs 


Mill Valley, California 
September 1982 


X PREFACE 


FOREWORD 


T° MANY people, the late Alan Watts remains the 
guru par excellence even though he made no claims to 
such exalted titles, and rather fashioned himself as a “‘phil- 
osophical entertainer’? who merely pointed out the 
obvious in his own whimsical, yet extremely talented way. 
His sense of hilarity, his humor and ability to play, his easy 
laughter, and his claim not to be serious but to always be 
sincere are truly characteristic of a highly developed 
degree of consciousness. One is reminded here of the divine 
in Vedantic philosophy who is always at play, Brahman, 
totally involved in his lila, playing the entire universe; or 
the Hindu myth of Shiva, who dances the cosmic illusion 
in his aspect of Nataraja. Watts had a lifelong interest in 
these themes, and he frequently spoke about them with his 
usual excellence of interpretation in numerous lectures and 
prolific writings. 

Like all philosophers and mystics who represent the 
“Perennial Philosophy,’’ Watts’s work grew out of a 


FOREWORD Xi 


central experience usually referred to as samadhi, satori, 
cosmic consciousness, or spiritual union with God. In truth, 
it is this experience that allows a distinction between an 
enlightened mind, with its clear depth of vision, and the 
mere abstractions of a groping intellect. 

Philosophia Perennis is a phrase which, as far as we know, 
was first used by the seventeenth-century German philos- 
opher, Leibnitz. At present, it may be used to explain the 
collective wisdom that grows out of the samadhi experience 
and that has been universally recorded in the world’s great 
literature, sacred writings, myths, and symbols, from 
prerecorded time to the present day. Although there have 
been many attempts to describe this experience of the 
foremost and highest state of consciousness, it is usually 
considered futile to attempt any description since this 
great experience is ineffable. 

The Chinese sage Lao-tzu declared in his opening state- 
ment to the Tao Te Ching, ‘‘The Tao that can be explained 
is not the true Tao,’’ and yet he went on to compose a 
whole book about it. So too, Shakyamuni Buddha is re- 
ported to have said, ““What I have to teach cannot be 
taught,’’ and yet he went on to teach for over forty-five 
years. In the gospel of St. John we read that when the cyni- 
cal Pontius Pilate asked Jesus, ‘‘What is truth?”’ there was 
no reply. Alan Watts was fond of using the Greek word 
muein, which he liked to translate as meaning ‘‘mum’s 
the word’’—it cannot be spoken. But as is well known, 
Watts could never be accused of silence, since he has left 
us over twenty books, countless articles, and an innumera- 
ble amount of lectures that fortunately have been recorded 
on tape. This outpouring of words is indicative of the in- 
tellectual’s need to verbalize and the poet’s need to embel- 
lish in order to extract some comprehension from the 
experience. Thus we have the ‘‘Pcrennial Philosophy.’’ 

To the mystic this experience is the criterion of the 
soteriological, or the confirmation of the redemptive 


xll FOREWORD 


aspect within the entire spectrum of religious experience. 
Although it can never be imagined, preconceived, or com- 
prehended by the intellect, it seems to occur most fre- 
quently through a total and unreserved surrender to the 
divine. Most often it follows a rock bottom, extremely 
painful,” and intensely desperate state of mind, a strange 
coincidence of the opposites when abyssmal darkness turns 
into the most glorious light. Just as the lotus flower grows 
out of the mud, there is an emergence from a chaotic state 
to the heights of ecstatic bliss. This brings to mind the 
occurrence in the life of Ramakrishna as he was about to 
commit suicide immediately prior to his samadhi in the 


form of a ‘‘revelation of the Divine Mother.”’ 


As Alan Watts made vividly clear in one of his finest es- 
says, ‘This Is It,’’ the individual will interpret this sublime 
experience within the context of the religious and philosoph- 
ical milieu of his particular culture, and will express 
it as a confrontation with or an interior realization of the 
divine: 


The terms in which a man interprets this experience 
are naturally drawn from the religious and philosophi- 
cal ideas of his culture and their differences often con- 
ceal its basic identity. As water sceks the course of 
least resistance, so the emotions clothe themselves in 
the symbols that lie most readily at hand, and the as- 
sociation is so swift and automatic that the symbol may 
appear to be the very heart of the experience. Clarity 
—the disappearance of problems—suggests light, and 
in moments of such acute clarity there may be 
a sensation of light penetrating everything. . . . One 
feels himself taken up and united with a life infinitely 
other than his own. But as the beating of the heart 
may be regarded as something that happens to you or 
something that you do, depending on the point of 
view, so another will feel that he has experienced, not 


FOREWORD  4Xili 


a transcendent God, but his own inmost nature. One 
will get the sense that his ego or self has expanded to 
become the entire universe, whereas another will feel 
that he has lost himself altogether and that what he 
called his ego was never anything but an abstraction. 
One will describe himself as infinitely enriched, while 
another will speak of being brought to such absolute 
poverty that he owns not even his mind and body, 
and has not a care in the world. ! 


In the afterglow of this experience, one may realize the 
cosmic purpose and spiritual siginificance of all life. Total 
existence becomes sacred. One is overwhelmed with love 
and humility. All things are affirmed just as they are, 
and it is felt that everything has always been just right. 
Although the rapture diminishes in time, the mind retains 
a sense of certainty and an element that gradually grows into 
an integral state of being which is eventually expressed in 
the recipient’s everyday life. 

Through interior cultivation or by the removal of various 
obstructions and simply letting ‘‘It’’ flow, some attain the 
final flowering of the spiritual quest in altruism or loving 
service. One of the greatest examples we have in the 
world at the present time is in the life and work of Mother 
Teresa in Calcutta. However, to these few it does not seem 
that they attain anything, but rather receive “‘It’’ as a gift 
by grace alone. 

But let us give the last word on this to the great historian 
of religions, Mircea Eliade, quoting from his book, The Two 

and the Once, in which he sums up the chapter ‘‘Experiences 


of the Mystic Light”’ : 


For all conceptualization is irremediably linked with 
language, and consequently with culture and history. 
One can say that the meaning of the supernatural light 
is directly conveyed to the soul of the man who ex- 
periences it 


and yet this meaning can only come 


xiv FOREWORD 


fully to his consciousness clothed in a preexistent 
ideology. Here lies the paradox: the meaning of the 
light is, on the one hand, ultimately a personal dis- 
covery and, on the other, each man discovers what he 
was spiritually and culturally prepared to discover. Yet 
there’remains this fact which seems to us fundamental: 
whatever his previous ideological conditioning, a meet- 
ing with the Light produces a break in the subject’s 
existence, revealing to him—or making clearer than 
before—the world of the Spirit, of holiness and of 
freedom, in brief, existence as a divine creation, or 
the world sanctified by the presence of God.’ 


From a very early age in his life, Watts was fascinated and 
intensely interested in ‘‘all things of the Orient.” It is 
needless to say here that his gifted interpretations of Eas- 
tern religion and philosophy are included among the very 
best. And yet, for some odd reason, there have been both 
critics and admirers who, having made superficial evalua- 
tions of his work, refer to him as a “‘popularizer’’ of Zen 
Buddhism. To the discerning mind, however, it will be 
apparent that his major contribution is in his interpretation 
and celebration of the mystical experience. As he himself 
wrote when he was about halfway through his career : 


I saw everything, just as it is now, is IT—is the 
whole point of there being life and a universe. I saw 
that when the Upanishads said, ‘‘That thou art!”’ or 
““All this world is Brahman,’’ they meant just exactly 
what they said. Each thing, each event, each cx- 
perience in its inescapable nowness and in all its own 
particular individuality was precisely what it should 
be, and so much so that it acquired a divine authority 
and originality. It struck me with the fullest clarity that 
none of this depended on my seeing it to be so; that 
was the way things were, whether I understood it 
or not, and if I did not understand, that was IT too. 


FOREWORD xv 


Furthermore, | felt that I now understood what 
Christianity might mean by the love of God—namely, 
that despite the commonsensical imperfection of 
things, they were nonetheless loved by God just as 
they are, and that this loving of them was at the same 
time the godding of them. This time the vivid sensation 
of lightness and clarity lasted a full week. 

These experiences, reinforced by others that have 
followed, have been the enlivening force of all my 
work in writing and in philosophy since that time.’ 


The genius of Alan Watts was in his originality and 
method—in his ability to remove all obstructions from the 
mind flow and to simply allow a frolic of words to gush 
forth in a seemingly magical arrangement of gaiety, wit, 
and humor with profound meaning and instruction; his 
gifted use of the English language; his extraordinary me- 
mory ; and his wide range of interests and learning, which 
took in not only the history of religious and philosophical 
thought, but also included the work of such eminent 
scientists as L. L. Whyte, Gregory Bateson, David Bohm, 
Joseph Needham, and others, including Korzybski, Sapir, 
Whorf, and Wittgenstein. 

Through his representation of the ‘‘Perennial Philoso- 
phy,’’ and his synthesis of the views of Vedanta, Mahayana 
Buddhism, and Taoism, Watts’s work has become respected 
among the less dogmatic and more liberal-minded members 
of the scientific community. This in turn has opened up 
more dialogue and communication between Eastern reli- 
gionists and modern empiricists, which in the course of 
time should influence even the most elementary educational 
systems. 


In the following lectures, which have been selected and 
edited by Alan’s son, Mark Watts, we have some exemplary 
talks that Dr. Watts gave between the years 1966 and 


xvi FOREWORD 


1973. Also included is one earlier work that was written 
in 1955. 

One may discover that throughout most of his life 
Watts possessed an attitude of grand affirmation and joyous 
participation in all existence. He enjoyed himself under 
almost afiy circumstances, had good fortune, and seemed 
to ride the crest of a wave throughout his entire life. 

By familiarizing ourselves with his many writings and 
lectures, we may find that this same attitude can be awak- 
ened in us, and we can join Watts in singing along with 
Nammalvar : 


He is not: He is. 

Thus it is impossible to speak of Him, 
Who has pierced the earth and the sky 
And become the inner ruler in all. 

He is unaffected by defects. 

He is the abode of bliss. 


Such a person have I attained.‘ 


GEORGE INGLES 
Berkeley, California 
March 1982 


THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


CHAPTER ONE 


THE WAY OF LIBERATION 
IN ZEN BUDDHISM 


\ X } ORDS CAN express no more than a tiny fragment 


of human knowledge, for what we can say and think 
is always immeasurably less than what we experience. This 
is not only because there are no limits to the exhaustive 
description of an event, as there are no limits to the possible 
divisions of an inch; it is also because there are experiences 
which defy the very structure of our language, as water can- 
not be carried in a sieve. But the intellectual, the man who 
has a great skill with words, is always in danger of restrict- 
ing what can be known to what can be described. He is 
therefore apt to be puzzled and suspicious when anyone 
tries to use ordinary language to convey an experience 
which shatters its logic, an experience which words can 
express only at the cost of losing their meaning. He is 
suspicious of fuzzy and ill-conceived thinking, and concludes 
that there is no experience that can correspond to such 
apparently nonsensical forms of words. 
This is particularly true of an idea which crops up re- 


LIBERATION IN ZEN 3 


peatedly in the history of philosophy and religion—the 
idea that the seeming multiplicity of facts, things, and 
events is in reality One, or, more correctly, beyond duality. 
This idea is usually intended to convey more than a specu- 
lative theory ; it is intended to convey the actual experience 
of unity, which may also be described as the sense that 
everything that happens or can happen is right and natural 
in so positive a way that it can even be called divine. To put 
it in the words of the Shinjinmei: 


One is all; 

All is one. 

If only it can be thus, 

Why trouble about being imperfect? 


To the logician such an utterance is meaningless, and to the 
moralist it is plainly subversive. Even the psychologist 
may wonder whether there can be a state of mind or feeling 
that such words can faithfully represent. For he may 
insist that sensations or feelings are recognizable only by 
their mutual differences, as we know white by contrast 
with black, and that therefore a sensation of non-difference, 
of absolute oneness, could never be realized. At most it 
would be like putting on rose-tinted spectacles. One would 
at first be aware of rosy clouds by contrast with the me- 
mory of white clouds, but in time the contrast would fade, 
and the all-pervasive hue would vanish from consciousness. 
Yet the literature: of Zen Buddhism does not suggest that 
the experience of unity or non-duality is recognized only 
temporarily, by contrast with the former experience of 
multiplicity. It suggests that it is an abiding experience 
that by no means fades with familiarity. Our best way of 
understanding it will be to follow, as best we can, the inner 
process through which the experience is realized. This 
will mean, in the first place, treating it from the psycho- 
logical point of view, to find out whether the words ex- 


4 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


press any psychological reality, let alone any logical sense 
or moral propriety. 

It may be assumed that the starting point is the ordinary 
man’s feeling of conflict between himself and his environ- 
ment, between his desires and the hard facts of nature, 
betweerf his own will and the jarring wills of other people. 
The ordinary man’s desire to replace this sense of conflict 
by a sense of harmony has its parallel in the age-old concern 
of philosophers and scientists to understand nature in terms 
of a unity—in the human mind’s perennial discontent with 
dualism. We shall see that this is in many ways a rather 
unsatisfactory starting point. The problem of telling any- 
one how to proceed from this point to the experience of 
unity reminds one of the yokel who was asked the way to 
an obscure village. He scratched his head for a while and 
then answered, ‘‘Well, sir, I know where it is, but if I 
were you I wouldn’t start from here.’’ But unfortunately 
this is just where we are. 

Let us, then, consider some of the ways in which the Zen 
masters have handled this problem. There are four ways in 
particular that seem to deserve special attention, and these 


may be listed briefly as follows: 


1. To answer that all things are in reality One. 

2. To answer that all things are in reality Nothing, Void. 

3. To answer that all things are perfectly all right and 
natural just as they are. 

4. To say that the answer is the question, or the ques- 
tioner. 


The question itself may assume many different forms, but 
essentially it is the problem of liberation from conflict, 
from dualism, from what Buddhism calls the samsara or 
vicious circle of birth-and-death. 


1. Asan example of the first type of answer, the assertion 
that all things are in reality One, consider the words of Eka: 


LIBERATIONIN ZEN 5 


The profound truth is the principle of ultimate 
identity. 

Under delusion the mani gem may be called 
a broken tile, 

But when you enter truly into self-awakening 
it is a real pearl. 

Ignorance and wisdom are alike without differ- 
ence. 

For you should know that the ten thousand 
things are all Suchness (tathata). 


It is out of pity for those disciples who hold 
a dualistic view 

That I put words in writing and send this 
letter. 

Regarding this body and the Buddha as neither 
differing nor separate, 

Why, then, should we seek for something that 
does not need to be added to us?! 


The implication of this answer is that liberation from the 
conflict of dualism does not require any effort to change 
anything. One has only to realize that every experience 
is identical with the One, the Buddha-nature, or the Tao, 
and then the problem will simply vanish. Similarly, when 
Joshu asked Nansen, ‘‘What is the Tao?’’ Nansen replied, 
“Your ordinary mind is the Tao.’’ ‘‘How,”’ asked Joshu, 
‘can one return into accord with it?’? Nansen answered, 
“By intending to accord you immediately deviate.’’? 
The psychological response to answers of this kind will 
be an attempt to feel that every experience, every thought, 
sensation, or feeling is the Tao—that somehow the good 
is the same as the bad, the pleasant the same as the pain- 
ful. This may take the form of trying to attach the symbol- 
thought ‘‘this is the Tao’’ to each experience as it arises, 
though obviously it will be hard to realize much content, 
much meaning, in a symbol which applies equally to every 


6 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


possible experience. Yet as the frustration of not realizing 
any content arises, it is asserted that this, too, is the 
Tao—so that any grasp of what the nature of this One that 
is All may be becomes more and more elusive. 


2; Thus another, and perhaps better, way of answering 
the original question is to assert that all things are in 
reality No-thing or Void (shunyata), following the doc- 
trine of the Prajnaparamita-hridaya-sutra. ‘‘Form is precisely 
the void; the void is precisely form.” This answer 
provokes no attempt to find content or meaning in the term 
used to represent the One reality. In Buddhism the word 
shunya or Void implies inconceivability rather than mere 
nothingness. The psychological response to the assertion 
that all is One might be described as an attempt to say 
“Yes”? to every experience as it arises, as an attempt to 
achieve a total acceptance or affirmation of life in all its 
aspects. Contrariwise, the psychological response sug- 
gested by the assertion that all is Void would be an at- 
tempt to say ‘‘No”’ to each experience. 

This is found also in the Vedanta, where the formula neti, 
neti, ‘‘not this, not this,’’ is used to support the under- 
standing that no experience is the One reality. In Zen, the 
word mu* —no, not, or nothing—is used in a similar way, 
and is often employed as a koan* or initiatory problem in 
meditation for beginners in such a way that at all times and 
under all circumstances one persists in saying the word 
“‘No.”’ Hence the reply of Joshu to the question, ‘‘How will 
it be when I come to you without a single thing?’ ‘“Throw 
it down!’’* 


3. Then there are the answers which seem to imply that 
nothing has to be done at all, neither saying ‘‘Yes’’ to 
everything nor “‘No’’ to everything. The point here is 
rather to leave one’s experience and one’s own mind alone 
and allow them to be just as they are. Consider the follow- 


ing from Rinzai: 


LIBERATIONIN ZEN 7 


“‘One can only resolve past karma as the circumstances 
arise. When it’s time to dress, put your clothes on. When 
you have to walk, then walk. When you have to sit, then 
sit. Don’t have a single thought in your mind about seeking 
for Buddhahood. How can this be? The ancients say, ‘If 
you desire deliberately to seek the Buddha, your Buddha 
is just Samsara.” . . . Followers of the Tao, there is no 
place in Buddhism for using effort. Just be ordinary, 
without anything special. Relieve your bowels, pass water, 
put on your clothes, and eat your food. When you’re tired, 
go and lie down. Ignorant people may laugh at me, but the 
wise will understand. . . . The ancients say, ‘To happen 
to meet a man of Tao upon the road, you must first not be 
facing the Tao.’ Thus it is said that ifa person practices the 
Tao, the Tao will not work.’’® 

Similarly, a monk asked Bokuju, ‘‘We dress and eat every 
day, and how do we escape from having to put on clothes 
and eat food?’’ The master answered, ‘‘We dress; we eat.’’ 
“I don’t understand.”’ “‘If you don’t understand,”’ said the 
master, ‘‘put on your clothes and eat your food.’’” In other 
incidents the state of non-duality is sometimes represented 
as beyond the opposites of heat and cold, but when asked 
to describe this state Zen will say: 


When cold, we gather round the hearth before 
the blazing fire ; 

When hot, we sit on the bank of the mountain 
stream in the bamboo grove.* 


The psychological response here seems to be one of 
letting one’s mind respond to circumstances as it feels 
inclined, not to quarrel with feeling hot in summer or 
cold in winter, and—it must also be added—not to quarrel 
with the feeling that there is some feeling you want to 
quarrel with! It is as if to say that the way you are actually 
feeling is the right way to feel, and that the basic conflict 
with life and oneself arises from trying to change or get 


& THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


rid of one’s present feeling. Yet this very desire to feel 
differently may also be the present feeling which is not to 
be changed. 


4. There is finally the fourth type of answer which turns 
the question back on itself, or on the questioner himself. 
Eka said to Bodhidharma, “‘I have no peace of mind. Please 
pacify my mind.’’ Bodhidharma replied, ‘“Bring out your 
mind here before me, and I will pacify it!’ ‘“But when 
I seek my own mind,”’ said Eka, ‘I cannot find it.’’ 
“There !’’ concluded Bodhidharma, ‘‘I have pacified your 
mind!’’? 

Doshin asked Sosan, ‘‘What is the method of liberation?”’ 
The master replied, ‘‘Who binds you?’’ ‘‘No one binds 
me.’ ‘‘Why then,’’ said the master, “‘should you seek 
liberation?’’'® There are other instances where the answer 
is simply the repetition of the question, or some such reply 
as ‘“Your question is perfectly clear. Why ask me?” 

Replies of this type seem to throw attention back upon 
the state of mind from which the question arises, as if to 
say, “‘If your feelings are troubling you, find out who or 
what it is that is being troubled.’’ The psychological res- 
ponse is therefore to try to feel what feels and to know 
what knows—to make an object of the subject. Yet, as 
Obaku says, ‘‘To make the Buddha seek after himself, or 
to make the mind take hold of itself—this is an impossibi- 
lity to the end of eternity.’’ According to Ekai, “‘It is much 
like looking for an ox when you are riding on it’’—or, as 
one of the poems in the Zenrin Kushu puts it, it is 


Like a sword that wounds, but cannot 
wound itself; 

Like an eye that sees, but cannot see 
itself. 


In the words of an old Chinese popular saying, ‘‘A single 
hand cannot make a clap.’’ Yet Hakuin always introduced 


LIBERATION IN ZEN 9 


his students to Zen by asking them to hear the sound of 
one hand clapping ! 


It is not difficult to see that there is a common pattern 
underlying all these four types of answers, since all the 
answers are circular. If all things are the One, then my 
feeling of conflict between dualities is also the One, as well 
as my objection to this feeling. If all things are Void, then 
the thought that this is so is also Void, and I feel as if I 
am being asked to fall into a hole and pull the hole in after 
me. If everything that happens is perfectly right and na- 
tural just as it is, then the wrong and unnatural is also 
natural. If I am just to let things happen, what happens 
when one of these things is precisely my desire to interfere 
with the course of events? And finally, if the root of the 
conflict is a lack of self-understanding, how can I under- 
stand the self which is trying to understand itself? In short, 
the root of the problem is the question. If you do not ask 
the question, the problem will not arise. To put it in an- 
other way, the problem of how to escape from conflict is 
the very conflict one is trying to escape. 

If all these answers are not particularly helpful, this is 
only to say that the human situation is one for which there 
isno help. Every remedy for suffering is after all like chang- 
ing one’s position on a hard bed, and every advance in the 
control of our environment makes the environment harder 
to control. Nevertheless, all this mental circulation does at 
least seem to produce two rather definite conclusions. The 
first is that if we do not try to help ourselves, we shall never 
realize how helpless we are. Only by ceaseless questioning 
can we begin to realize the limits, and thus the very form, 
of the human mind. The second is that when we do at last 
realize the depths of our helplessness, we are at peace. We 
have given ourselves up for lost, and this is what is meant 
by losing oneself, or by self-surrender, or self-sacrifice. 

Perhaps this will throw some light on the Buddhist doc- 


10 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


trine of the Void, on the saying that all is in reality empty 
or in vain. For if the deepest impulse of my being is to 
escape from a conflict which is substantially identical with 
my desire to escape from conflict, if, in other words, the 
entire structure of myself, my ego, is an attempt to do the 
impossible, then I am in vain or void to the very core. | 
am simply an itch which has nothing upon which to 
scratch itself. Trying to scratch makes the itch worse, 
but an itch is, by definition, what wants to be scratched. 

Zen is therefore trying to communicate a vivid realiza- 
tion of the vicious circularity, the helplessness, and the 
plain impossibility of the human situation, of that desire for 
harmony, which is precisely conflict, that desire at our core, 
which is our very will-to-live. This would be a masochistic 
discipline of pure self-frustration, were it not for a very 
curious and seemingly paradoxical consequence. When it 
is clear beyond all doubt that the itch cannot be scratched, 
it stops itching by itself. When it is realized that our basic 
desire is a vicious circle, it stops circling of its own accord, 
But this happens only when it has become utterly clear and 
certain that there is no way of making it stop. 

The attempt to make oneself do or not do something im- 
plies, of course, an inner, subjective duality—a splitting 
asunder of the mind’s integrity which brings about a paral- 
ysis of action. To some extent, then, the statement that 
all is One and One is all is actually expressing the end of 
this inner split, and the discovery of the mind’s original 
unity and autonomy. It is not unlike learning the use of a 
new muscle—when suddenly you move it from inside, or 
rather, it moves itself, after all efforts to force it from with- 
out have been unavailing. This type of experience is vivid 
enough, but, as we all know, practically impossible to 
communicate. 

It is important to remember that the state of mind out 
of which this new experience of unity arises is one of total 
futility. In Zen it is likened to the predicament of a mos- 


LIBERATIONIN ZEN I] 


quito biting an iron bull, or, as another poem in the Zenrin 
Kushu expresses it : 


To trample upon the Great Void 
The iron bull must sweat. 


But how will an iron bull sweat? It is the same question as 
“‘How can I escape from conflict?’’ or ‘‘How can I catch 
hold of myself, or of my own hand?”’ 

Now in the intensity of this complete impasse, in which 
the radical impotence of the ego is vividly understood, it 
is suddenly realized that—nevertheless—there is a great 
process of life still going on. “I stand and I sit; I clothe 
myselfandIeat. . . . The wind blows in the trees, and cars 
honk in the distance.’ With my ordinary self reduced to 
nothing but a completely useless straining I suddenly re- 
alize that all this is my real activity—that the activity of 
my ego has been displaced by the total activity of life, in 
such a way that the rigid boundary between myself and 
everything else has completely disappeared. All events 
whatsoever, whether the raising of my own hand or the 
chattering of a bird outside, are seen to be happening shizen'' 
—by themselves or automatically, in the spontaneous as 
distinct from the mechanical sense of the word. 


The blue mountains are of themselves 
blue mountains; 

The white clouds are of themselves 
white clouds. !? 


And the raising of a hand, the thinking of a thought, or the 
making of a decision happen in just the same way. It 
becomes clear that this is, in fact, the way things have 
always been happening, and that therefore all my efforts 
to move myself or to control myself have been irrelevant— 
having had the sole value of proving that it cannot be done. 
The whole concept of self-control has been misconstrued, 
since it is as impossible to make oneself relax, or make oneself 


12 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


do anything, as to open one’s mouth by the exclusively 
mental act of willing it to open. No matter how much the 
will is strained and thought is concentrated on the idea of 
opening, the mouth will remain unmoved until it opens it- 
self. It was out of this sense of all events happening by 
themselves that the poet Ho Koji wrote: 


Miraculous ‘power and marvelous activity— 


Drawing water and hewing wood [ts 


This state of consciousness is by no means a psycholo- 
gical impossibility, even as a more or less continuous feel- 
ing. Throughout the course of their lives most people seem 
to feel more or less continuously the rigid distinction 
between the ego and its environment. Release from this 
feeling is like release from a chronic illness, and is fol- 
lowed by a sense of lightness and ease comparable to being 
relieved of the burden of a huge plaster cast. Naturally the 
immediate sense of euphoria or ecstasy wears off in the 
course of time, but the permanent absence of the rigid ego- 
environment boundary remains as a significant change in the 
structure of our experience. It is of no consequence that 
the ecstasy wears off, for the compulsive craving for ecstasy 
disappears, having formerly existed by way of compen- 
sation for the chronic frustration of living in a vicious 
circle. 

To some extent the rigid distinction between ego and 
environment is equivalent to that between mind and body, 
or between the voluntary and involuntary neural systems. 
This is probably the reason why Zen and yoga disciplines 
pay so much attention to breathing, to watching over the 
breath (anapanasmriti), since it is in this organic function 
that we can see most easily the essential identity of volun- 
tary and involuntary action. We cannot help breathing, and 
yet it seems that breath is under our control; we both 
breathe and are breathed. For the distinction of the volun- 
tary and the involuntary is valid only within a somewhat 


LIBERATION IN ZEN. 13 


limited perspective. Strictly speaking, I will or decide 
involuntarily. Were it not so, it would always be necessary 
for me to decide to decide and to decide to decide to decide 
in an infinite regress. Now the involuntary processes of the 
body, such as the beating of the heart, do not seem to differ 
very much in principle from other involuntary actions 
going on outside the body. Both are, as it were, environ- 
mental, When, therefore, the distinction of voluntary and 
involuntary is transcended within the body, it is also trans- 
cended with respect to events outside the body. 

When, therefore, it is understood that these ego- 
environment and voluntary-involuntary distinctions are 
conventional, and valid only within limited and somewhat 
arbitrary perspectives, we find ourselves in a kind of ex- 
periencing to which such expressions as “One is All and All 
is One’’ are quite appropriate. For this one-ness represents 
the disapearance of a fixed barrier, of a rigid dualism. But 
it is in no sense a “‘one-thing-ness’’—a type of pantheism 
or monism asserting that all so-called things are the illusory 
forms of one homogeneous “‘stuff.’? The experience of 
release from dualism is not to be understood as the sudden 
disappearance of mountains and trees, houses and people, 
into a uniform mass of light or transparent voidness. 

For this reason the Zen masters have always recognized 
that ‘‘the One’’ is a somewhat misleading term. In the 
words of the Shinjinmei: 


There are two because there is One, 
Yet cling not to this One... . 
In the dharma-world of true Suchness 


”? nor ‘‘self.’’ 


There is neither ‘‘other 
If you want an immediate answer, 


We can only say **Not two.’’ 


Hence the koan question, ‘“When the many are reduced to 
the One, to what shall the One be reduced?’ To this Joshu 


replied, ‘“‘When I was in Seishu Province, I made a linen 


14. THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


robe weighing seven pounds.’’** Strange as it may sound, 
it is in this type of language that Zen expresses itself most 
plainly, for this is a direct language without the least ele- 
ment of symbolism or conceptualism. After all, it is so 
easy to forget that what is being expressed here is not an 
idea or an opinion, but an experience. For Zen does not 
speak from the external standpoint of one who stands out- 
side life and comments upon it. This is a standpoint from 
which effective understanding is impossible, just as it is 
impossible to move a muscle by nothing more than verbal 
commands, however strenuously spoken. 

There is, of course, a permanent value in being able, as 
it were, to stand aside from life and reflect upon it, in being 
aware of one’s own existence, in having what communi- 
cations engineers would call a psychological feedback 
system which enables us to criticize and correct our ac- 
tions. But systems of this kind have their limitations, and a 
moment’s consideration of the analogy of feedback will 
show where they lie. Probably the most familiar example of 
feedback is the electrical thermostat which regulates the 
heating of a house. By setting an upper and a lower limit 
of desired temperature, a thermometer is so connected 
that it will switch the heat on when the lower limit is 
reached, and off when the upper limit is reached. The tem- 
perature of the rooms is thus kept within the desired limits. 
We might say, then, that the thermostat is a kind of sensitive 
organ which the furnace acquires in order to regulate its 
own conduct, and that this is a very rudimentary analogy of 
human self-consciousness. 

But having thus constructed a self-regulating furnace, how 
about constructing a self-regulating thermestat. We are all 
familiar enough with the vagaries of thermostats, and it 
might be a fine idea to install a second feedback system to 
control the first. But then there arises the problem of how 
far this can go. Followed logically to its limits, it implies 
an indefinite series of feedbacks controlling feedbacks, 


LIBERATION IN ZEN 15 


which, beyond a certain point, would paralyze the whole 
system with the confusion of complexity. If this is to be 
avoided, there must, somewhere at the end of the line, be 
a thermostat or a source of intelligence whose information 
and authority is to be trusted, and not subjected to further 
checks and controls. To this the only alternative is an 
infinite series of controls, which is absurd, since a point 
would arrive when the information would never reach the 
furnace. It might seem that another alternative would be a 
circular system of control, as when the civilian is con- 
trolled by the policeman, who is controlled by the mayor, 
who is controlled by the civilian. But this works only when 
each member trusts the one above it, or, to put it in another 
way, when the system trusts itself—and does not keep 
on trying to stand outside itself to correct itself. 

This gives us a rather vivid picture of the human predica- 
ment. Our life consists essentially in action, but we have 
the power to check action by reflection. Too much re- 
flection inhibits and paralyzes action, but because action is 
a matter of life or death, how much reflection is necessary? 
In so far as Zen describes its fundamental attitude as mushin 
or munen'* —no-mind or no-thought—it seems to stand 
for action as against reflection. 


In walking, just walk. In sitting, just sit. 
Above all, don’t wobble.'® 


Joshu’s answer to the question about the many and the 
One was simply unreflective action, unpremeditated speech. 
“‘When I was in Seishu Province I made a linen robe weigh- 
ing seven pounds.”’ 

But reflection is also action, and Zen might equally well 
say: “‘In acting, just act. In thinking, just think. Above all, 
don’t wobble.” In other words, if you are going to reflect 
or to think, just reflect, but do not reflect about reflecting. 
And Zen would also agree that reflection about reflection is 


16 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


action, provided that in doing it we do just that, and have 
no tendency to drift off into the infinite regression of trying 
always to stand above or outside the level upon which we are 
acting. In short, Zen is also a liberation from the dualism of 
thought versus action, for it thinks as it acts—with the same 
quality of abandon, commitment, or faith. Thus the attitude 
of mushin is by no means an anti-intellectualist exclusion of 
thinking. It is action upon any level whatsoever, physical 
or psychic, without trying at the same moment to observe 
and check the action from outside, that is, without wob- 
bling or anxiety. 

Needless to say, what is true of the relationship of think- 
ing to action is also true of feeling, since our feelings or 
emotions about life are as much a type of feedback as our 
thoughts. Feeling blocks action, and blocks itself as a form 
of action, when it gets caught in this same tendency to ob- 
serve or feel itself indefinitely—as, for example, when, 
in the midst of enjoying myself thoroughly, I examine my- 
self to see if lam getting the utmost out of the occasion. Not 
content with tasting the food, I am trying also to taste my 
tongue. Not content with feeling happy, I want to feel 
myself feeling happy—so as to be sure not to miss any- 
thing. 

Obviously there is no fixed way of determining the exact 
point where reflection must turn into action in any given 
situation, of knowing that we have given the matter enough 
thought to act without regret. This is always a problem of 
sensibility, of nice judgment. But the fact remains that how- 
ever skillfully, however carefully our reflecting is done, its 
conclusions are always a long way short of certainty. Ul- 
timately, every action is a leap into the dark. The only real 
certainty that we have about the future is that unknown 
quantity called death, standing as the final symbol of the fact 
that our lives are not in our own control. In other words, 
human life is founded upon an irreducible element of the 


LIBERATION IN ZEN 17 


unknown and the uncontrolled, which is the Buddhist 
shunya or Void and which is the mushin, or no-mind, of 
Zen. But Zen is—beyond this—the realization that I do not 
merely stand on this unknown, or float upon it in the frail 
barque of my body: it is the realization that this unknown 
is myself. 

From the standpoint of vision, my own head is an empty 
space in the midst of experience—an invisible and inconcei- 
vable void that is neither dark nor light. This same voidness 
stands behind each one of our senses—both the external 
or exteroceptive and the internal or proprioceptive senses. 
It stands, too, beyond the beginnings of my life, beyond my 
conception in my mother’s womb. It stands at the center 
of the very nuclear structure of my organism. For when the 
physicist tries to penetrate this structure he finds that the 
very act of looking into it obscures what he wants to see. 
This is an example of the same principle that we have en- 
countered all along—that in trying to look for themselves, 
the eyes turn away from themselves. This is why it is usual 
to begin training in Zen with one of the many forms of the 
koan, ‘‘Who are you?’’; ‘Before you had a father and mo- 
ther, what was your original nature?’’; ‘‘Who is it that 
carries this corpse around?” 

By such means it is discovered that our “‘self-nature”’ 
(svabhava) is “‘no-nature,’’? that our real mind (shin) is 
“‘no-mind”’ (mushin). To the extent, then, that we realize 
that the unknown and the inconceivable is our own original 
nature, it no longer stands over against us as a threatening 
object. It is not so much the abyss into which we are fall- 
ing; it is rather that out of which we act and live, think 
and feel. 

Again, we can see the appropriateness of the language of 
unity. There is no longer a fixed dualism between reflection 
and action. More important still, there is no longer a sep- 
aration of the knower on the one hand and the unknown 


18 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


on the other. Reflection is action, and the knower is the 
unknown. We can see, too, the appropriateness of such 
remarks as Ekai’s “‘Act as you will; go on as you feel, with- 
out second thought. This is the incomparable Way.’’ For 
sayings of, this kind are not intended to discourage ordinary 
reflection, judgment, and restraint. Their application is 
not siperadial but profound. That is to say, in the final 
analysis we have to act and think, live and die, froma source 
beyond all our knowledge and control. If this is unfor- 
tunate, no amount of care and hesitancy, no amount of in- 
trospection and searching of our motives, can make any 
ultimate difference to it. We are therefore compelled to 
choose between a shuddering paralysis or a leap into action 
regardless of the ultimate consequences. Superficially speak- 
ing, our actions may be right or wrong with respect to 
relative standards. But our decisions upon this superficial 
level must be supported by the underlying conviction that 
whatever we do and whatever happens to us is ultimately 
right—which is a way of saying that we must enter into it 
without second thought without the arriére pensée of regret, 
hesitancy, doubt, or self-recrimination. Thus when Ummon 
was asked, ‘What is the Tao?”’ he answered simply, ‘‘Walk 
on!’’!? But to act without second thought is not by any 
means a mere precept for our imitation. It is actually 
impossible to realize this kind of action until we have 
understood that we have no other alternative, until we have 
realized that we ourselves are the unknown and the un- 
controlled. 

So far as Zen is concerned, this realization is little more 
than the first step in a long course of study. For it must 
be remembered that Zen is a form of Mahayana Buddhism, 
in which Nirvana—liberation from the vicious circle of 
Samsara—is not so much the final goal as the beginning of 
the life of the Bodhisattva. The concern of the Bodhisattva 
is upaya or hoben, the application of this realization 


LIBERATIONIN ZEN 19 


to every aspect of life for the “‘liberation of all sentient 
beings,’’ not only human and animal, but also trees, grass, 
and the very dust. 

In Zen, however, the idea of Samsara as a process of cy- 
clic reincarnation is not taken literally, and thus Zen has 
its own special meaning for the Bodhisattva’s task of 
delivering all beings from the course of endless birth and 
death. In one sense, the cycle of birth and death is from 
moment to moment, anda person may be said to be involved 
in Samsara to the extent that he identifies himself with an 
ego continuing through time. It might be said, then, that 
the real discipline of Zen begins only at the point where 
the individual has altogether stopped trying to improve 
himself. This appears to be a contradiction because we are 
almost completely unaccustomed to the idea of effortless 
effort, of tension without conflict and concentration with- 
out strain. 

But it is fundamental to Zen that a person who is trying 
to improve himself, to become something more than he is, 
is incapable of creative action. In the words of Rinzai, “‘If 
you seek deliberately to become a Buddha, your Buddha is 
just Samsara.’’ Or again, ‘‘If a person seeks the Tao, that 
person loses the Tao.’’'* The reason is simply that the 
attempt to improve or act upon oneself is a way of locking 
action in a vicious circle, like trying to bite one’s own 
teeth. Release from this ridiculous predicament is achieved, 
at the very beginning of Zen discipline, by understanding 
that ‘‘you yourself as you are, are a Buddha.”’ For the 
object of Zen is not so much to become a Buddha as to act 
like one. Therefore no progress can be made in the 
life of the Bodhisattva so long as there is the least anxiety 
or striving to become more than what one is. Similarly, a 
person who tries to concentrate upon a certain task with a 
result in mind will forget the task in thinking about its re- 
sult. 


20 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


The irrelevance of self-improvement is expressed in two 
poems of the Zenrin Kushu: 


A long thing is the long body of Buddha; 
A short thing is the short body of Buddha. 


In the landscape of spring there is no 
measure of worth or value; 
The flowering branches are naturally short 


and long. 
Or the following from Goso: 


If you look for the Buddha, you will not 
see the Buddha; 

If you seek the Patriarch, you will not see 
the Patriarch. 

The sweet melon is sweet even through 
the stem; 

The bitter gourd is bitter even to the roots.!? 


Some Buddhas are short and some are long; some students 
are beginners, and others are far advanced, but each is 
“‘right’’ just exactly as he is. For if he strives to make 
himself better, he falls into the vicious circle of egoism. 
It is perhaps difficult for the Western mind to appreciate 
that man develops by growth rather than self-improvement, 
and that neither the body nor the mind grows by stretching 
itself. As the seed becomes the tree, the short Buddha be- 
comes the long Buddha. It is not a question of improve- 
ment, for a tree is not an improved seed, and it is even in 
perfect accord with nature or Tao that many seeds never 
become trees. Seeds lead to plants, and plants lead to 
seeds. There is no question of higher or lower, better or 
worse, for the process is fulfilled in each moment of 
its activity, 


LIBERATION IN ZEN 2] 


always raises the 


A philosophy of non-striving or mui’ 
problem of incentive, for if people are right or Buddhas 
just as they are, does not this self-acceptance destroy the 
creative urge? The answer is that there is nothing truly 
creative about actions which spring from incentives, for 
these are not so much free or creative actions as conditioned 
reactions. True creation is always purposeless, without 
ulterior motive, which is why it is said that the true 
artist copies nature in the manner of her operation and un- 
derstands the real meaning of ‘‘art for art’s sake.’’ As 
Kojisei wrote in his Saikontan: 

“‘If your true nature has the creative force of Nature it- 
self, wherever you may go, you will see (all things as) fishes 


leaping and geese flying.’’ 


22 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


CHAPTER TWO 


PLAY AND SURVIVAL 


Are They in Necessary Contradiction? 


L IVING, it seems to me, is a spontaneous process. The 
Chinese term for nature is tzu-jan, which means that 
which is so of itself, that which happens. It is very curious 
that because of our grammar, which we speak in all standard 
European languages, we are unable to imagine a process 
which happens of itself. Every verb must have a noun as its 
subject, a director, and we think nothing is in order unless 
someone or something orders it—unless there is somebody 
in charge; thus, the idea of a process which happens of it- 
self and by itself is frightening because there seems to be no 
authority. In the United States we are in a serious social 
and political conflict because we think we ought to be living 
in a republic when the great majority of citizens believe 
that the universe is a monarchy. You cannot be a loyal 
citizen of the United States unless you believe that a republic 
is the best form of government, and yet we are always seek- 
ing a monarch, someone else upon whom to push the res- 
ponsibility. We will not take it ourselves, and we are 


PLAY AND SURVIVAL 23 


always complaining that where we are is the result of our 
past: ‘“My mother and father were neurotic, and therefore 
they made me neurotic. And their fathers and mothers were 
neurotic, which made them neurotic’’ . . . and so it goes 
back to Adam and Eve. And you remember what happened 
in the Garden of Eden: God set a trap. He said there was a 
specific tree, the fruit of which must not be eaten. If he had 
really not wanted Adam and Eve to eat the fruit, he would 
not have said anything about it. But by drawing attention 
to it, it was obvious that they were going to eat it. 

So when God saw Adam looking guilty he said, ‘‘Adam, 
hast thou eaten of the fruit of the tree whereof I told thee 
thou shouldst not eat?’’, and Adam said, “The woman you 
gave me, she tempted me and I did eat.’’ Then God looked 
very severely at Eve and said, “‘Eve, hast thou eaten of the 
fruit of the tree whereof I told thee thou shouldst not 
eat?’’, and Eve said, ‘‘The serpent, he beguiled me!’’— 
passing the buck, you see. So God looked at the serpent, and 
this is not written in the Bible, but they winked at each 
other. They had planned long in advance that the universe 
was not going to be a merely obedient arrangement where 
I-God-say-you-shall-do-thus-and-so, and you will automat- 
ically do it. There would be no fun in that because there 
would be no surprises. So it is in Hebrew theology that God 
put into the heart of Adam at the creation a thing called 
the Yetzer Ha-ra, which means “‘the wayward spirit.’’ Just 
as when you make a stew and want to put some salt into 
it, you do not want the whole stew to be salty—just a 
touch. So God, in creating Adam, put just a touch of wick- 
edness in him so that something surprising and different 
would happen that God would not be able to prognosticate. 
Now this is very important. What I am talking about is our 
sense of identity, our sense of alienation, and the com- 
plications we put ourselves into by regarding our survival 
as a duty. 

If you imagine yourself in the position of being God, in 


24 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


the popular sense of God, the Father Almighty, it means 
that you are a male chauvinist pig, and that you are in 
charge of everything. You know all past, you know all fu- 
tures, you are completely in control of the cosmos, you 
have absolute power, and you are bored to death. So you 
say to yourself, ‘“Man, get lost! I want a surprise.’’ And 
here you are; only you must not admit it. The hallmark 
of insanity is to know that you are God. It is absolutely 
taboo, especially in the Christian religion. 

Jesus got crucified for knowing it and the Christians said, 
“‘Okay, okay, Jesus was God, but let it stop right there. 
Nobody else.’’ But the Gospel is a revelation to us all of 
something that the Hindus have known all along, tat tvam 
asi, you are it! If Jesus had lived in India, they would have 
congratulated him for finding out rather than crucified him. 
There have been many people in India who knew they were 
God in disguise. Sri Ramakrishna, Sri Ramana, Krishna, 
and the Buddha—they all discovered it, because it is not an 
exclusive claim that I alone am that, but that you all are, 
and as I look into your eyes I see the universe looking back 
at me. 

So we are ina situation where it is taboo to know that we 
are God, and we must not admit that we know who we are 
so as to have the thrill, the sort of self-goosing effect of 
feeling lost, feeling strange, feeling alone, and of not be- 
longing. We say in popular speech that we come into this 
world, but we do nothing of the kind. We come out of it. 
In the same way as the fruit comes out of the tree, the egg 
from the chicken, and the baby from the womb, we are 
symptomatic of the universe. Just as in the retina there are 
myriads of little nerve endings, we are the nerve endings 
of the universe. And fascinating things happen. Because 
there are so many of us the universe is many-sided; thus, 
its point of view of itself will not be prejudiced. Here we 
are, and we want to find out what it is that is going on. 
We look through telescopes to find the farthest-out things, 


PLAY AND SURVIVAL 25 


and with microscopes to find the farthest-in things, and 
the more sophisticated our instruments become, the more 
the world runs away from us. As our telescopes become 
more powerful, the universe expands. It is ourselves run- 
ning away from ourselves. 

You know, some years ago we thought we had it. We 
had found a thing called the atom and that was that. But 
then whoops! the electron turned up. And then bang! 
there was a proton. Then when we got past all those there 
came all kinds of things—mesons, antiparticles, and it got 
worse and worse. We are a self-observing system which is 
like the snake, the ouroboros, that bites its own tail and 
endeavors to swallow itself to find out what it is. And this 
is like the whole quest of “Who Am I?’ We are saying, 
“I would like to see me,’’ but look at your own head. 
Can you see it? It is not black, and there is not even a blank 
space behind the eyes—it’s just plain nowhere. And thereby 
hangs the tale. Most of us assume as a matter of common 
sense that space is nothing, that it’s not important and 
has no energy. But as a matter of fact, space is the basis of 
existence. How could you have stars without space? Stars 
shine out of space and something comes out of nothing just 
in the same way as when you listen, in an unprejudiced 
way, you hear all sounds coming out of silence. It is amazing. 
Silence is the origin of sound just as space is the origin of 
stars, and woman is the origin of man. If you listen and pay 
close attention to what is, you will discover that there is 
no past, no future, and no one listening. You cannot hear 
yourself listening. You live in the eternal now and you are 
that. It is really extremely simple, and that is the way it is. 

Now then, I started out by saying that survival, going on 
living, is a spontaneous process, and love is much the 
same. The trouble is that when we were children our 
elders and betters told us that it was our duty to love them. 
God said: ‘Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy 


26 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


strength, and love thy neighbor as thyself.’’ And so our 
mothers said to us, ‘“You must have a bowel movement after 
breakfast,”’ ‘“Try to go to sleep,”’ ‘‘Take that look off your 
face,” ‘‘Stop pouting,’’ ‘‘Oh, you’re blushing,” ‘‘Pull 
yourself together!”’, and ‘Pay attention!’ And all these 
are cominands, the basic rule of which is as follows: You 
are required to do that which will be acceptable only if 
you do it voluntarily. That is the formula. You must love me. 
It is a double bind, and everyone is completely mixed up 
because of this. The husband says to his wife, ‘‘Darling, 
do you really love me?’’, and she says, ‘‘Well, I’m trying 
my best to do so.’’ But nobody wants that answer. They 
want to be told, “‘I love you so much I could eat you. I 
can’t help loving you, I’m your hopeless victim.’’ So, we 
are under the compulsion to go on loving just as we are 
under the compulsion to go on living. We feel we must 
go on, that it is our duty. We are tired of living and scared 
of dying, but we must go on. Why? Well, you say, ‘‘I have 
dependents, I have children, and IJ have to go on working to 
support them.”’ But all that does is teach them the same 
attitude so that they will go dragging along to support 
their children, who will in turn learn it from them to go 
dragging along, fighting this thing out. 

So I watch with total amazement the goings-on of the 
world. I see all these people commuting, driving cars like 
maniacs to get to an office where they are going to make 
money—for what? So that they can go on doing the same 
thing, and very few of them enjoy it. Sensible people get 
paid for playing—that is the art of life. But the whole idea 
of struggling and beating your brains out in order to go 
on living is completely ridiculous. Albert Camus, in the 
beginning of his book The Myth of Sisyphus, made this very 
sensible statement: “‘The only real philosophical ques- 
tion is whether or not to commit suicide.’ Think that one 
over. Must you go on? It would be so much simpler to 
stop. No problems, nobody around to regret that it was 


PLAY AND SURVIVAL 27 


not going on any longer. What is it like—death? To go to 
sleep and never wake up. Oh, how terrible to be in the 
dark forever! But it would not be like that. It would 
not be like being buried alive forever. It would be as if you 
had never existed at all. Not only that you had never 
existed, but that nothing at all had ever existed; and that 
was just the way it was before you were born. 

Just as you have an invisible head, your ultimate reality, 
the ground of your being, is nothing. Shunyata is the Bud- 
dhist term for the void—which is space, which is con- 
sciousness, which is that in which ‘‘we live and move and 
have our being’’—God, the Great Void. Fortunately, there 
is no way of knowing what it is, because if we could know, 
we would be bored. 

There was a great Dutch philosopher by the name of 
Van Der Leeuw who said, ‘‘The mystery of life is not a 
problem to be solved, but a reality to be experienced.” 
Fortunately, you see, we have in the middle of all con- 
sciousness a perpetual question, the perpetual problem that 
we do not know what it is. Therefore, life remains interest- 
ing. We are always trying to find out, but life will not yield 
the answer. The only way to answer the question ‘‘What is 
reality?’ is by classification. Is you is, or is you ain’t? Are 
you male, or are you female? Are you republican or are you 
democrat? Are you animal, vegetable, mineral, tinker, tai- 
lor, soldier, sailor, rich man, poor man, beggar man, thief? 
We are all put in a class, but what it is that fundamentally 
is, cannot be classified. Nobody knows what it is and you 
cannot really ask the question in a meaningful way. 

There are many philosophical theories about what reality 
is. Some people say, ‘‘Well, reality is material—you know, 
there’s something called stuff.’ And philosophers, be- 
cause they are always lecturing in front of tables in univer- 
sities, always bang the table and say, ‘‘Now, does this table 
have reality or doesn’t it??? When Dr. Johnson heard about 
Bishop Berkeley’s theory that everything is in fact mental, 


28 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


he disproved it by kicking a stone and saying, “‘Surely, to 
every person of common sense this stone is really material 
and physical.’? Whereas on the other hand, more subtle 
thinkers say, ‘“No, there’s nothing material, it’s all a mental 
construction. The whole world is a phenomenon of cons- 
ciousnes¢””” In Bishop Berkeley’s time they did not know 
much about neurology. But now we know a great deal more 
about it and we can state the same position in a much more 
sophisticated way : it is the structure of your nervous system 
that determines the world which you see. In other words, 
in a world of no eyes, the sun would not be light. In a 
world of no tactile nerve ends, fire would not be hot. In a 
world of no muscles, rocks would not be heavy, and in a 
world without soft skin, the rocks would not be hard. It is 
all relationship, you see. In the old question: when a tree 
falls in a forest and nobody is listening, does it or does it 
not make a sound, the answer is perfectly simple. Sound is 
a relationship between vibrations in the air and the ear- 
drums. If I hit a drum which has no skin on it, no matter 
how hard I hit it, it will not make a sound. So the air can 
go on vibrating forever, but if there is no eardrum or 
auditory nervous system there is no noise. We, by virtue 
of our physical structure, evoke the world from the vibra- 
tions that would otherwise be the void. We are creating the 
void, but we are also in the world. Our bodies, our nervous 
systems, are something in the external world. You are in my 
external world, and I am in your external world. So it is an 
egg and hen situation—perfectly fascinating. We are, from 
a very hard-boiled, neurological point of view, evoking the 
world in which we live, and at the same time we are 
something which the world is doing. After all, the physicist 
will explain that you are a buzzing of electronic substances 
and processes, just like anything else. It is all one jazz, and 
it is absolutely marvelous because it is aware of itself 
through you. 


The whole of existence is a vibration, and all vibrations 


PLAY AND SURVIVAL 29 


have two basic aspects. We will call one ‘‘on’’ and the 


other ‘‘off.’’ If I am sitting next to a girl in the movies 
and I feel attracted to her and I put my hand on her knee 
and I leave it there, she will notice it at first, but if I do not 
move my hand she will become unaware of it. Then, if in- 
stead of just leaving my hand there Istart stroking or patting 
her knee, the sensation goes on and off, on and off, and she 
realizes that I am paying attention. Everything that is hap- 
pening to us is going on-off-on-off-on-off-on-off-on-off. 
Take the sensation of light. The vibration of light is so fast 
that the retina does not register the off, it retains the 
impression of the on, and so with our eyes we see things as 
relativelystable. But if we close our eyes and listen, we hear 
both the on and the off, especially in the low registers of 
sound. In the high registers you cannot hear the off, you 
hear the on. But when you get into the low register you hear 
the on and the off of vibration. Actually, everything that is 
physically existing is a throbbing, it is positive and nega- 
tive electricity. Read the first two paragraphs of the article 
of electricity in the fourteenth edition of the Encyclopedia 
Britannica. It is a learned scientific article with all kinds of 
formulas and technical information, but it starts out with 
pure metaphysics. ‘‘Electricity’’, says the author, ‘‘is an 
absolute. We do not know anything else that is like it. It 
is a fundamental... .’’—and you know he is talking 
pure theology. 

So this is it~-everything goes on and off, male and 
female, yang and yin, now you see it, now you don’t. With 
our ninteenth-century background we have been brought 
up to think that this energy that goes on and off is inherently 
stupid, that it is a mechanical thing. Freud called it libido. 
Others have called it blind energy, and therefore we feel 
that we as human beings are flukes. A million monkeys 
working on a million typewriters for a million years might 
statistically type the Bible. Of course, thereafter, as soon 
as they got to the end of it they would dissolve again into 


30 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


nonsense. So, we have been brought up to feel that we are 
flukes, that we are simply accidents. This is alienation, and 
this is the great problem. It seems to me completely obvious 
that we are not accidents. Some people say we are nothing 
but a little bacterium that crawls around on a ball of rock 
that circles an unimportant star on the outer fringes of a 
minor galaxy. Why do people say things like that? Because 
they want to say, “‘I am a real realistic guy. I am tough. 
I look at the facts and they are hard facts. The idea that 
there is somebody up there who cares is for little old ladies 
and weaklings, and I think this universe is a bunch of crap.”’ 
That is the message you get from certain people. Always 
look into a person’s philosophy to see what he or she is 
saying about themself. Your philosophy is your role, the 
game you put on. J admit that my philosophy is my game 
that I put on. It is my big act. And if I am going to put on 
an act, I am going to put on the biggest act I can think of 
and say, ‘‘To hell with all that nonsense, I know very well. 
that Iam impermanent, that I am an impermanent manifes- 
tation of the which than which there is no whicher.’’ And 
that is just the way I want it. I am a manisfestation of the 
root and ground of the universe, which is what all men call 
God, Atman, or Brahman. And I think it is fun to know that. 
It is fun to know it not merely as a theory, but as a positive 
sensation that you can actually feel. Therefore, my function 
is, if at all possible, to share this feeling so that you will 
not need anymore psychotherapy, not need anymore gurus, 
and not need anymore religion—just take off! 

There is, however, something called religion for kicks. 
My favorite church is the Russian Orthodox cathedral in 
Paris where they really live it up. They have gold, incense, 
icons, masses of candles, and gorgeous music. The priests 
come out from the secret sanctuary behind the royal doors 
which divide the main church from the inner sanctum, and 
when the doors open, somebody comes out looking like 
God the Father, dressed in beautiful robes, and it goes 


PLAY AND SURVIVAL 31 


on and on and on, and when you get bored you go across 
the street to a vodka shop where they sell vodka, caviar, 
and piroshki. Everybody lives it up, and then they go back 
to church again. That kind of religion is like dancing, it is 
a joyous expression, and it is not telling God what to do 
because it is all in old church Slavonic which nobody under- 
stands anyway. Everybody is just making great and glorious 
noises. This is essentially music, and music is essentially 
play. 

Now, herein lies one of the great mysteries of being, 
because music, like survival, does not really have to happen. 
Music is a fantasy with no destination. Dancing is the same 
thing only in motion. When we dance we are not going 
anywhere except round and round, thus, music and dance 
are models of the universe. The universe, according 
to Hindu theories, is going round and round; but according 
to St. Augustine of Hippo, the universe is going along in 
a straight line. Now, this was one of the most disastrous 
ideas that was ever visited upon Western civilization. If 
time is cyclic, Jesus Christ would have to be crucified again 
and again. There would not be, therefore, that one perfect 
and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for the sins 
of the whole world. Time had to be a straight line from 
the creation to the consummation to the last judgment. 
At that point everybody stopped thinking because they did 
not know what they were going to do when they got to 
heaven. They knew what they were going to do in hell. 
If you look at Jan van Eyck’s painting of the Last Judgment 
in the Metropolitan Museum, it is perfectly clear that 
everybody in heaven is completely bored. They are sitting 
there looking like the cat that swallowed the canary. Rows 
and rows of them with the Lord God Almighty presiding 
and looking equally bored. But down below there is a bat- 
winged skull spreading out its ghastly wings, and all-nude 
bodies writhing and being eaten by snakes and chewing each 
other. Down below they are having an orgy. But all those 


32 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


stately people up in heaven are destined to stay in church 
forever, in an obvious state of ultimate boredom. 

Also observe Gustav Doré’s illustrations of Dante’s Divina 
Commedia. He was a magnificent engraver, and while he is 
on the theme of the Inferno he is full of imagination, but 
when hé" gets to the Paradiso his imagination is shot. All he 
has is ladies in white nighties trailing in circles through 
the skies; you know, angels. He has no idea what an angel 
is! It is a very rare person, indeed, who has a true vision 
of paradise. And it is extraordinary that our idea of para- 
dise is so weak. Students should write about their idea of 
heaven to get the imagination going. The point is, we 
have never admitted that our idea of heaven is a perfectly 
useless state. What purpose is served by our idea of God? 
Obviously none at all. Like children when they are little 
and wise: they make goo-goo noises; the sounds have no 
meaning, no purpose—and the universe is just like that. 

The point is then that life is like music for its own sake. 
We are living in an eternal now, and when we listen to 
music we are not listening to the past, we are not listening 
to the future, we are listening to an expanded present. 
Just as we have a field of vision that is an expanded width 
and distance, so the present moment is not just a hairline 
as the clock indicates. The present moment is a field of 
experience that is much more than an instant. To hear a 
melody is to hear the interval between tones. Within the 
present moment we can hear intervals and see rhythms. 
Thus, within each moment we can feel a sequence going on. 

So, when I speak of the eternal now, please do not confuse 
it with a split second; it is not the same kind of thing. The 
eternal now is roomy, easy, and rich, but also frivolous! 
This reminds me of a wonderful tale about a clergyman of 
Christ’s Church, Oxford, who had terribly bad handwrit- 
ing. It was so bad that he could not even read it himself. 
One day he was preaching a sermon and as he started out 
reading his notes he said: ‘‘You who are frivolous, of 


PLAY AND SURVIVAL 33 


course, . . . uh, You who are frivolous of course, .. . 
Ah! You who are followers of Christ!’’ But do you see 
the connection? ‘‘Consider the lilies of the field how 
they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin, and yet 
Solomon in all his glory was not clothed like one of these.”’ 
This is saying: do not be anxious for the morrow, you who 


are frivolous, of course. 
There is a divine frivolity. The love that moves the sun 


and other stars is frivolity. Therefore, God might be des- 
cribed as being sincere, but not serious. If a woman who 
is beautiful and attractive says to me: “‘I love you’’, and I 
say to her, ‘Are you serious, or are you just playing with 
me?’’, that is the wrong response because I hope she will 
not be serious and that she will play with me. So I should 
say to her, ‘*Are you sincere or are you just toying with 
me?”’ You see, playfulness is the very essence of the energy 
of the universe. It is music. And in my opinion, good music, 
as written by Bach, has no meaning. Classical music, wheth- 
er it be of the West, of the Hindus, or of the Chinese, 
has no meaning other than its own sound. And words, like 
music, have no meaning. Words are noises that represent 
and point to something other than themselves. Dollar bills 
represent wealth, maps represent territory, and words al- 
ways represent something else. The sound ‘‘water’’ will 


ce PB) 
water. 


not make you wet. You cannot drink the noise 
Therefore, the word is symbolic and points to something 
other than itself, And yet we say of words that they have 
meaning. And people get all fouled up because they want 
life to have meaning as if it were words. Goethe was hung 
up on this: “‘. . . all that is mortal is but a symbol.’’ Of 
what’? What do you mean? As if you had to have a meaning, 
as if you were a mere word, as if you were something that 
could be looked up in a dictionary. You are meaning. 
This is the point: the meaning, the goodie about life is 
exactly here and now. We are not going anywhere. Look 
out in the street and you will see people frantically think- 


34 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


ing they are going somewhere; that they have important 
business. They have a far-out look in their eyes and their 
noses stick out in front. They are going somewhere, they are 
on purpose, they have something to achieve. Here and now, 
sitting wherever you happen to be, do you realize you do 
not havé’to go anywhere? Right where you are is where it 
is at. That is why the Hindus call the true self of us all 
the atman, the man where it is at. There is a being in Bud- 
dhist iconography called Avalokiteshvara, who is also 
known as Kannon in Japanese, Kuan-yin in Chinese, and 
Chenrezigs in Tibetan. These names are usually interpreted 
as ‘‘god(dess) of mercy,’’ and (s)he is represented with 
1,000 arms all radiating outward ; (s)he is the cosmic milli- 
pede, the embodiment of compassion. However, (s)he is 
not completely a ‘‘she.’’ She is hermaphroditic, male/ 
female. Avalokiteshvara means the watchful onc, the one 
who is always caring. The name is easy to remember be- 
cause as the cockneys say, ‘‘ ’avea look it’’-—‘‘Take a look 
at it.” 

Language is simply fascinating. We could go into this and 
play all kinds of games with words and their music and 
magic. But now, here is the thing that I am getting at: a 
culture which excludes frivolity has lost the point of life, 
and this is where the Chinese communists are in extreme 
danger. They are the most earnest of people, the most 
dedicated to survival. The style of life in China and also 
in Russia is drab because they think that the point of life 
is to go on living, and so long as you get by, no matter how 
horrible the food is, how drab your dress, you are getting 
by. And this is completely missing the point. The mistake 
is on page 224 of Mao Tse-Tung’s red book where he 
says, ‘‘It is essential to have a furrowed brow to think,” 
as if straining the muscles of the forehead has anything to 
do with clear thinking. This is against Lao-tzu, who is 
the greatest of all Chinese philosophers, the Father of 


Wisdom. You cannot make your mind or your nervous 


PLAY AND SURVIVAL 35 


system efficient by straining; this is basic to psycho-physical 
functioning. Mao Tse-Tung makes this mistake and this 
indicates an excessive seriousness. This is the point I am 
getting at: life is not worth living if it is compulsive. One 
might ask why more people do not commit suicide? The 
vast majority of people could be said not to commit suicide 
because either they are terrified of it and feel it is an ab- 
solute necessity to go on, that is, ‘‘while there is life, there 
is hope’’ (and that is a terrible motto), or they do not com- 
mit suicide simply because they are enjoying the dance. 
Even if you are not very rich and live in a fairly simple 
way, nevertheless, the companionship with other people, 
the sight of the sun and the stars, the rustling of grasses 
and the sound of water provide your life with its own 
explanation. As a haiku poem says: ‘“The long night, the 
sound of the water says what I think.”’ 

Herein we have what I am trying to describe as play. 
Play in Sanskrit is lila. Lila is the root of our word “‘lilt,”’ 
and the universe is called Vishnu-lila, the sport or play of 
Vishnu. Now, when we talk about the play, we also think 
of the theatre. The theatre is a very curious phenomenon 
because it is defined by a stage and a proscenium arch. 
But behind the scenes is a greenroom where the actors 
dress up. They know who they are in reality before they 
assume their personas. ‘‘Persona’” means a mask through 
which sound passes, per-sona, because the masks were worn 
in the open-air theatre of Graeco-Roman drama. They had 
megaphonic mouthpieces so that the sound could be pro- 
jected out-of-doors just as your personality projects your 
image of yourself, which is not you at all—it is your mask. 
So, the actors come on, and their strategem is to convince 
the audience that what is happening on the stage is real. The 
audience knows by virtue of the prosceniurn arch, and the 
fencing off of the stage from the spectators, that what is 
happening on the stage is not really for real, but the actors 
are going to act so well that they will have people weeping, 


36 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


laughing, crying, and sitting on the edge of their seats in 
anxiety. Now, imagine pushing this to a far extreme: the 
finest actors with the most appreciative audience—and here 
we are! You see, it is a play. But we take it seriously, and 
therefore we cannot see through it. We exploit and kill 
each othér, and are mean to each other, but have no real 
reason whatsoever. Even so, we can understand and see 
through it, we can know that this whole life is a joke. After 
all, what is the joker in the deck of cards but the wild card 
that can play any role. The joker is the symbol of God in the 
pack. Kings, in ancient times, would always have a jester 
at court and who was the jester but the man who was 
crazy. He was a schizophrenic who made unpredictable 
remarks, and everybody would roar with laughter because 
he said things out of context. Schizophrenics are in a way 
liberated because they do not give a damn. A schizophrenic 
child does not care if he is knocked down by a car— 
whatever happens, happens. So, the kings had these schizo- 
phrenics who were funny people, and they sat at the 
foot of the king’s throne to remind the king not to take 
himself seriously, as in Richard II: 


Within the hollow crown 
That rounds the mortal temples of a king, 
Keeps Death his court; and there the antic sits, 
Scoffing his state, and grinning at his pomp; 
Allowing him a breath, a little scene 
To monarcharize, be fear’d, and kill with looks; 
Infusing him with self and vain conceit,— 
As if his flesh, which walls about our life, 
Were brass impregnable ; and humour’d thus, 
Comes at the last, and with a little pin 
Bores through his castle wall, and—farewell, king! 

[3. 2. 160-70] 


Shakespeare is full of this kind of wisdom; The Tempest 
talks of the transcience of life: 


PLAY AND SURVIVAL 37 


Our revels now are ended: these our actors, 
As I foretold you, were all spirits, and 

Are melted into air, into thin air: 

And, like the baseless fabric of this vision, 
The cloud-capp’d towers, the gorgeous palaces, 
The solemn temples, the great globe itself, 
Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve, 

And, like this insubstantial pageant faded, 
Leave not a rack behind: We are such stuff 
As dreams are made on, and our little life 

Is rounded with a sleep. 


[4. 1. 148-58] 


The most fantastic things in poetry work on the theme of 
insubstantiality, of transcience. It is all fading away. We, 
each one of us, are not a substantial entity, we are like a 
flame. A flame is a stream of hot gas, like a whirlpool in 
a river, it is always moving, always changing, and yet it 
always appears the same. Each one of us is a flowing, and if 
you resist it, you go crazy. You are like somebody trying 
to grab water in his hands—the harder you squeeze it, the 
faster it slips through your fingers. So, the principle of the 
enjoyment of life is—and this is not a precept, this is not a 
moralization, this has nothing to do with what you ought, 
should, et cetera, it is completely practical—do not hang 
onto it—let it go. 


38 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


CHAPTER THREE 


THE RELEVANCE 
OF ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 


(The following lecture was given before 
the members of a Christian theological in- 
stitution, so Watts’s remarks are directed 
primarily along the lines of the relevance 


of Asian philosophy to Christianity.) 


\ y' ESTERN theology has not had a very distinguished 
record in promoting the study of other than the 


Christian religion, and most study of comparative religion 
that has gone on in theological schools has historically 
been missionary oriented. This is rather puzzling. The 
student of theology has always been encouraged to find out 
the weird ideas of the opposing prospects so as to be able 
to undermine them. But if you believe in the first place 
that yours is the only true religion, is there really any 
point in studying any other one? You would very quickly 
find reasons for showing the others to be inferior because 
that was a foregone conclusion—they had to be. There- 
fore, in all the arguments about the respective merits of 
various religions, the judge and the advocate are the same. 
If, for example, Christians get into discussions as to whe- 
ther Jesus Christ was a more profound and spiritual 


ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 39 


character than the Buddha, they arrive at their decision on 
the basis of a scale of values that are, of course, Christian— 
making the judge and the advocate the same. I really do 
marvel at this Christian imperialism because it prevails 
even among theological liberals, and in practice it reaches 
its final absurdity in religionless religion—the doctrine 
that there is no God and Jesus Christ is his only son. It is 
at this point that we begin to see the anxiety that, even 
though we do not generally believe in God any more, 
somehow we have still got to be Christians. 

Obviously, the Christian church is a very curious or- 
ganization that must be understood. The inner meaning 
of the Church, as it works in fact, is a society of the saved, 
and a society of the saved necessarily requires a society of 
the not saved. All social groups with claims to some kind 
of special status must necessarily create aliens and foreign- 
ers. St. Thomas Aquinas let the cat out of the bag one 
day when he said that the saints in heaven would occasionally 
peer over the battlements into hell and praise God for the 
just punishment visited upon evil doers. 

Now, I realize I am not being very fair or very kind to 
modern theology, but there is this strange persistence of 
insisting that our group is the best group, and I feel that 
there is in this something peculiarly irreligious, and that 
furthermore it exhibits a very strange lack of faith. There 
is a very strong distinction between faith on the one hand, 
and belief on the other. Belief is, as a matter of fact, 
quite contrary to faith. Belief is really wishing. It comes 
from the Anglo-Saxon root lief, ‘‘to wish,’’ and, as ex- 
pressed in the Apostles’ Creed, belief is a fervent hope, 
a hope that the universe will turn out to be thus and so. 
In this sense, therefore, belief precludes the possibility 
of faith. Faith is openness to truth, to reality, whatever 
it may turn out to be. “I want to know the truth’’—that 
is the attitude of faith. Most Christians use ideas about the 
universe and about God as something to hang onto in the 


40 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


spirit of “‘Rock of Ages cleft for me.”’ Hymnal imagery is 
full of such rocks: ‘‘A mighty fortress is our God,”’ ‘‘Un- 
harmed upon the eternal rock, the eternal city stands.”’ 
There is something very rigid about a rock, but we are find- 
ing our rock getting rather worn out in an age where it 
is becoming more and more obvious that our world is a 
floating world. Ours is a world floating in space where 
all positions are relative, and any point may be regarded 
as the center. Our world does not float on anything, and 
therefore, the religious attitude appropriate to our time 
is not one of clinging to rocks but of learning how to swim. 
You know that if you get in the water and have nothing to 
hold onto, but try to behave as you would on dry land, you 
will drown. But if, on the other hand, you trust yourself 
to the water and let go, you will float. And this is exactly 
the situation of faith. In the New Testament when Jesus 
began to foretell his own death, his disciples became greatly 
disturbed because it was written in the Law that the Messiah 
would not die. To this Jesus replied: ‘‘Unless a grain of 
wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains alone; but if 
it dies, it brings forth much fruit.’’' There is also the 
curious incident after the Resurrection when Mary Mag- 
delene, being so delighted to see the Master again, reached 
out to grab hold of him, and Jesus said, “‘Do not cling to 
me!’? On another occasion he said to the disciples: ‘‘It 
is expedient for you that I go away, for if I go not away, 
the Holy Spirit cannot come to you.’’* Somehow we have 
reversed all this. 

Jesus, it seems to me, was one of those rare and re- 
markable individuals who had a particular kind of spiritual 
experience that, in terms of Hebrew theology, he found 
most difficult to express without blasphemy. He said, ‘‘I and 
the Father are One’’; in other words, ‘‘I am God.’’ Now, 
if you are a Hindu, that is a rather natural statement to 
make; but in our culture, which has Hebrew theology in 
its background, anyone who says “‘I am God’’ is either 


ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 4] 


blasphemous or insane. It is our image of God as ‘‘Our 
Father’’ that really influences our conception of God, and 
the image has far more emotional power than any amount 
of theology or abstraction. It is not like Tillich’s decontam- 
inated name for God, “‘The Ground of Being,’’ nor like 
Professor Northrop’s, “‘Undifferentiated Aesthetic Continu- 
um.’ These expressions are not very moving, even though 
subtle theologians prefer such descriptions. They tell us 
that when we call God ‘‘The Father’’ we do not have to 
believe literally that he is a cosmic male parent, and still 
less that he has a white beard and sits on a golden throne 
above the stars. No serious theologian ever believed in such 
a God. But nevertheless, the image of the monotheistic God 
of the West affects us because it is political. The title ‘‘King 
of Kings and Lord of Lords”’ is the title of the emperors of 
ancient Persia. Our image of God is based on the Pharoahs, 
on the great rulers of the Chaldeans, and on the kings of 
Persia; it is the image of the political governor and Lord 
of the Universe who keeps order and who rules it from, 
metaphorically speaking, above. 

Our image of the world in the West is that the world is 
a construct. Thus, it is very natural for a child to say tc 
his mother, ‘‘How was I made?’’ 
put together. This imagery goes back to Genesis, where 
the story is told of how God created Adam out of a clay 
figurine by breathing the breath of life into the nostrils of 
this figurine, and bringing it to life. This reflects the funda- 
mental supposition, that even underlies the development of 
Western science, that everything has been made, that 
someone knows how it was made, and that you can find out 
because behind the universe there is an architect. This 


, as if we were somehow 


could be called ‘‘the ceramic model of the universe’’ be- 
cause it upholds the basic feeling that there are two things 
in existence: one is “‘stuff,’’ or material, and the other 
is form. Now, material such as clay, by itself, is rather 
stupid; it has no life in it. So, for matter to assume orderly 


42 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


forms, it requires that an external intelligence be in- 
troduced to shape it. Now, with that deeply embedded in 
our common sense, it is very difficult for people to realize 
that this image is not necessarily appropriate for a descrip- 
tion of the, world. Indeed, the entire concept of “‘stuff”’ is 
completefy absent from modern physics, which studies the 
physical universe purely in terms of pattern and structure. 
On the other hand, the Hindu model of the universe is a 
drama. The world is not made, it is acted. And behind every 
face—human, animal, plant, or mineral—there is the face, 
or non-face, of the central self, the atman, which is Brah- 
man, the final reality that cannot be defined. Obviously, 
that which is the center cannot be made an object of 
knowledge any more than you can bite your own teeth, or 
lift yourself up by your own bootstraps; it is the basis 
of what there is, and you are it. The idea being that the na- 
ture of reality is a game of hide and seek, which is really 
the only game there is—now you see it, now you don’t. 
This Hindu image is one that is particularly disturbing 
to Christians because in it is the element of a very special 
theological profanity called “‘pantheism.’’ Pantheism is 
the feeling that every part in the drama of life is being 
played by the Supreme Lord, and this makes Christians 
think that all the real distinctions between good and 
evil are obliterated. But practically speaking, that is the big- 
gest bit of nonsense ever uttered. Distinctions between 
good and evil do not have to be eternal distinctions to be 
real distinctions, and to say that a distinction that is not 
eternal is not real is a highly un-Christian thing to say, 
and certainly a very un-Jewish thing to say. One of the 
fundamental principles of the Hebrew attitude is that all 
finite things that have been created by God are good, and 
therefore a thing does not have to be infinite to be good. 
Furthermore, to invoke the authority of heaven in matters 
of moral regulation is like putting a two million volt current 
through your electric shaver. As the Chinese say ‘‘Do not 


ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 43 


swat a fly on a friend’s head with a hatchet’’. Like all kinds 
of judicial torture and harsh justice, such ideas bring law 
into disrespect. Such a fierce God, and such an unbending 
attitude, results in people disbelieving in God altogether, 
and, shall we say, ‘‘throwing out the baby with the bath 
water.’’ This is one among many reasons why people today 
are saying, “‘God is Dead.’’ It is very inconvenient to have 
the kind of God who is an authoritarian boss over the world, 
peering down over your shoulders all the time, knowing 
your innermost thoughts and judging you. In the so-called 
“Ages of Faith’’ people were just as immoral as they are 
today, so it has never significantly improved anyone’s beha- 
vior; it is a very uncomfortable feeling, and everyone is 
happy to be rid of it. 

If thou shalt not make any graven image of anything that 
is in the heavens above, then all these fixed notions of God 
are idolatrous. The most dangerous and pernicious images 
are not those made of wood or stone—nobody takes those 
seriously-—they are the images made of imagination, con- 
ception, and thought. This is why, in the fundamental 
approach to the Godhead, both the Hindu and the Buddhist, 
and for that matter the Taoist, take what is called the 
negative approach. St. Thomas Aquinas said that to proceed 
to the knowledge of God, it is necessary to go by the way 
of remotion—of saying what God is not—since God by his 
immensity exceeds every conception to which our intellect 
can attain. When of the Godhead the Hindu says, ‘*All that 
can truly be said is “‘neti, neti’? or “‘not this, not this,’’ and 
when the Buddhist uses such a term for the final reality as 
shunyata, which means voidness or emptiness, textbook 
after textbook on comparative religion by various theolo- 
gians complain that this is terrible negativism, or nihilism. 
But it is nothing of the kind. If, for example, you have a 
window on which there is a fine painting of the sun, your 
act of faith in the real sun will be to scrape the painting 


44 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


off so that you can let the real sunlight in. So, in the same 
way, pictures of God on the windows of the mind need 
scraping off, otherwise they become idolatrous substitutes 
for the reality. 

Now, I am hoping that this sort of understanding will 
issue frofa the ‘‘God is Dead’? theology, but I am not quite 
sure whether it is going to. As a matter of fact, there are 
precedents within the Christian tradition for an intelligent 
theology such as this, for what I would call ‘‘atheism in the 
name of God.”’ In other words, one completely lets go of 
clinging to images of God because all such images only get 
in the way of reality. The highest form of prayer is that in 
which all concepts of God have been left behind—this is the 
supreme act of faith. But the moment you insist on the 
Christian image, you support the Church as a huge, im- 
perialistic, vested-interest organization. After all, if the 
Church is the Body of Christ, is it not through the break- 
ing of the Body of Christ that life is given to the world? 
But the Church does not want to be broken up, by Jove, 
no! It goes around canvassing for new members. 

Consider the difference between a physician and a clergy- 
man: the physician wants to get rid of his patients, so he 
gives them medicine and hopes they will not get hooked on 
it; the clergyman, on the other hand, is usually forced to 
make his patients become addicts so that they will continue 
to pay their dues. The doctor has faith in turnover, he 
knows that there will always be sick people. The clergy 
should also have faith in turnover. Clergymen, get rid of 
your congregations! Say to your people, ‘‘You’ve heard 
all Ihave to tell you. Go away. If you want to get together 
for making celestial whoopee, which is worship, all right; 
but if you come to church out of a sense of duty, you are 
not wanted.’” When I was a chaplain at Northwestern 
University, I used to tell the students that if they did not 
want to be at Mass they would only be skeletons at the feast, 


ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 45 


and it would be much better if they went swimming or 
stayed in bed because we were going to celebrate the Holy 
Communion and I meant celebrate! 

I think it is a shame that we take religion in such dead 
earnest. I remember when I was a boy, how wicked I 
thought it was to laugh in church. We do not realize that, 
as Chesterton reminded us, the angels fly because they take 
themselves so lightly. So too, in the Paradiso, when Dante 
heard the song of the angels he said it sounded like the 
laughter of the universe. They were singing, ‘‘Alleluia, 
Alleluia, Alleluia,’’ which does not mean anything; it is 
sublime nonsense. So in the same way, there are Hindu 
and Buddhist texts that are the chants of the buddhas, or 
the divine beings, and that do not mean anything at all 
and never did. 

The point that I wish to make most strongly is that 
behind a vital religious life for the West there has to be a 
faith that is not expressed as ideas and opinions to which 
you cling in a kind of desperation. Faith is the act of 
letting go, and that must begin with letting go of God. This 
is not atheism in the ordinary sense, because atheism in 
the ordinary sense is fervently hoping that there is no God. 
Thus, faith is letting God go. 

Someone once described ‘‘Christian Secularism’’ as the 
assumption that there is nothing at all to life except a 
pilgrimage between the maternity ward and the crema- 
torium, and that it is within that span that Christian 
concern must be exercised because that is all there is. So I 
am afraid that this is what the ‘‘God is Dead’? movement 
might evolve into. It is true that this is pretty much com- 
mon sense these days. I very much doubt whether most 
religious people really believe in their religion; it has be- 
come implausible. Even Jehovah Witnesses are pretty 
polite when they come around to the door. If they really 
believed what they were talking about they would be 
screaming in the streets. If Catholics believed what they 


46 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


were talking about they would be making an awful fuss— 
they would be having horrendous television programs 
that would put pro-football to shame, and they would have 
full-page ads in the papers about the terrible things that 
would happen if ‘you didn’t,’” and more so if ‘you did.”’ 
They would also be very serious about it, but nobody is. 
And so, it has become extremely plausible that this trip 
between the maternity ward and the crematorium is what 
there is to life. 

You see, we still have going into our common sense the 
nineteenth-century myth of the universe which succeeded 
“‘the ceramic myth’’ in Western history. I call it ‘‘the 
myth of the fully automatic model,’’ namely, that it is stu- 
pid, blind force. Hegel’s phrase, ‘‘the fortuitous congress 
of atoms,”’ which is of the same vintage as Freud’s libido, 
is the blind surge of lust at the basis of human pyschology. 
These men of the nineteenth century were indulging in a 
put-down attitude of the world, and by making it seem as 
banal as it possibly could be, they were advertising their 
own hard-headedness. This was a kind of role playing. 
On the other hand, if we think about the existence of things 
and our place in the universe, we might be absolutely 
amazed to discover ourselves on this ‘‘ball of rock’’ rotating 
around a spherical fire; it is a very odd situation. 

The more I look at things, I cannot get rid of the feeling 
that existence is quite weird. You see, a philosopher is a 
sort of intellectual yokel who gawks at things that sensible 
people take for granted. Sensible people say, ‘‘Existence is 
nothing at all, just go on and do something.’’ So, too, the 
current movement in philosophy, logical analysis, says you 
must not even think about existence, it is a meaningless 
concept. Therefore, philosophy has become the discussion 
of trivia, and philosophical journals are as satisfactorily dull 
as any other kind of purely technical inquiry. No good 
philosopher lies awake at night worrying about the destiny 
of man and the nature of God because a philosopher today 


ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 47 


is a practical fellow who goes to the university with his 
briefcase at nine and leaves at five. He ‘‘does’’ philosophy 
during the day by discussing whether certain sentences 
have meaning and, if so, what. However, as William Earle 
said in a very funny essay, “‘He would come to work in a 
white coat if he thought he could get away with it.”’ 

The problem is that the philosopher of today has lost his 
wonder, because wonder, in modern philosophy, is some- 
thing you must not have; it is like enthusiasm in eighteenth- 
century England—it is very bad form. I wonder about the 
universe, but it is not a question that I wonder about, it 
is a feeling that I have. I do not even know what question 
to ask! What would you ask? Imagine if you had an inter- 
view with God and were allowed to ask one question. 
What would it be? If you do not rush to answer, you will 
soon find that you have no idea what to ask. I simply 
cannot formulate the question that contains my wonder. 
The moment my mouth opens to utter it, I suddenly find 
Iam talking nonsense. Yet this should not prevent wonder 
from being the foundation of philosophy. As Aristotle 
said, ‘‘Wonder is the beginning of philosophy.’’ To the 
philosopher, existence seems very strange, and even more 
so when he realizes that we are all embraced within a 
neurological contraption that is able to center itself in the 
midst of an incredible expanse of galaxies and then start 
measuring the whole thing. Existence is relationship, and 
we are smack in the middle of it. 

Obviously, there is a place in life for a religious attitude 
in the sense of awe, of astonishment at existence. And this 
is also a basis of respect for existence—which is something 
we do not have very much of in this culture, even though 
we call it materialistic. A materialist is a person who loves 
material, but in our culture today we are bent on the total 
destruction of material and its conversion into junk and poi- 
sonous gas as quickly as possible. Ours is not a materialistic 
culture because it has no respect for material. And respect 


48 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


is, in turn, based on wonder—on feeling the marvel of just 
an ordinary pebble in your fingers. 

So I am afraid that the ‘‘God is Dead’’ theology will 
sort of drift off into secular do-goodery in the name of 
Jesus. And this, I think, is where we can be strongly re- 
vivified “and stimulated by the introduction into our 
spiritual life of certain things that are Oriental. Now, it 
must be understood that the crux of the Hindu and Bud- 
dhist disciplines is an experience; it is not a theory, nor 
is it a belief. If we say that a religion is a combination of 
creed, code, and cult—as is true of Judaism, Islam, and 
Christianity—then Buddhism is not. A creed is a revela- 
tion, a revealed symbolism of what the universe is about, 
and you are commanded to believe in it on divine au- 
thority; a code is the revealed will of God for man, which 
you are commanded to obey; and a cult is the divinely 
revealed form of worship that you must practice. The Ten 
Commandments must be obeyed because God is boss. He 
is the ruler, King of Kings and Lord of Lords. But the 
discipline of yoga in Hinduism, or in the various forms of 
Buddhist meditation, do not require you to believe any- 
thing, and they contain no commandments. They do indeed 
have precepts, but they are really vows that you undertake 
on your own responsibility, not as an obedience to some- 
one. They are experimental techniques for changing 
consciousness, and the thing that they are mainly concerned 
with is helping human beings to get rid of the hallucination 
that each one of us is a skin-encapsulated ego—a little man 
inside our head located between the ears and behind the 
eyes who is the source of conscious attention and voluntary 
behavior. Most people do not really think that they are 
anything but that, and that the body is a thing that you have. 
‘‘Mommie, who would I have been if my father had been 
someone else?’’, as though your parents give you the body 
and you pop the soul into it at some point—conception or 
parturition, nobody could ever decide. 


ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 49 


This attitude, that we are something in a body, is one 
that lingers with us. We are taught to experience the 
beating of the heart as something that happens to us, 
whereas talking or walking is something that we do. But, 
do you not beat your heart? Language will not allow you 
to think that; it is not customary. How do you even think? 
How do you manage to be conscious? Do you know? How 
do you open and close your hand? If you are a physiologist, 
you may be able to say, but that does not help you to open 
and close your hand any better than I do. I know how to 
do it, but I cannot put it into words. In the same way, 
the Hindu god knows how he creates this whole universe 
because he does it, but he could not explain it. He might 
as well try to drink the Pacific Ocean with a fork. So when 
a Hindu gets enlightened and he recovers from the hallu- 
cination of being a skin-encapsulated ego, he finds out 
that central to his own self is the eternal self of the universe, 
and if you go up to him and say, “‘How do you do all this?’’, 
he is apt to say, ‘Well, just like you open and close your 
hand.”’ 

Whenever questioners would go to Sri Ramana, the 
great Hindu sage who died a few years ago, they would say 
to him, ‘‘Master, was I living before in a previous in- 
carnation, and ifso, who was I?’’, and he would say to them, 
**Who is asking the question? Who are you?”’ What a spiri- 
tual teacher in both Hinduism and Buddhism does to awaken 
you, to get you ‘over the hallucination of being the skin- 
encapsulated ego, is to bug you in a certain way. He has a 
funny look in his eyes as if to say, “‘Come off it, Shiva, I 
know what you are up to, I know what you are doing.”’ 
And you say, ‘“‘What, me?’’ So he looks at you ina funny 
way, until finally you get the feeling that he sees all the way 
through you; and that all your selfishness and evil, nasty 
thoughts are transparent to his gaze. Then you have to try 
and alter them. He suggests that you practice the control 
of the mind, that you become desireless, and that you give 


50 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


up selfish desires so as to be a skin-encapsulated self. Then 
you may have some success in quieting your mind and in 
concentrating. But after that, he will throw a curve at you, 
which is: But are you not still desiring not to desire? Why 
are you trying to be unselfish? Well, the answer is, ‘‘I 
want to*be on the side of the big battalions. I think it is 
going to pay off better to be unselfish than to be selfish.” 
Luther saw that, and St. Augustine saw it also. But there 
it is—he has begun to make you see the unreality and the 
hallucinatory quality of a separate self. Such a self is merely 
conventional reality, in the same sense as lines of latitude 
and longitude and the measurements of the clock; which 
is why one of the means of maya, illusion, is measurement. 
Things are measurements; they are units of thought, like 
inches are units of measurement. There are no things in phy- 
sical nature. How many things is a thing? However many 
you want. A ‘‘thing’’ is a ‘‘think,’’ a unit of thought; it 
is as much reality as you can catch hold of in one idea. 

So when this realization of the hallucination of the 
separate self comes about, it comes about through discover- 
ing that your alleged separate self cannot do anything—it 
cannot improve itself either by doing something about it, 
or by doing nothing about it, and both ways are based on 
illusion. You see, this is what you have to do to get people 
out of hallucinations—you make them act consistently on 
the suppositions of their hallucinations. The guru, whether 
Hindu or Buddhist, performs a reductio ad absurdum on the 
premise of the skin-encapsulated ego. So, what happens 
then? You might imagine from garbled accounts of Eastern 
mysticism that one thereupon disappears into an infinite 
sea of faintly mauve jello, and that you become so lost to 
the world, and so entranced, that you forget your name, 
address, telephone number, and function in life. But noth- 
ing of the kind happens. The state of mystical] illumination, 
although it may in its sudden onset be accompanied by a 
sensation of tremendous luminance and transparency, when 


ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 5] 


you get used to it, it is just like everyday life. Here are the 
people that you formerly thought were separate individuals, 
and here is the ‘‘you’” whom you formerly thought was 
merely confronting these other people. When the great 
Dr. D. T. Suzuki was asked, ‘‘What is it like to be en- 
lightened?” he said, ‘‘It is just like ordinary, everyday 
experience, except about two inches off the ground.’’ You 
see, what is altered is not the way your senses perceive ; 
what is altered is the way you think about it—your definitions 
of what you see, and your evaluation of it. When you do not 
cling to the world, and when you no longer have a hostile 
attitude toward it, you know the world is you. Taken from 
the point of view of biology, the behavior of a living 
organism cannot possibly be described without simul- 
taneously describing the behavior of the environment. To 
describe organisms in environments is to describe a uni- 
fied field of behavior called an ‘‘organism-environment.”’ 
The environment does not push the organism around and 
the organism does not push the environment around. They 
are two aspects, or poles, of the same process. 

This attitude toward nature—seeing the fundamental 
unity of the self that manifests it all—is not an attitude 
that, as missionaries are apt to suppose, denies the value 
of differentiation. You must understand the principle of 
what are called identical differences. Take a coin. The 
head side is a different side from the tail side, and yet the 
two are inseparable. Take the operation of buying and 
selling. Selling is a separate operation from buying, but you 
cannot buy anything unless somebody sells something at 
the same time, and vice versa. This is what is meant by the 
underlying unity of opposites, what is called Advaita, or 
nonduality, in Hinduism; and what the Chinese mean 
when they use the word tao to designate the way of opera- 
tion of the positive and negative principles, the yang and 
the yin. It is not a unity that annihilates differences, but a 
unity that is manifested by the very differentiations that we 


52 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


perceive. It is all polar, like the two poles of one magnet. 

So when we say that Oriental monism is a point of view 
toward life that merges everything into a kind of sickening 
goo, this is terribly unfair; it just is not so. If you argue 
that this sort of doctrine, in which everybody is really the 
Godhead* destroys the possibility of love between indi- 
viduals because you have to be definitively ‘‘other’’ in order 
to love, otherwise it is all self-love, then that argument 
collapses in view of the doctrine of the Trinity. If the three 
persons are one God, then they cannot love each other by 
the same argument. Hinduism simply uses the idea that is 
in the Christian Trinity, only it uses the idea of a multi- 
trinity. Instead of a three-in-one, it is a one-in-All. 

Of course, the thorn in the flesh, when approaching a 
doctrine that seems to be monistic or pantheistic, is always: 
what about evil? Are we to make the ground of being 
responsible for evil? No, we do not want to do that because 
we want to keep God’s skirts clean. In spite of the fact 
that our Hebrew Bible says: “I am the Lord, and there 
is none else; I form the light and create darkness; I make 
peace, and create evil. I the Lord do all these things.’’* 

Who is it that sits at the left hand of God? (We know who 
sits at the right hand.) All word about the one who sits on 
the left is hushed up because that is the side on which the 
district attorney sits. Of course, in the Book of Job, it is 
Satan who is the district attorney in the court of heaven. 
He is the prosecutor and faithful servant of the court. The 
whole problem is that it would be very bad indeed if God 
were the author of evil, and we were his victims. That is to 
say, if we keep the model of the king of the universe in 
which the creatures are all subjects of the king, then a 
God who is responsible for evil is being very unkind to the 
people. But in the Hindu theory, God is not another per- 
son. There are no victims of God. He is never anything but 
His own victim. You are responsibie. If you want to stay in 
the state of illusion, stay in it. But you can always wake up. 


ORIENTAL PHILOSOPHY 53 


CHAPTER FOUR 


SUSPENSION OF JUDGMENT 


The Tangle of Transformation 


H UMAN beings have for a long time been concerned 
about transforming their minds. But may I ask: is 
there any way in which one’s mind can be transformed, or 
is it simply a process that is nothing more than a vicious 
circle? In so many people’s minds there is an urgent 
feeling that ‘‘I must improve me,”’ and this is critically 
important. In the very idea that ‘‘I must improve me’’ there 
is the obvious difficulty that if I am in need of improvement, 
the ‘‘T’’ who is going to do the improving is the one who 
needs to be improved; and there, immediately, we have 
a vicious circle. 

If I may put this in theological terms: how does man 
follow the will of God if the will of man is perverse? The- 
ologians say you cannot follow the will of God without 
having divine grace. How, then, do you get grace? Why is 
grace given to some and not to others? If I cannot follow 
the will of God by my own effort because my will is selfish, 
how will my will, which is selfish, be transformed into an 


SUSPENSION OFJUDGMENT 55 


unselfish will? If I cannot do it, then grace must do it. If 
grace has not already done it, why not? Because I did not 
accept it? But by definition I had no power to accept 
it because my will was selfish. Must I then become a 
Calvinist and say that only those people who are predestined 
to receive grace will be able to live the good life? Following 
this line of questioning, we come to the inadmissable 
position that people who lead evil lives do not get grace 
because they are not predestined to it out of the infinite 
wisdom of the Godhead, and that God himself must then be 
held responsible for their evil deeds. This is a nice little 
tangle. 

In the language of Oriental philosophy, the problem of 
transformation sounds something like this: the Buddha said 
that wisdom can come only from the abandonment of 
selfish craving, or desire. One who abandons that desire 
attains nirvana, which means supreme peace and liberation. 
In Sanskrit, nirvana means to blow out, to exhale the 
breath. Its opposite, desire, is to breathe in. Now, if you 
breathe in and hold it, you lose your breath; but if you 
breathe out it comes back to you. So the point is: if you 
want life, do not cling to it, let it go. Still there is the prob- 
lem that if I desire not to desire, is that not already desire? 
How can I desire not to desire? How can I surrender myself 
when myself is precisely an urge to hold on, to cling, to 
cling to life, to continue to survive? I can see rationally 
that by clinging to myself I may strangle myself, and so | 
may chose to be like a person who has a bad habit as a result 
of which he is committing suicide because the means of 
death are so sweet. 

I am sure you have observed how people who get in- 
terested in improving themselves behave. They usually 
shop around quite a bit. They try out psychoanalysis, psy- 
chodrama, encounter groups, yoga, Scientology, Christian 
Science, Roman Catholicism, Zen Buddhism, or Tibetan 
Buddhism, and whenever they have hold of one of these 


56 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


things it is the absolute rage—‘‘Man, you’ve got to dig 
this.”’ But we notice that nothing fundamentally different 
happens. It is always the same old guy going around with a 
new bag of tricks. He does not really change, only his 
ways of trying to change do. 

One of the basic forms in which you notice that there is 
no change is the nature of what I will call the self-improve- 
ment game. This is a game we are all playing from one 
point of view or another. I could ask: what are you looking 
for? Would it be too presumptuous of me to say that you 
are looking for help? That you would like to hear someone 
who has something of relevance to say to you as a member of 
a world which is running into the most intense difficulty? 
Our world is beset by a complex of problems, any one of 
which is bad enough; but when you add together all the 
great political, social, and ecological problems with which 
we are faced, it is appalling. One might naturally say that 
the reason why we are in such a mess is not simply that 
we have wrong systems for doing things, whether they 
be technological, political, or religious, but that we have 
the wrong people. The systems may be all right, but they 
are in the wrong hands, because we are all in various 
ways self-seeking, lacking in wisdom, lacking in courage, 
afraid of death, afraid of pain, unwilling really to cooperate 
with others, and unwilling to be open to others. So we all 
think: ‘‘It’s really me that’s wrong. If only I could be the 
right person. And is this man going to tell me something 
that will make me be a more creative and cooperative mem- 
ber of the human race? I sincerely would like to improve.”’ 

So I imagine that many of you hope that I will tell you 
something to make you better, better in whatever sense 
you want to use that word—to feel better, to be morally 
better, to be a better citizen, or to have a higher state of 
consciousness. Perhaps some of you have mystical am- 
bitions and want to transcend your feeling of egocentricity, 
of being an isolated center of consciousness inside a bag 


SUSPENSION OF JUDGMENT 57 


of skin; perhaps you would like to experience cosmic 
consciousness and to feel that you yourself are basically 
identical with the infinite energy of this universe. Mystics 
have often had that experience, and you would like it; and 
you would also appreciate getting from me some advice 
as to how that might come about. You may say, “‘I need 
some help in this process, and I] am going to find someone 
else to help me.’’ You may chose a therapist, or a cler- 
gyman, or even a guru—any kind of person who teaches a 
technique of self-improvement. But how will you know 
whether this person is able to teach you? How can you 
judge, for example, whether a psychotherapist is effective 
or just a charlatan? How can you judge whether a guru is 
himself spiritually wise or merely a good chatterbox? Well, 
of course you ask your friends, or you ask his other students 
or patients, and, of course, they are all enthusiastic. You 
have to be enthusiastic when you have bought something 
expensive. If you have bought an automobile that has turned 
out to be a lemon, it is very difficult to admit that it is a 
lemon and that you have been fooled. And it is the same 
when you buy a religion or an expensive operation. But 
what people do not sufficiently realize is that when you 
picked an authority, whether it is a psychotherapeutic or a 
religious one, you chose it. In other words, that this fellow, 
or this book, or this system, is the right one is your opin- 
ion. If you are saying to this other person, or other source: 
“T think you are the authority’’—that is your opinion. 
And how are you competent to judge? You cannot really 
judge whether an authority is sound unless you yourself 
are. Otherwise, you might just be fooled. You may say, 
“I believe that the Bible is the word of God’’—all right, 
that is your opinion. I know the Bible says it is the word 
of God, but it is your opinion that the Bible is telling the 
truth. The Church says that the Bible is the word of God, 
but it is your opinion that the Church is right. You 
cannot escape from this situation—it is your opinion. 


58 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


At this point, it might be obvious to you that when se- 
lecting an authority who will help you to improve yourself 
it is like hiring the police out of your tax money and putting 
them in charge of seeing that you obey the law. This seems 
pretty silly—can we not take care of ourselves? Is this the 
land of the free and the home of the brave, or not? Nobody 
seems to want to be in charge of themselves because they 
feel they cannot do it. As St. Paul said, ‘‘To will is present 
with me. But how to do good I find not, for the good that I 
would, I do not, and the evil that I would not, that I do.”’ 
Here at once we are in difficulty because trying to improve 
ourselves is like trying to lift ourselves up into the air by 
tugging at our own bootstraps. It just cannot be done! 
There are, however, all sorts of ways in which religious 
people try to explain that it can be done. But you cannot do 
the job by yourself because the improving ‘‘you’’ is the one 
that needs to be improved. Therefore, you have to say, 
“‘God help me.’’ OF course, that God exists is your opin- 
ion; that God will answer your prayer is your opinion; and 
your idea of God is your idea of God. If you bought someone 
else’s script—you bought it! Maybe your mother and father 
talked to you about God in a very impressive way, but basi- 
cally, you bought their idea. You may be a father yourself. 
I am a grandfather now. I have five grandchildren, and I 
know I am as stupid as my own grandfather must have 
been. I sit in the position from which they look at me and 
think, ‘‘Oh, wow! There’s an important man!’ But I know 
I am just like anyone else. So I hope my children are not 
believing things on my authority, because it is always 
their authority. If I look impressive and make big noises at 
them, they have just been taken in. 

So let us suppose there is God, and that there is available 
grace—the divine power that gives the human being a rope 
to climb upon instead of just pulling at his own boot- 
straps. All right, you want grace. A theologian will tell 
you, ‘‘Yes, God gives His grace freely. He gives it to all 


SUSPENSION OF JUDGMENT 59 


because He loves all. It is here like the air, all you have to 
do is receive it.” Or, a more orthodox, perhaps Catholic, 
Christian will say, ‘‘All you have to do is be baptized and 
take the holy sacrament of the altar, the bread and wine, 
the body and blood of Christ. There is grace right there. 
It is given by these simple physical means so that it is very 
easily available.’’ Well, a lot of people have been baptized, 
but it does not always take. People fall from grace. Why 
do they? You see, we are still talking about the same 
old problem but we have put it one step up. ‘‘How can I 
improve myself?’’, was the first problem, and the second 
problem is, ‘‘How can I accept graee?’’, but they are both 
the same problem because in each case you have got to make 
a move that will put yourself out of your own control into 
the control of a “‘better.’’ And if you do not believe in the 
Christian kind of a God you can believe in the Hindu kind 
of a God who is your inner self. You have a lower self that 
you call your ego—that is that little scoundrelly fellow 
that is always out for ‘‘me.’’ But behind the ego there is 
the atman, the inner self, or the inward light, as the Quak- 
ers call it; it is the real self, the spirit that is substantially 
identical with God. So you have to meditate in such a 
way that you identify with your higher self. 

But how do you do that? Well, you start by watching all 
of your thoughts very carefully. You watch your feelings, 
you watch your emotions, and you begin to build up a sense 
of separation between the watcher and what is watched. In 
this way, youare no longer carried away by your own stream 
of consciousness. You remain the witness, impassively, 
impartially suspending judgment and watching it all go on. 

Now, this seems to be something like progress—at least 
you are taking an objective view of what is happening, and 
you are beginning to be in a position to control it. But just 
wait a minute! Who is this self behind the self, the watch- 
ing self? Can you watch that one? It is interesting if you do 
because you find out, of course, that the watching self, or 


60 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


the observing self, behind all your thoughts and feelings is 
itself a thought. That is tosay, when the police enter a house 
in which there are thieves, the thieves go up from the 
ground floor to the first floor. When the police arrive on 
the first floor, the thieves have gone up to the second, and 
so on tothe third and finally out onto the roof. Just so, when 
the ego is about to be unmasked, it immediately identifies 
with the higher self. It goes up a level, because the religious 
game version is simply a refined and high-brow version of 
the ordinary game: ‘‘How can I outwit me?’’ So if I find, 
for example, that in the quest for pleasure, the ordinary 
pleasures of the world—food, sex, power, possessions— 
become a drag and I think, “‘No, it is not that,’’ and then 
I go in for the arts, literature, poetry, and music, and | 
absorb myself in those pleasures, then after awhile I find 
that they are not the answer either. So then I go in for 
psychoanalysis, and I find out that is not the answer, and 
then I turn to religion, but I’m still seeking what I was 
seeking when I wanted candy bars! J want to get that goodie. 
Only I see now that it is not going to be a material goodie 
because all material goodies fall apart; but maybe there is 
a spiritual goodie that will not. Still, the spiritual quest 
is no different than the quest for the candy bar. Same old 
story, only you have refined the candy bar and made it 
abstract and holy and blessed and so on. So it is with the 
higher self. The higher self is your same old ego, but you 
sure hope it is eternal, indestructable, and all-wise. 
The great problem is how to get this higher self working. 
How does it make any difference to what you do and what 
you think? I know all kinds of people who have this higher 
self going. They practice their yoga, and they are just like 
ordinary people, sometimes a little worse. You see, they too 
can fool themselves. They can say, ‘‘My point of view in 
religion is very liberal. I believe that all religions have divine 
revelations in them, so I do not understand the way you 


people fight about it.’’ Others say, ‘Well, God has given 


SUSPENSION OF JUDGMENT 6] 


the spirit through all the traditions but our’s is the most 
refined and mature.’? Then somebody else comes along 
and says, ‘‘Well, as I said, they are all equally revelations 
of the divine and in seeing this, of course, I am much more 
tolerant than you are.’” You see how this game is going to 
work? 

Suppose I take this position: Let us Say you regard me 
as some kind of a guru. Well, you know how gurus hate 
each other and are always putting each other down. But I 
could say, ‘“‘Well, I do not put other gurus down,” and 
that outwits them all. You see, we are always doing this. 
We are always finding a way to be one up, and by the most 
incredibly subtle means. You may say, “‘I realize that I am 
always doing that, now tell me, how do I not do that?”’ 
And I will say, ‘‘Why do you want to know?” ‘‘Well, I 
would be better that way’’, you would say. “‘Yes, but why 
do you want to be better?’ You see, the reason why you 
want to be better is the reason why you are not—it is be- 
cause you want to be, and do not realize that you already are. 
‘The road to hell is paved with good intentions’’ because 
the do-gooders in the world, whether they are doing good 
for others or doing good for themselves, are troublemakers 
on the basis of: ‘Kindly let me help you or you will 
drown,”’ said the monkey putting the fish safely up in a tree. 

We European-Americans have been on the rampage for 
the last one hundred years or more to improve the world. 
We have given the benefits of our culture—our religion 
and our technology—to everyone (except perhaps the 
Australian aborigines). We have insisted that they receive 
the benefits of our culture and even our political style: 
“*You better be democratic, or we will shoot you!’’ And 
having conferred these blessings all over the place we won- 
der why the rest of the world dislikes us. Sometimes doing 
good to others, and even doing good to oneself, is amazingly 
destructive. And it is also full of conceit. How do you know 
what is good for other people? How do you know what 


62 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


is good for you? If you say that you want to improve, then 
you ought to know what is good for you, but obviously 
you do not, because if you did you would already be im- 
proved. 

So wes do not know. It is like the problem that genet- 
icists aré faced with today. I went to a meeting of genet- 
icists not so long ago where they gathered in a group of 
philosophers and theologians and said, ‘‘Now look here, 
we need help. We are now on the verge of figuring out how 
to breed any kind of human character we might want to 
have. We could give you saints, philosophers, scientists, 
great politicians, anything you want. Just tell us. What kind 
of human beings ought we to breed?”’ So I said, ‘‘How will 
those of us who are genetically unregenerate make up our 
minds what genetically generate people might be? I am 
very much afraid that our selection of virtues may not work. 
It may be like this new kind of high-yield grain that is be- 
coming ecologically destructive. When we interfere with 
the processes of nature and breed efficient plants and ani- 
mals, there is always some way in which we have to pay for 
it. And I can well see that eugenically produced human 
beings might be dreadful.’’ Do you not realize that we could 
have a plague of virtuous people? I mean, any animal con- 
sidered by itself is virtuous, doing its own thing, but in 
crowds they are awful. Like a crowd of ants or locusts on 
the rampage, I could imagine a perfectly pestiferous mass 
of a million saints. So I said to the geneticists, ‘‘Just be sure 
that a vast variety of human beings are maintained. Please 
do not breed us down to a few excellent types—excellent 
for what? We never know how circumstances are going 
to change, or how our need for different kinds of people 
might change. At one time we may need very individualistic 
and aggressive people, at another time we may need very 
cooperative, team-working people, and at another time we 
may need people who are full of interest in the dexterous 
manipulation of the external world. Still, at another time 


SUSPENSION OF JUDGMENT 63 


we may need people who can explore their own psychology 
and are introspective. There is no knowing, but it is obvious 
that the more varieties and the more skills we have, the 
better off we will be.’’ 

So, the problem comes out in genetics. We do not really 
know how to interfere with the way things are. The world 
actually is an enormously complex interrelated organism. 
The same problem arises in medicine because the body, 
too, is a very complexly interrelated organism. If you look 
at the body in a superficial way you may see there is some- 
thing wrong with it and end up only treating the outward 
manifestation rather than the cause. Let us say you have 
chicken pox, the cause of which is something in the blood ; 
it is some kind of a bug and it comes out in itchy spots all 
over the body. But you do not want to cut off the spots; 
what you have to do is kill the bug. So you kill the bug. 
Well, then you find you have real problems because you 
have to introduce other bugs to kill that bug. It is like 
bringing rabbits into Australia, everything gets out of hand. 
So you think, “‘Well, now wait a minute. It was not just 
the bugs in the blood; there are bugs all over the place. The 
problem with chicken pox is that the blood system suddenly 
becomes vulnerable to those particular bugs. It must have 
been that my resistance was down. What I should have taken 
was not antibiotics but vitamins.’’ Okay, so you are going 
to build up your resistance, but resistance to what? You may 
build up resistarice to all these types of bugs, but then there 
is another type that just loves that situation and moves right 
in. Medically, we always look at the human being in bits and 
pieces—we have heart specialists, lung specialists, bone 
specialists, nerve specialists, et cetera—and they each see 
the human being from their own point of view. There are a 
few general practitioners, but they realize that the human 
body is so complicated that no one mind can understand it. 
Furthermore, supposing we do succeed in healing all these 
people of their diseases, then what do we do about the pop- 


64 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


ulation problem? We have stopped cholera, the bubonic 
plague, we are getting the better of tuberculosis, and we 
may even fix cancer and heart disease. Then what will 
people die of? Well, they will just go on living. There 
will be gnormous quantities of us, and so we will have to 
fix the problem of birth control—pills for everyone. But 
what about the side effects of those pills, and the psycho- 
logical effects upon men and women who do not breed 
children in the usual way? What are they going to do? 
Are they going to become homosexuals? We do not know. 
What seems a good thing today, or yesterday, like DDT, 
turns out tomorrow to have been a disaster. What seemed, 
in the moral or spiritual sphere, like great virtues in times 
past, are easily seen today as hideous evils. 

Take, for example, the Inquisition. In its own day, 
among Catholics, the Holy Inquisition was regarded as we 
today regard the practice of psychiatry. A heretic was a very 
sick man. He was much to be pitied because if he held a 
false view he was doomed to suffer forever in the most 
exquisite torture chamber ever imagined. Think of en- 
tertaining that idea as seriously as we regard cancer or 
schizophrenia today. We feel that in curing a person of 
disease almost anything is justified: the most complex 
operations; people suspended for days on the end of tubes 
with x-ray penetration burning of diseased tissue with lasers ; 
people undergoing shock treatment; people locked in the 
colorless, monotonous corridors of mental institutions not 
knowing if they will ever get out because they cannot 
understand what is expected of them, and the psychiatrists 
do not know either. It is a kind of Kafka-like nightmare. 
We think these surgeons and psychiatrists are very good 
people, that they are righteous men working to alleviate 
human suffering. Well, they thought exactly the same thing 
about the Inquisitors. In all good faith, they knew that 
witchcraft and heresy were terrible things, awful plagues 
imperiling people’s souls forever. Any means were justified 


SUSPENSION OF JUDGMENT 65 


to cure people of heresy; and we have not changed. We 
are doing the same thing today but under different names. 
We can look back at those people and see how evil that was, 
but we cannot see it in ourselves. 

So beware of virtue! The Chinese philosopher, Lao-tzu, 
said that the highest virtue is not conscious of itself as 
virtue, and therefore really is virtue; but lower virtue is so 
self-conscious of itself as virtue that it is not virtue. In other 
words, when you breathe, you do not congratulate yourself 
on being virtuous, but breathing is a great virtue; it is living. 
When you are born with beautiful eyes, blue, brown, or 
green, as the case may be, you do not congratulate yourself 
for having grown two of the most fabulous jewels on earth. 
You say, ‘Oh, they are just eyes.’’ But.do you not account 
it a virtue to see, to entertain the miracles of color and 
form? You say, ‘‘Well, that is just seeing.”’ But that is real 
virtue. Real virtue, in the old sense of the word, infers 
strength, as when you speak of the healing virtue of a plant. 
The other virtucs are just stuck on, they are imitation 
virtues, and they usually create trouble. More diabolical 
things are done in the name of righteousness, and you can 
be assured that everyone, of whatever nationality or political 
frame of mind or religion, always goes to war with a sense 
of complete rightness—the other side is the devil. Our 
opponents, whether in China, Russia, or Vietnam, have the 
same feeling of Big htcousness about what they are doing as 
we have on our side. And ‘‘a plague on both houses !’’ As 
Confucius said, ‘“The goody-goodies are the thieves of vir- 


tue,’’ which is another form of our own proverb, ‘‘The 


road to hell is paved with good intentions.”’ 

So the moral, or the immoral, of these considerations is 
that if you are really aware of your own inner workings, 
you will realize that there is nothing you can do to im- 
prove yourself. You do not even know what “‘better’’ is, 
and, in any case, the you who will do the improving is the 


one who needs to be improved. This also goes for society. 


66 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


We can change society. We can get enormously enthusiastic 
about the idea that there is a revolution afoot, and that it 
will set everything to right. But do you know a revolution 
that has ever set everything to right? It does not matter 
whether the revolution came from the left wing or from 
the righf wing. The best forms of government that have ever 
existed in the world are those that muddled through, those 
that did not have any clear setup of control. They had what 
I would call ‘‘controlled anarchy,’’ and this system seems to 
work out better than anything else. When you have a great 
system and real power to put it into effect there is always 
more violence, more bloodshed, more trouble. It makes no 
difference whether it be Chairman Mao or Adolf Hitler. 
We cannot outwit ourselves, we cannot be unself-conscious 
on purpose, we cannot be designedly spontaneous, and we 
cannot be genuinely loving by intending to love. Either you 
love someone or you do not. If you pretend to love a person, 
you deceive them and build up reasons for resentment. 
Today we hear a lot of songs about love, and the mention 
of the big love thing on the way. You know what I would do? 
I would buy a gun and bar my door because I would know 
there is a storm of hypocrisy brewing. You know, a bunch 
of little buggers come around and say, ‘‘Well, you should 
not mind our taking your stuff; after all, nothing really 
belongs to anybody and surely you are a loving and spiritual 
person and want to share everything.”’ 

Let us look at this from another point of view, one that 
you will at first think highly depressing. Let us suppose that 
we cannot do anything to change ourselves. Suppose we are 
stuck with it. Now that is the worst thing an American au- 
dience can hear—there is no way of improving yourselves. 
Every kind of culture in this country is dedicated to self- 
improvement. Why do some people go to the opera or the 
symphony? Only a small fraction of the audience goes to the 
symphony to enjoy it. The rest go to be seen there and to 
see themselves there because that is culture, that is doing 


SUSPENSION OF JUDGMENT 67 


what is good for you. Take jogging, that deplorable prac- 
tice. It is a very nice thing to run and go dancing across 
the hills at a fast speed, but we see these joggers shaking 
their bones, rattling their brains, and running on their 
heels. There is a grimness about it because it is so deter- 
minately good for you. Why do you go to school? There is 
only one reason for going to school, and that is because 
someone there has something that you want to find out. The 
whole point of going to school is that you are interested in 
something. You do not go to improve yourself, but the 
trouble is that the schools have the wrong idea—they give 
people honors for learning. The reward for studying 
French should be the ability to speak French, to enjoy 
reading French, and to have fun with French people. But 
when you get a degree for it, then the degree becomes the 
point in a game of one-upmanship. 

Of course, one-upmanship is the main business of the 
educational community today. You learn all the rules ofhow 
to be a good professor. It is very instructive to go to a pro- 
fessor’s meeting. In my field, which is philosophy, you go 
to a congress of philosophers and you find that when they 
all get together in the bar or the restaurant, or in someone’s 
room, the one thing they never talk about is philosophy. 
It is very bad form, indeed, to show interest in philosophy 
among your colleagues. The same is exactly true in clergy 
gatherings. The one thing they do not talk about is religion. 
What they both'do talk about is church and academic poli- 
tics. You see, it is bad form to be brilliant on the faculty 
because if outclasses your colleagues. Therefore, faculty 
people tend to cultivate a studied mediocrity. You have to 
watch out because if you have mobs of students coming 
to your lectures, you get pretty black looks from your 
colleagues. Then, of course, there is a whole world of one- 
upmanship in research and publication, of learned papers 
and the relative quantity of footnotes to basic text, and 
footnotes on footnotes, and the various ways of making your 


68 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


bibliography painfully accurate. It is endless. But you see, 
what it is, it is scholarship about scholarship. Just as learning 
because learning is good for you is irrelevant to learning, 
the whole idea of improving yourself by learning is irrele- 
vant to the learning process. In the same way, doing 
business is doing business. Being a manufacturer of clothing 
is a very good thing to do. I could conceive that it would be 
extremely enjoyable, something one could be very proud 
of, to make good clothes. Of course, you would need to 
sell them because you need to eat. But to make clothes to 
make money raises another question, because then your 
interest is not in making clothes, it is in making money, 
and then you are going to cheat on the clothes. Suppose 
you get an awful lot of money, then what would you do with 
it? You cannot eat ten roasts of beef in one day. You cannot 
live in six houses at once. You cannot drive three Rolls 
Royces at the same time. What could you do? Well, you 
could just go make more money and put it back, you could 
invest it in something else so that it would make more, 
and not give a damn how it is made so long as you make it. 
You do not care if they foul the rivers, put oil fumes 
throughout the air everywhere, and kill off all the fish. So 
long as you see these figures happening, you are not aware 
of anything else. 

So you went out to do a self-improvement thing—making 
money is a measure of improvement, a measure of your 
economic worth, or at least that is what it is supposed to 
be—but you went out, in other words, for the status 
instead of the actuality. If you are a musician, why do you 
play music? The only reason for playing music is to enjoy 
it. If you play music to imrpess an audience or to read about 
yourself in the newspaper, then you are not interested in 
music. 

Here is the situation: the whole idea of self-improvement 
is a will-o’-the-wisp and a hoax. Let us begin where we are. 


What happens if you know beyond any shadow of a doubt 


SUSPENSION OF JUDGMENT 69 


that there is nothing that you can do to be better? Well, 
it is a kind of relief. lam what I am, there it is. So you say, 
“‘Now what will I do?’’, and there is a little fidget that 
comes up because we are so used to making things better— 
“leave the world a little better than when you found it’’ 
sort of thing, or “‘I want to be of service to other people,”’ 
and all such dreadfully hazy ideas. There is that little itch 
still. But if we realize that there really is nothing we can 
do to improve ourselves or to improve the world, it gives 
us a breather in the course of which we may simply watch 
what is happening. No one ever does this. It sounds terribly 
simple, it sounds so simple that it looks almost as if it is not 
worth doing. But have you ever just watched what is hap- 
pening, and what you are doing by way of reaction to it? 
Just watch it happen, and do not be ina hurry to think you 
know what it is. People look and say, ‘‘Well, that is the 
external world.’’ How do you know? The whole thing, 
from a neurological point of view, is just a happening in 
your head. That you think there is something outside the 
skull is a notion in your nervous system. There may or may 
not be. That this is the material world, is someone’s phil- 
osophical idea. Or maybe you think the world is spiritual ; 
that, too, is someone’s philosophical idea. The real world 
is not spiritual, it is not material, the real world is simply 
as it is. 

Do you think we could look at things in this way, with- 
out, as it were, fixing labels, names, gradations, and 
judgments on everything? Could we just watch what 
happens, watch what we do? If you do that, you do at 
least give yourself a chance. And it may be that when 
you are in this way freed from being out to improve every- 
thing, that your own nature will begin to take care of itself. 
Once you get out of your own way, you will begin to find 
out that the great things that you do are really happenings. 
No great genius can explain how he does it. He says, ‘‘Yes, 
I have learned a technique to express myself because I had 


70 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


something in me that had to come out. I had to learn how 
to give it.’ If you are a musician you have to learn how 
music is produced, or if you want to describe something 
you have to learn a language so that others can understand 
you. You need a technique. But beyond that, can you tell 
someoné how you were able to use that technique to 
express the mysterious thing that you wanted to tell them? 
If we could tell people that, we would have schools in 
which we could infallibly train musical geniuses and 
scientific miracle minds. There would be so many of them 
that geniuses would be a dime a dozen. Then we would 
say, ‘‘Well, these people are not very ingenious after 
all.’’ The fascinating element about genius is that it pro- 
duces something we cannot understand, it surprises us. But 
do you not see that, just in the same way, we cannot even 
understand our own brains, which is only to say that the 
brain is a lot smarter that neurology. Our brain is such that 
it can perform all these extraordinary intellectual and 
cultural miracles; we do not know how we do it, but we do. 
We did not campaign to have an improved brain over the 
monkeys, or whatever may have been our ancestors; it just 
happened. 

All growth is fundamentally something that happens, but 
for it to happen, two things are important. The first is, as 
I have said, you must have the technical ability to express 
what happens; and secondly, you must get out of your own 
way. But right at the bottom of the problem of control is 
“‘How am I to get out of my own way?”’ If I showed you 
a system—“‘Let’s all practice getting out of our own way”’ 
—it would only turn into another form of self-improve- 
ment. We find this problem repeatedly throughout the 
entire history of human spirituality. In the phraseology of 
Zen Buddhism, ‘‘You cannot achieve this by thinking, 
you cannot achieve this by not thinking.’’ Getting out of 
your own way comes about only when doing so ceases to 
be a matter of choice, because you see that there is noth- 


SUSPENSION OF JUDGMENT 7] 


ing else for you to do. In other words, it happens when you 
see that doing something about your situation is not going 
to help you, and that trying not to do anything about it 
is equally not going to help you. Then where do you stand? 
You are nonplussed. You are simply reduced to watching, 
and letting it be. 


72 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


CHAPTER FIVE 


CHUANG-TZU 
Wisdom of the Ridiculous 


Re CHINESE philosopher, Chuang-tzu, who lived 
about 300 B.c., or perhaps even a little earlier, was 
a very remarkable person. He is one of the only phil- 
osophers from the whole of antiquity who has any real 
humor, and therefore, he is an immensely encouraging 
person to read. 

Part of Chuang-tzu’s humor is in the art of exaggeration, 
which is something I think we must always allow for. So in 
reading his work we must realize that he is pulling his own leg 
to some extent. He is like a group of enthusiasts who, when 
talking amongst themselves, carry their own ideas to ludi- 
crous extremes and roar with laughter about them. Chuang- 
tzu does this, but in doing so he has a lot to say about the 
value of the useless life. 

The whole notion that any event in life might be useful, 
that is to say, serving the end of some future event, is to 
a Taoist absurd. The universe is viewed as purposeless and 
useless through and through. It is a game, and yet it is more 


CHUANG-TzZU_ 73 


than that, because to call it a game does not really convey 
the sense of it. For example, when a Taoist sage is wander- 
ing through the forest, he is not going anywhere, he is 
just wandering. When he watches the clouds, he loves them 
because they have no special destination. He watches birds 
flying, and he watches waves slapping on the shore. Just 
because all this is not busy in the way that human beings are 
normally busy, and because it serves no end other than 
being what it is now, he admires it. It is for this reason that 
you get the peculiar styles of Chinese painting in the T’ang, 
Sung, and later dynasties, where nature in its aimless, 
wandering way is the main subject of interest. Usually, 
when we say that something is without purpose, that is a 
put-down phrase. We say, ‘‘Well, there is no future 
in it. What is the use?” It is funny that we say, ‘‘What is 
the use?’’, and I think we should realize that this question 
reflects our insanity. The joy for the Taoist is that things 
have no use, and the future is not important. 

Now, one can exaggerate this, and Chuang-tzu does so 
in a very humorous way when he describes the ideal, 
useless man. This man is a hunchback who is so deformed 
that his chin rests on his navel, and yet he is very admirable 
because it appears to everyone else that he has found the 
secret to life. When the social service workers come 
around, he is the first to get a free handout, and when the 
military officers come around to conscript people for the 
army he is the first to be rejected. Therefore, he lives a long 
life. 

Chuang-tzu tells another story in which he describes a 
group of travelers who came across an enormous tree. Never 
had anyone seen such a fantastic tree, so they went up to 
see if it might be useful for some purpose. First they tested 
the leaves, but found them too rough and disagreeable and 
not good to eat. Then they looked at the branches and 
found them all twisted and absolutely no good for using as 
sticks ; so then they examined the wood, but found it was 


74 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


full of pith and absolutely no good to usc in building. As 
a result, no one ever disturbed this tree. It was not useful 
for any purpose whatsoever, and so it had grown to an 
enormous sizc and was of great age. Chuang-tzu is not 
exactly,asking us to take this literally, but this is his way of 
doing things. 

In another story he describes the behavior of the highest 
form of man: 


The man of character lives at home without exer- 
cising his mind and performs actions without worry. 
The notions of right and wrong and the praise and 
blame of others do not disturb him. When within 
the four seas all people can enjoy themsclves, that 
is happiness for him. When all people are well- 
provided, that is peace for him. Sorrowful in coun- 
tenance, he looks like a baby who has lost his mother ; 
appearing stupid, he goes about like one who has lost 
his way. He has plenty of money to spend, but does not 
know where it comes from. He drinks and cats just 
enough and does not know whcre the food comes from. 
This is the demcanor of the man of character. 


Then, by contrast: 
The hypocrites are those people who regard as good 


whatever the world acclaims as good, and regard as 
right whatever the world acclaims as right. When 
you tell them that they are men of Tao, then their 
countenances change with satisfaction. When you call 
them hypocrites, then they look displeased. All their 
lives they call themselves ‘‘men of Tao,’’ and all their 
lives they remain hypocrites. They know how to give 
a good speech and tell appropriate anecdotes to attract 
a good crowd. But from the very beginning to the very 
end, they do not know what it is all about. They put 
on the proper garb, and dress in the proper colors. 
They put on a decorous appearance in order to make 


CHUANG-TZU 75 


themselves popular, but refuse to admit that they are 
hypocrites.’ 


This explanation of man who is stupid in countenance 
and appearance, and is wandering about as if he has lost his 
way and does not know anything, is based on the text of 
Lao-tzu, where he says: 


The people of the world are merrymaking, 
As if partaking of the sacrificial feasts, 
As if mounting the terrace in spring ; 

I alone am mild, like one unemployed, 
Like anew-born babe that cannot yet smile, 
Unattached, like one without a home. 


The people of the world have enough and 
to spare, 

But J am like one left out, 
My heart must be that of a fool, 
Being muddled, nebulous! 


The vulgar are knowing, luminous; 
T alone am dull, confused. 

The vulgar are clever, self-assured ; 
T alone, depressed. 

Patient as the sea, 
Adrift, seemingly aimless. 


The people of the world all have a purpose; 
] alone appear stubborn and uncouth. 

T alone differ from the other people, 
And value drawing sustenance from the 
Mother.? 


There is about the character of the Taoist sage, as 
depicted by Chuang-tzu, something of the fool. The fool is 
a person who does not know enough to come in out of the 
rain, and who does not compete. Everyone else gets to the 


76 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


material prizes of life before him, and even to the spiritual 
prizes. The fool is the person who is not going anywhere, 
He sits by the side of the road talking nonsense. The fool 
is like a Mongoloid child who is not interested in survival, 
and who will take a plate of food and run his finger around 
in it, make a wonderful slosh with the stew, and then 
watch it drip from the tip of his finger. He will not eat it 
for quite a while, and then he will play with it in all 
sorts of ways until his attention is distracted by something 
else, and he will chase after that. So long as you do not 
cross him he remains the most wonderfully friendly sort of 
person, but he does not have any kind of ambition ; he docs 
not fight for himself, and nobody can ever get him to. 
One might understand why the fool has always been used 
as a kind of analog of the sage, when, as Shankara says: 


Sometimes naked, sometimes mad, 
Now as a scholar, now as a fool. 
Thus, they appear on earth, 


the free men. 


The biographies of the early life of Sri Ramakrishna, or Sri 
Ramana reflect this type of understanding, and they are 
absolutely wild. But, just as in reading Chuang-tzu, you 
must not take them too literally. These things are said by 
way of a kind of overstress to correct another kind of 
overstress in the opposite direction. 

Many years ago when a Japanese scholar explained the 
teaching of Buddhism to me, he said something I have never 
heard anyone else say since. He said that the Buddha taught 
that life is suffering in order to correct the wrong view that 
it ought to be pleasure. He said that everything is im- 
permanent in order to correct the wrong view that reality 
lasts forever in time. The idea of the middle way is set up 
in this fashion—of going to one extreme to correct the 
other. This is a very common Asian technique, and it is 
found especially in Zen. For example, when teachers are 


CHUANG-TzU_ 77 


asked about something sacred they will always answer in 
terms of something secular. When asked, ‘‘What is the 
Buddha?”’, they might answer, ‘‘The tree in the garden.” 
Then, when you ask about something secular, they answer 
in terms of something sacred. For example, a master and his 
student were working in the field, using a knife to prune. 
The student suddenly said to the master, ‘‘Give me the 
knife.’’ So the master gave it to him point first. Then the 
student said, ‘‘Please, let me have the other end,’’ and the 
teacher said, ‘‘What will you do with the other end?’’ You 
see, the questions immediately turn into a kind of meta- 
physical exhange; and this play, back and forth between 
the extremes, the interior design of awakening the mind 
to polarity, to mutual arising. 

Chuang-tzu’s philosophy is one of relativity. He thorough- 
ly stresses the point that there is no absolute standard of 
great or small, of important or unimportant. He tells a 
story about a certain keeper of monkeys who said with 
regard to their ration of nuts that each monkey should 
have three in the morning and four at night. But at this 
the monkeys were very angry. So the keeper said they 
might have four in the morning and three at night, with 
which arrangement they were all pleased. Now, the number 
of nuts was the same, he goes on to say, but there was an 
adaptation to the likes and dislikes of those concerned. 
This, he says, is the way of conduct of the sage. With 
Chuang-tzu you begin to get the point of view that small 
things are as big as big things can be, and that big things 
are as small as small things can be. Everything can be 
looked at as great and small, important and unimportant, 
as well as all the steps in between. His conception of the 
world is essentially cyclic. 

Teaching by circles is a method often used by Taoist and 
Zen teachers. The center of a circle is understood as any 
point on the circumference, and you can begin anywhere. 
There is a Zen koan which asks the question: ‘‘Indra built 


78 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


the seamless tower; where did he start?’’ Now, a seamless 
tower is like a sleeve without a seam in it, it isa continuous 
cylindrical tower. Where do you start? In the same way, 
where does the circle start? The circle of life, or the cycle 
of life; the interdependence of bees and flowers, and the 
interdependence of long and short—it is all circular. There 
is nowhere, and there is everywhere, that it can begin. 
When Chuang-tzu discusses the organs of the body he makes 
a catalog of all these organs, and says, ‘‘Now, which do 
you prefer? Which one comes first, and which one follows? 
Which one rules, and which ones are servants?’’ It semeed 
that there might be a governor in all this, but nobody could 
ever find it. Thus, there is no notion in Taoist philosophy— 
one might almost say in Chinese philosophy as a whole— 
of the world as responding to a boss. Within the body 
there is no ruling organ; its order is the consequence of, or 
the operation of, every part of it existing together, simul- 
taneously, arising mutually. There is no governor. Now, the 
difficulty which arises in trying to understand Chuang-tzu’s 
philosophy is that people begin to think in terms of govern- 
ing and ruling, and they set out to dominate themselves and 
their surroundings, which invariably leads to a mess. 
Chuang-tzu tells a story of an ancient man by the name of 
Po Loh. Po Loh was a horse trainer, and this is perhaps 
where we get the word “‘polo.’’ Chuang-tzu says that 
horses were nice, charming creatures before Po Loh inter- 
fered with them and ruined their nature. In other places he 
says that a good carpenter does not need a square or a 
compass; he works without them. This is fantastically true 
of Japanese carpenters. One of the fascinating things in 
going to Japan is watching these old-style carpenters 
working from the roughest architectural plans you could 
imagine. They use the strangest instruments, and have an 
uncanny knack for fitting things by feel and by eye. 

A great story is told of the ceremonial raising of the 
ridgepole of a new temple. It was being done by a certain 


CHUANG-TzZzU 79 


guild of carpenters, but there was a rival guild in town that 
had not got the contract, and was very sore about it. So 
during the night one of the members of the rival guild 
came and chopped off six feet or so of the ridgepole. 
When the master craftsman came in the morning, and 
all the priests had arrived for the ceremony of raising the 
roof beam, he looked at it and said, “‘Somebody has in- 
terfered with this. It must have been our enemy guild. They 
have cut off six feet of the ridgepole. Oh well,” he said, 
“T will put it right.’” So he took his hammer and cere- 
monially struck the beam, then said, ‘‘Raise it.’” It was 
raised and it fit exactly. The story is, of course, that he 
knew that this would happen and so he made the beam 
too long. This sort of story is always associated with the 
carpenter’s art. He needs no square because the sense of 
skill that is in his organism, in his nerves, in his senses, is 
much mere subtle than anything that could be made with 
instruments. 

There are many stories about artists of the Far East who 
excel in this kind of thing—knowing with tremendous 
precision exactly where something should go. There is a 
story told about a master who was decorating a ceremonial 
tea room with his students, when one of the students asked 
him where to put a hook for hanging a bamboo vase for 
flowers on the wall. The master said with exactness, 
‘‘There.’” So the student made a little mark. Well, some- 
what later, the student intentionally rubbed out the mark, 
but he remembered where it should go by a tiny little prick 
in the wall. Then he said to the teacher, ‘‘Excuse me, sir, 
but I forgot where you said the vase should go.’’ The 
teacher said, ‘It was there,’’ and he put his finger exactly 
on the same spot as before. This is the sort of thing that 
is admired by students in the Far East. 

The whole principle which Chuang-tzu explains at great 
length is one of success in life through not pushing it 
around, through not trying to govern it. For example, he 


80 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


explains that music has been ruined by the five notes. He 
says; 


The five notes will make a man deaf; 
The five colors will make a man blind. 


What he means by this is that if you think there are only 
five notes, you cannot hear, and if you think there are only 
five colors, you cannot see. This is a problem we have with 
music in the West. We have a notation system that in- 
dicates our chromatic scale and the staff, and the way we 
write music is limited to that possibility. But there are 
all kinds of subtleties between every one of our notes. 
In writing our rhythm we have to go in steps from whole 
note, half note, quarter note, eighth note, sixteenth note, 
and so on; and we can increase the value by one half by 
dotting it. But that is the extent of our rhythmic expres- 
sion. In Oriental music they have an infinite continuum of 
rhythm and tone, and so they make the most extraordinarily 
complicated rhythms. The way they learn music is not from 
notation, or from measures, but from the living body of 
their teacher as he demonstrates the ways of playing a 
certain instrument. They follow the teacher, the man, 
instead of the words and symbols. 

There is an absolutely absurd translation of Chuang-tzu 
put out by a professor of Chinese at Harvard. I am sure this 
professor must be an ex-missionary because he keeps using 
the word ‘‘God,’’ when there is no expression in the 
Chuang-tzu for God. The notion of God as we understand it 
is, indeed, very foreign to Taoist thought. The missionaries, 
you must understand, have been the foundation of Chinese 
scholarship in the West. In order to translate the scriptures 
into English, they had to study Chinese, and they have been 
slipping Christian ideas into Chinese classics ever since. But 
the notion of God, in the sense of the personal ruler of the 
world, is totally foreign to Chinese thought. There is the 
expression ch’ien-jan which has almost the same meaning 


CHUANG-TzuU_ 81 


as tzu-jan—spontaneity, or ‘‘self-so-ness.’’ Ch’ien-jan refers 
to something that is so through the power of heaven. Hea- 
ven, or ch’ien, means simply the universe. As you look out 
from Earth, which is, as it were, the center or the base, 
everything else in the whole expanse of the cosmos is ch’ien, 
heaven. But in Chuang-tzu, there is no connection in the 
idea of heaven with some sort of personal ruler of the 
universe. When you see someone translating ch’ien as 
“‘God,”’ it gives a very wrong impression of this teaching. 

There is a passage in which a student asks the master, 
“‘Can one get the Tao so as to have it for one’s own?”’ 
And the sage answers, ‘“Your body is not your own, it is 
the delegated image of ch’ien.’’ The missionaries translate 
this as “‘God”’ because they have read in the Bible that 
man is made in the image of God. But the master says: 


Your life is not your own, it is the delegated adapta- 
bility of heaven. Your offspring are not your own, they 
are the delegated seeds of heaven. You move, you know 
not how; you are at rest, you know not why. These are 
the operations of the ways of Tao. 


So how could you get the Tao so as to have it for your own? 

Similarly, there is a passage which says that when a 
drunk man falls out of a cart, though he may suffer, he 
does not die. Because his spirit is in a condition of security, 
he does not suffer from contact with objects of existences. 
If such security may be got from wine, how much more 
from ch’ien-jan? 

What is revealed here is the effortlessness of being 
in accord with the spontaneous rhythm of the universe. 
In Chinese thought there is not even an idea for what we call 
the law of nature. The motions of the body and the har- 
mony of the organism are not what they are because of any 
obedience to a law. The Chinese do have an idea of law 
which is expressed by the word tzu. There was a time 
when the laws were inscribed on the sacrificial vessels so 


82 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


that when people came to offer their sacrifices they would 
tead the laws. Certain sages objected to this and said that if 
the people were expected to know what the laws were 
in the fixed terms of writing they would develop a literary 
spirit. phat is to say, they would start haggling about what 
it really said. Well, as you know, this is the principle 
occupation of lawyers. But the point that the Taoist sages 
were making is that you must not write it down like that. 
They describe the Tao as wu-tzu, which we would translate 
literally as ‘“‘lawless’’?; but what it means is the tran- 
scending of this kind of law, which is specific or positive 
law. 

In continuing to explain this principle of lawlessness, 
Chuang-tzu employs a very funny little trick. He often 
puts his own wisdom into the mouth of Confucius, and 
this is to the immense confusion of everyone else. He tells 
us that one day Confucius was standing by a river near where 
there was a tremendous cataract plunging down. Suddenly 
he saw an old man coming out of the forest who fell into 
the river and disappeared into the cataract. So he said, 
“*Oh, dear, too bad. Probably some old fellow tired of life 
wanted to put an end to it all.’’ But in the next moment, 
way down the stream, the old man gets out of the water 
and starts bouncing along. Confucius is amazed! He sends 
one of his disciples to catch this fellow before he disappears. 
On meeting him he says, ‘‘Sir, I was thinking that you 
were going to commit suicide and IJ suddenly find that you 
have come out of that cataract alive. Do you have some spe- 
cial method by which you did this?’ “‘No, I have no 
special method,”’ said the old man, “‘I just go in with a 
whirl and come out with a swirl. I do not resist the water, 
I entirely identify myself with it.’’ So here is this old man, 
utterly relaxed, rolling around in the current and not re- 
sisting in any way, and so he is preserved. He goes with 
the stream and he rolls with the punch. 

Again, of course, there is exaggeration in a story of this 


CHUANG-TzU_ 83 


kind, because true wu-wei, or letting go, noninterference, 
is an exaggeration stressing the yin point of view to com- 
pensate for the yang. Relaxation is simply something that 
happens when there is too much yang in you—too much of 
the active principle that needs to be balanced out by the 
passive, or yin principle. The trouble is that human beings 
in their anxiety to control things exhibit too much yang 
aggressiveness; and yet, in balancing this out with the yin 
principle of letting go, one must not confuse it with, for 
example, flabbiness. A lot of people when they are trying 
to relax, merely become flabby. Furthermore, there is the 
obvious difficulty that if, in trving to relax, you feel you 
must relax, you only get anxious and create further tension 
in the process. I remember reading a book called You Must 
Relax. Now, you cannot achieve wu-wei like that. Even in 
trying to relax you are tense; you are anxious that it must 
happen, and afraid that it will not. Then how on earth do 
you do it? First of all you have to understand that you do 
not have to do anything. As the Old Man said, there is no 
method. Taoists use the term wu-tzu, lawlessness, to mean 
that there is no method that you can master to do it. It is all 
based on the understanding, or what our psychologists call 
insight, that there is nothing that you can do as a source 
and cause of action separate from everything else. When 
you know that, that there is no separate-acting you, then 
there is no need to try to relax. The flow of the Tao goes on. 
You can try and swim against the river if you wish, but it 
really is much easier to go with it. Just like the flow of 
time—you cannot get out of the present moment. You 
can think about the past and you can think about the future, 
but since you do that thinking now, the present is ines- 
capable. All right, now the present moment does, does 
it not, have a sense of flow. Time is going along; life is 
going along. Clock time is simply a measure of flow, a way 
of going tick, tick, tick, tick, and counting the ticks. 
Well, we have lived through so many ticks, but neverthe- 


84 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


less, real time, as distinct from ticking, is a flowing; yet, 
it is still. Is it not fascinating that it moves, but you are 
always there; it is always now. You never get out of now. 

This is the principle of flowing. It is beautifully simple. 
But yoy-can think of all kinds of very clever ways to post- 
pone finding this out. You can say, ‘Well, this is a very 
spiritual matter, and I am an unevolved person, so it will 
take me a very long time to realize this in more than an 
intellectual way.’’ But this is just an excuse for playing 
your own game, and not finding this out. There are all 
sorts of elaborate ways of doing this, and you can put it off 
by indulging in the most complicated systems of spiritual 
culture, or yoga, and so on, and so forth. And that is all 
right, I have no objection to your putting it off if that is 
what you want to do. But actually, it is always here and 
now. Just as you cannot get away from now, you cannot 
get out of the Tao. That is the humor of the whole thing, 
and that is why Chuang-tzu has this beautiful light touch. 
He says: 


The heron is white without a daily bath. 
The crow is black without being painted 
in ink. 
Therefore, there are blondes and brunettes, fat people and 


skinny people, tall people and short people, cultured people 


and vulgar people. Even the Christian hymn says: 


The rich man in his castle, 
the poor man at his gate, 
God made them high and lowly, 


and ordered their estate, 


Of course, we do not sing that much now, because we 
have too much social conscience. 
Chuang-tzu has this to say about that: 


Those who say that they would have right without 
its correlate wrong, or good government without its 


CHUANG-TzU_ 85 


correlate misrule, do not apprehend the great 
principle of the universe, nor the nature of all 
creation. One might as well talk of the existence of 
heaven without earth, or of the negative principle, 
yin, without the positive, yang; which is clearly 
impossible. If people keep on discussing it without 
stop, such people must be either fools or knaves. 


Of course, one could always reply to Chuang-tzu that 
there have to be fools and knaves so that we can re- 


cognize the existence of sages! He says as much in another 
way here: 


Speech is not mere blowing of breath, it is intended 
to say something, only what it is intended to say cannot 
yet be determined. Is there speech indeed, or is there 
not? Can we, or can we not, distinguish it from the 
chirping of young birds? 

How can Tao be so obscured that there can be a 
distinction of true and false? How can speech be so ob- 
scured that there can be a distinction of right and 
wrong? Where can you go and find Tao not to exist? 
Where can you go and find that words cannot be 
proved? The Tao is obscured by our inadequate 
understanding, and words are obscured by flowery 
expressions. Hence, the affirmations and denials of 
the Confucian and the Mohian schools, each denying 
what the other affirms and affirming what the other 
denies. Each denying what the other affirms and af- 
firming what the other denies brings us only confusion. 

There is nothing which is not this, there is nothin 
which is not that. What cannot be seen by “‘that’’ (the 
other person) can be known by myself; hence, I say, 
‘‘this’? emanates from ‘‘that’’; ‘‘that’’ also derives 
from “‘this.’’ This is the theory of the interdependence 
of ‘‘this’’ and ‘‘that.’’ Nevertheless, life arises from 
death and vice versa. Possibility arises from impossi- 


86 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


bility, and vice versa. Affirmation is based upon denial, 
and vice versa. Which being the case, the true sage 
rejects al] distinctions and takes refuge in heaven. 

For one may base it on this, yet this is also that, 
andgthat is also this. This also has its right and wrong, 
and that has its right and wrong; does then, the dis- 
tinction between this and that really exist or not? 
When this, the subjective, and that, the objective, 
are both without their correlates, that is the very axis 
of Tao. And when that axis passes through the center 
at which all infinities converge, affirmations and denials 
alike blend into the Infinite One. Hence, it is said that 
there is nothing like using the Light. 


You see, the axis of the opposites is the perception of 
their polarity. The difference between them is explicit, 
but the unity of them is implicit. There is the explicit 
difference between two ends of a stick, and the implicit 
unity that they are ends of the same stick. This is what is 
understood as the axis. The axis of Tao is what you might 
call the “‘secret conspiracy’’ that lies between all poles 
and opposites. It is implicit, or esoteric, that they are 
fundamentally one. Unity, whether it is between you and 
the universe, or any polarity, is not something that has to 
be brought into being. If one brings it into being one 
assumes that it does not exist, and this is called in Zen, 
putting ‘‘legs on a snake’’ or ‘‘a beard on a eunuch’’—it 
is just unnecessary. Unity exists; it is always there. You 
can see it so vividly, and actually almost put your finger on 
it and sense it. But, of course, if you try to grab the present 
moment and say, ‘“Get ready, get ready, Now!’’—-it is 
gone! The finer and finer we draw the hairline on the watch 
to know exactly when now is, the closer we eventually get 
to where we cannot see it at all. But, if you leave it alone 
and do not try to grab the moment as it flies, it is always 
there. You do not have to mark it, you do not have to put 


CHUANG-TZU 87 


your finger on it, because it is everything that there is. 
And so, the present moment suddenly expands. It contains 
the whole of time, all past, all future, everything. You nev- 
er have to hold on to it. If you can feel that, then realize 
that the movement of the Tao is exactly the same thing as 
the present moment—that which we call now is the same 
thing as the Tao. The Tao, the course of things, the eternal 
now, the presence of God, anything you want to call it— 
that is now! And you cannot get out of it. There is no need 
to get with it because you cannot get away from it! That 
is beautiful. You just relax, and you are there. 


88 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


THE PRACTICE OF 
MEDITATION 


C | he pracnce rf meditation is nttewhat ss ordinarily 


meant by rAchte, in thé Sense of repetitions 
Pe parcition Zshrecf ire formance. [t-: may Seem. ooo 
ar sloq teal to Sa SSH inthe orm yore, 
P) oy oy Lazen, as used by Hindus and Budi ists, ts 
a& Practice withewt¢ YDIIE~ in Sonectucture time — beige 
ik- is the avi-of being Crmpleteh aT, here and 
now. “Lin not Sle aid there. 1S no pb/ nce. 2 me omg 70. 
We are living in’ 2 cuffure entirely h notizes b a 
illusion of me ) in while the so-called present mremierct-iS 
fet as nothing but-an infinitesimal hairtite. befhveen 
sos raeln causative past and aw absorbing ly 
ot lon lee We have no presewh: eet 
is aie 


Marga ied wi ite mevn 
sm eri bo ¢ that these nevér was, (5, 


by will Be a othey SPOTL i cas experienc. 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION QI 


We are thereto out f touch wth yealy, Weco 
the wold as Falke) ateut; describe), an) mecgured-wi'the 
the wold whick actually is, We at Sik mith 4 fascination 

the ureh torts tenes snd number, ct Uympals, - 
Sé4ns, ais Wee wets, ae Vion the 
aye ending verpal and Symbolic thivbr a 
He ombahad asa Eons audsence- wills 
talking when a concert if aheut to begin : 

Simply yit Dowy ; chee. yenr eyes, vr) liskn tt all 
Sounds that may he omg th — wi thout- ty to nNane. 
br ipentify them. Listew aS you would Lifttn to musre, 
LE vou find thet verbal thin ong will nor dup away, 
Som + HOnpr to SITp it by Jorce of. wt ewe. use 
kee Jee tog Ke. reaxed, tsatin C43 1b rv the /ower 
aw, an) bis her, to jeer then, ke aS} they Wee. bids 
chateyng cigide— mere nove in The Sku/l— aud thes 
will everiedy swhsile. af themselveS , 45 a hivdulent- did 

ubly oof ull become ‘cabn and clear if left one. 

Abs, become aware rf. breathing aoa llow your 
lun S tp ware. 11 re rhy flora SEMA enjal ‘Yo 
Hib: bw az while pus Sit listening Bs iar) 
byeath. Bit, i ossible, dnt call, it Hats imply 
experence the n -verbal h ening. Your May ect- 
that this cs not “spiritual “medstation buf Aese 
Attention fo the “ hysical wal, hut it shoul) be 
undteyStond thit the Spiritul avd the physiad Are 
onl ideas, Ai les. hicel conce TAS , AnD that the. 
yea li: of which You Are Now Aware Is not-an sea, 
Furthermae , there 1S no "yew" aware of-/t: That was 
also juStAnicea. Can You hery Your5t listening & 

thet begin -to let vony breath ‘fall " out, slowly 
ww easily, f force or Sham your hon Sy buf let the. 
Syeath come out-in the Same way THAD you. let 


yourself Slumg into a confrtable. Sed.’ Simply let, 


92 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


t-9e, AC, aw Go. As Som) AS there. I$ the least 
Strain, just leMitcane back In aS a ve jex s Ont 
pall in. Forget the clock. Faget ta Choato Vast 
keep VE up Hs $o log as vou fea he. hycory oft: 
sie Hie breath in This was Z you Orscover hLw +o 
qenera te ENE without Cos Tr exampie., one. ia 
the gimmicks fin 3: anskyit, Le paya 4 used tp quiet 
the. hinkiing onind and rty Compulsi c LAche nna i$ 
Known ag manha— the charting of SeUdS-FA The 
Sake. of sound yather than meaning. Thr: begin 
to “flat” a Single tone. on the [nag, easy outhreath 
at “whatever oh IS mest com le. Hindus awd 
Buddhists use. Jor This yactice.\“suck Syllables ws 
Bm, AH, HUM Ice. Hungf, and Christians might— 
refer AMEN oF ALLELUIA, Muslins ALLAM, ad 
Jews ADONAIL : it yeath makes no Dy) YEV7CR , St710e. 
whet is important is simply aup solely the Sound. 
Like. Zen Buddhists, Yow couls use juSt the syllable 
Mo00 iss}. Dry that, and let your CONSCAOUSH CLS 
sink. sown, down, jown into the seund iid 23 long 
Aas thee. (S$ no sense Ja Sprain. 

Jbove all, don't look’. a result, Some. 

marvellous change of consciousness t7-Sactort : the. 

€ ¢ssena *F meéditctim -practrce. 1S centering 
pon what IS— not-m whet should a might Be 
(AL point pe mike the mind blank Ae 
gencenfrate+rerzely u mM, Say, & Single port Aghit-— 
abthongh ib a Loc be delight pits AL 
fierconess. ’ 

Fry how Long shertd this be Kepr up? My own, Au 
perhags unoyhnsx 5 eeling /5 that [ft Cave be cortinucd 
ue as lma-as Thesei's no Senshi vf foci fi 
any thts NAY easily oten to 50 oO mnuts At 
one. Srtting ; WRI yew mk want fo yethyrn. 13 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 93 


the State of n royal vestlessness Ans dishaction. 

In sittin meditation it-is best use rn * 
substantial cushion om ofie var; fo Keep inks spine 
erect Put not Sty cee havee oY Wh 


alms Upwarts — easil eR an} 
he ee ley: af Ke a Bdhin fi 2, either 
Loh “lotus” COTUI , Or reeling 
pack 67 the ie otis" wa elie ge 
aie eet Sole Upwayds gala ie 
TheSe pastures are ee ly uncom he bast 
have; the , me vantage 4h Keepn 71 Se, 


In the pstiase nee ditacion “ym ay “pesibly, have. 
Astonishing visions, amazing | Has, aw faseina’ if 
frntasies! You may also fed thary Cu aye becoming 
Clairvoyant or that you ioe He leave your boy 
and trave atwill. Sut all that is distactin, Leave 
it alme And Simply watch what happens NOW. One. 
does not meditate: in ef ee ae ex ’ 

we ify manazed to become omnipotint- pr 
a PINS TD mers Vou do? These Cs $e 120 

ata yises Foy yor, aud yor whore Ne would 
bo bike. mas lve. +o aplastic: WOMAN, Bene, then, 

all Those. gun rus wtp Promuse ‘marvellous vesiia® 
awd other: ore beneprtt fon their disciplines. 7 The. 
whole port is to veahze. that there 1s no Future, 
ad that the reel Sense ef lefe is an ex loan. f- 
the efernal now. S7OP, LooK, and) LISTEN! dy 
shal. we SAy, “Tarn. on, tune ¢ on or Oya; 2) "7 

a mofo is lhe aa man Who ¢@ dime tp the. Buddha. 

Ne ls, yon i bork hawds. the Buddha 

sea), 


phe dvep ed the fowers in hus de. 
on 7 Lad a SaiVgain Fe al He ia 
AeA es in Aisi Wyorhand Aw the. 
‘ Drap thatv en you have nether /n 


94 THE WAY OF LIBERATION 


the right nov in the leff Seu the mjodle!* And 
the man was instantly ‘enles Atened 
Ft is sprabeis have the Sense that all b ving 


and Maks Is wiTh 
aan ‘ity. Phas TD I éa it ig around 
+e Sun, ans, in tum, the Sun 1s Arun) 


some other Star. Fir enemy is nett aki 
the line [east resifhance Lreray ''$ eee 
i gees wattr iS in Sang ty Rue Weight. 
to him who w 


THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION 95 


NOTES 


FOREWORD 


1. Alan Watts, This Is It (New York: Vintage Books, 1973), 
pp. 19, 21. 

2. Mircea Eliade, The Two and the One (New York: Harper 
& Row, 1952), p. 77. 

3. Watts, op. cit., pp. 30-31. 

4. K. C. Varadachari, Alvars of South India (Bombay: Bhara- 
tiya Vidya Bhavan, 1970), p. 178. 


CHAPTER ONE 


. Zoku-Kosoden (Ch., Hsu Kao-seng Chuan). 

. Mumonkan (Ch., Wu-men Kuan), case 19. 

In Chinese, wu (no, nothing). 

In Chinese, kung-an (public case). 

. Kattoshu (Ch., Ko-t’eng Chi). 

Rinzai Roku: Shishu (Ch., Lin-chi Lu: Shih-chung). 
. Bokuju Roku (Ch., Mu-chou Lu). 

. Zenrin Ruiju, ch. 2. 

. Mumonkan, case 41. 


WSANNANPWH 


NOTES 97 


10. Keitoku Dento Roku (Ch., Ching-te ch’uan-teng Lu), vol. 3. 

11. In Chinese, tzu-jan (spontaneity or naturalness). 

12. Zenrin Kushu. 

13. Keitoku Dento Roku, ch. 8. 

14. Joshu Shinsai Zenji Go Roku (Ch., Chao-chou Chen-chi Ch’an- 
shih Yu-lu). 

15. In Chinese, wu-hsin (no-mind, or unself-consciousness) and 
wu-nien (no-thought, or letting go of thoughts and impressions). 

16. Ummon Roku (Ch., Yun-men Lu). 

17. Ibid. 

18. Rinzai Roku. 

19. Goso Roku (Ch., Wu-tsu Lu). 

20. In Chinese, wu-wei (not-making, or growing naturally). 


CHAPTER THREE 


1. John 12:24 
2. John 16:7 
3. Isaiah 45:6-7 


CHAPTER FIVE 


1. See Herbert A. Giles, ed. and trans., Chuang-tzu: Mystic, 
Moralist, and Social Reformer (Shanghai: Kelly and Walsh, 1926) 
for all references to the Chuang-tzu. 

2. See Lin Yutang, ed. and trans., The Wisdom of Lao-tse (New 


York: Modern Library, 1948). 


98 NOTES 


