INSECURITY 


Age of Anxiety 


ALAN W. WATTS 


The Wisdom of Insecurity 


Alan W. Watts, who held both a master’s degree in 
theology and a doctorate of divinity, is best remembered 
as an interpreter of Zen Buddhism in particular, and of 
Indian and Chinese philosophy in general. Standing 
apart, however, from sectarian membership, he has 
earned the reputation of being one of the most original 
and “unrutted” philosophers of the twentieth century. 
Watts was the author of some twenty books on the 
philosophy and psychology of religion that have been 
published in many languages throughout the world, 
including the bestselling The Way of Zen. An avid 
lecturer, Watts appeared regularly on the radio and 
hosted the popular television series, Eastern Wisdom and 
Modern Life, in the 1960s. He died in 1973. 


ALSO AVAILABLE FROM VINTAGE BOOKS 


Behold the Spirit 
The Book 
Cloud-Hidden, Whereabouts Unknown 
Nature, Man, and Woman 
Tao 
This Is It 
The Way of Zen 


ALAN W. WATTS 


The Wisdom of Insecurity 
A Message for an Age of Anxiety 


VINTAGE BOOKS 
A Division of Random House, Inc. 
New York 


SECOND VINTAGE BOOKS EDITION, FEBRUARY 2011 


Copyright © 1951 by Pantheon Books, 
copyright renewed 1979 by Mary Jane Yates Watts 
Introduction copyright © 2011 by Deepak Chopra 


All rights reserved. Published in the United States by Vintage Books, a division 
of Random House, Inc., New York, and in Canada by Random House of Canada 
Limited, Toronto. Originally published in slightly different form in hardcover 
in the United States by Pantheon Books, New York, in 1951, and subsequently 
published in paperback by Vintage Books, a division of Random House, Inc., 
New York, in 1968. 


Vintage and colophon are registered trademarks 
of Random House, Inc. 


The Cataloging-in-Publication Data for the Pantheon Books edition is 
on file at the Library of Congress. 


Ebook ISBN 9780307809865 
Cover design: gray318.com 
www.vintagebooks.com 


v3.1_14 


TO DOROTHY 


CONTENTS 


Cover 

About the Author 

Other Books by This Author 
Title Page 


Copyright 
Dedication 
Introduction 
Preface 


The Age of Anxiety 

Pain and Time 

The Great Stream 

The Wisdom of the Body 
On Being Aware 

The Marvelous Moment 
The Transformation of Life 
Creative Morality 

Religion Reviewed 


INTRODUCTION 


by Deepak Chopra 


Every book is a journey, but this one aims to travel everywhere 
and nowhere. It begins in a state of anxiety, which few people 
want to dwell on. It punches holes in shared belief and treats 
sacred things with irreverence and cocky quips. As if to ensure its 
failure, Alan Watts also proposes a paradox that being insecure is 
a malady of the psyche and at the same time an open door to an 
invisible reality, the only place where the cures for fear and 
anxiety will ever be found. 

Yet with all these elements going against it, The Wisdom of 
Insecurity, which was published in 1951, has found many 
spellbound readers, and I’m proud to call myself one. 

In my mid-thirties, about the same age as the author was when 
the book was published, I found in Watts the perfect guide for a 
course correction in life, away from materialism and its empty 
promises. The new course headed into the most elusive territory 
one can imagine: the present moment. Here and now, Watts 
declared, lies the experience of the universe in its totality. “If 
happiness always depends on something expected in the future, 
we are chasing a will-o’-the-wisp that ever eludes our grasp, until 
the future, and ourselves, vanish into the abyss of death.” A 
typical Alan Watts pronouncement, sweepingly ambitious, 
offering help at the price of subverting everything the reader 
holds dear. For in postwar America, life was all about progress 
and the lure of tomorrow. Where were we headed? First to the 
moon and one day the stars. How much could we achieve? 
Everything. What would success bring us? Riches and 
contentment that could never be taken away. Watts was the 
gadfly who pricked us out of our sleep. Progress was a sham, he 
said, and dreaming about tomorrow was pure escapism from the 
pain we fear today. What is popularly called “the power of now” 
was being addressed fifty years before its time. 

Looking back, one realizes that Watts was a spiritual polymath, 


the first and possibly greatest of that type. He read omnivorously 
in philosophy, religion, psychology, and science—a sponge with a 
hundred arms, so to speak. He produced this little book at a 
turning point in his personal life. It was 1951, and he had just 
lost his vocation as an Episcopal priest, along with his young wife 
in a divorce. He had been following a longtime fascination with 
Zen Buddhism, leading him to spend his seminary years trying to 
fuse Eastern and Western mysticism. In the classic arc of coming- 
of-age tales, he was finally about to find himself. But he would do 
it in the strangest way, by declaring that there was no self to find. 
Lasting happiness—the underlying quest in almost all of Watts’s 
copious writing—can only be achieved by giving up the ego-self, 
which is a pure illusion anyway. The ego-self constantly pushes 
reality away. It constructs a future out of empty expectations and 
a past out of regretful memories. 

As Watts formulates it, in his brisk, deceptively simple style: 
“’,. tomorrow and plans for tomorrow can have no significance at 
all unless you are in full contact with the reality of the present, 
since it is in the present and only in the present that you live.” 
Like a good preacher, he sounds emphatic and connected to a 
higher truth. But the message was too pushy and barbed for a 
comfortable Episcopal pulpit. Imagine any believing Christian, 
who cherishes the reward of Heaven and the second coming of 
Christ, hearing these words: “There is no other reality than 
present reality, so that, even if one were to live for endless ages, 
to live for the future would be to miss the point everlastingly.” 
With swift jabs Watts demolishes the afterlife and dashes any 
hope that there is a better world to come. 

Watts was alone in the wilderness back then. For an eccentric 
to dabble in Eastern thought was acceptable in his native 
England. Because it possessed India and strong footholds in 
China, England produced some minds who were willing to delve 
deeper into Vedanta and Buddhism than the usual blinkered 
colonialist. But America was different. No one needed to hear 
from an upstart who fancied himself the Pied Piper of all things 
spiritual (Watts’s own _ self-description was “philosophical 
entertainer,” although he was much more than that). But as I 
revisit the arguments offered so boldly in The Wisdom of 
Insecurity, I can feel the shock of truth that it produced in me. 

His opening chapter, “The Age of Anxiety,” takes its title from a 


popular poem by W. H. Auden, and the first paragraph announces 
the first of Buddha’s four noble truths, that life is full of suffering. 
Watts is canny enough not to mention the Buddha by name. 
Instead, he looks directly into the heart of a reader living under 
the shadow of the bomb, and poses an eternal question in terms 
that the existential fifties recognized: can it really be that human 
life is no more than a brief flicker of time, full of chaos and pain, 
between the darkness that precedes birth and the darkness that 
follows death? “We live in a time of unusual insecurity,” Watts 
notes, after a century when traditional values—especially 
religious belief—broke down on all fronts. There have been two 
opposing reactions to the decay of belief: relief in tossing off the 
old shackles, and worry that reason and sanity will give way to 
chaos. But Watts wants to carve a third way, pointing out that 
belief has disappeared through careful doubt and examination. 
This is the first sign that he welcomes the insecurity others fear, 
and this quickly becomes the main theme. Without importing any 
Eastern notions that might scare readers off, Watts has already 
introduced the most basic Buddhist stance: sober examination of 
what lies before you, leaving aside all assumptions. 

By holding on to this sense of openness, we can find all truth in 
ourselves. That promise, as held out here, echoes what saints and 
sages have taught in every wisdom tradition. Where the Buddha 
refused to answer questions about the existence of God, Watts is 
more inclined to smash idols. He uses modern physics as proof 
that there is no evidence for the physical existence of God, 
arguing that no such proof will ever be offered (a reckless 
prediction, but how could Watts have anticipated post-quantum 
theories that posit a universe imbued with infinite intelligence?). 
We can’t reimpose old myths on ourselves or believe in new ones 
made up out of a desire for comfort; therefore, the path of self- 
examination is the only one a person of conscience can 
reasonably follow. Otherwise, we will only numb ourselves to the 
meaninglessness of life, seizing present pleasure to avoid pain, a 
futile strategy—here Watts has slipped in the second noble truth, 
which is that pleasure can never cure pain since the two are 
connected. 

Trapped between outworn myths and despair, there is another 
way, but it requires a revolution in thought. Ironically, this third 
way will resurrect the very things one must deny in order to walk 


the path. “The reality which corresponds to ‘God’ and ‘eternal 
life’ is honest, above-board, plain, and open for all to see. But the 
seeing requires a correction of mind, just as clear vision 
sometimes requires a correction of the eyes.” It takes Watts 
twenty pages to reach this point, the real start of the journey, but 
by being simple, direct, and patient he creates a_ special 
atmosphere: the reader is beguiled into forgetting that he ever 
disagreed with any of the arguments being placed before him. 
That’s an enviable thing for an author to do, and it was Watts’s 
special gift. He takes a pithy truth from, say, the Upanishads— 
that fear is born of duality—and spins a long chapter about how 
animals experience pain, simply and without dread, while human 
beings are overshadowed by anxiety because of our divided 
selves. 

I don’t want to give the impression that The Wisdom of 
Insecurity is Buddhism for dummies—far from it. Watts keeps in 
mind that he is building toward very difficult concepts, centered 
above all on the concept that there is no individual ego-self. As a 
mirror of our own inner division, we have fragmented the world 
into inner and outer experience. We embrace our separateness 
without realizing that there is only one reality. The universe is a 
single process occurring in consciousness (“the great stream”), 
and only by merging into that process can we discover who we 
really are. No external experience will support us, because the 
flux of events is inescapable. Time itself is a creation of the 
restless mind; space has been created by the same mind to give 
itself room to wander when in fact there is no space beyond a 
mental construct that, like all constructs, eventually turns into a 
prison. These are difficult ideas to grasp, even more difficult to 
abide by. 

The strategy Watts follows is not specifically Buddhist but goes 
back to the most ancient insights of the Vedic seers of India: 
eliminate what is unreal, and all that remains will be real. It’s a 
simple but ruthless approach, since there are so many things we 
accept as real which are in fact merely symbolic: “... thoughts, 
ideas, and words are ‘coins’ for real things. They are not those 
things.” Why, then, write books at all? Because words can point 
in the right direction; they can highlight overlooked flashes of 
insight; they can ignite the flame of discontent. In his beguiling 
way Watts aims to do all of that, but he knows that a map isn’t 


the same as the territory it represents. Behind his authoritative 
voice, the author of these pages is as questing as anyone, and as 
vulnerable in his quest. He hasn’t escaped the prison of the 
divided self; he understands that what will free him isn’t any kind 
of normal experience but something outside time, which we call, 
for want of a better term, waking up. 

The paradox about waking up—I mean the ordinary kind of 
waking up that occurred to you and me this morning—is that you 
can’t make it happen, yet it’s inevitable. The same holds true 
spiritually. You can’t wish, pray, beg, force, or meditate yourself 
awake. Even to detect that you are asleep is hard enough. 
Somehow, a tiny speck of awareness hints at another reality. With 
great fascination Alan Watts plays upon that small speck of 
doubt, here and in all his other books. As he sees it, the mind is 
in a whirl to escape itself and find itself at the same time. So 
every spiritual journey ends by closing the circle. The frightened 
mind that runs away from everyday terrors meets the seeking 
mind that wants a better world. When they join, illusion has been 
exhausted; it has no more tricks to play. 

At that moment Heaven doesn’t dawn, nor is there a 
benevolent God to embrace. There is something even better: 
wholeness. Self-division is healed. Once the mind has seen 
through all fear and all hope, it finds peace within itself, in a 
state of awareness beyond thought. This is the end point that The 
Wisdom of Insecurity, like all books of truth, cannot deliver neatly 
wrapped and tied. But such a book can symbolically draw the 
circle for us, which this one does splendidly. Anyone whose life 
needs a course correction would be fortunate to be guided by it. 
My life still is, some thirty years later. 


PREFACE 


I have always been fascinated by the law of reversed effort. 
Sometimes I call it the “backwards law.” When you try to stay on 
the surface of the water, you sink; but when you try to sink, you 
float. When you hold your breath, you lose it—which 
immediately calls to mind an ancient and much neglected saying, 
“Whosoever would save his soul shall lose it.” 

This book is an exploration of this law in relation to man’s 
quest for psychological security, and to his efforts to find spiritual 
and intellectual certainty in religion and philosophy. It is written 
in the conviction that no theme could be more appropriate in a 
time when human life seems to be so peculiarly insecure and 
uncertain. It maintains that this insecurity is the result of trying 
to be secure, and that, contrariwise, salvation and sanity consist 
in the most radical recognition that we have no way of saving 
ourselves. 

This begins to sound like something from Alice Through the 
Looking Glass, of which this book is a sort of philosophical 
equivalent. For the reader will frequently find himself in a topsy- 
turvy world in which the normal order of things seems to be 
completely reversed, and common sense turned inside out and 
upside down. Those who have read some of my former books, 
such as Behold the Spirit and The Supreme Identity, will find things 
that seem to be total contradictions of much that I have said 
before. This, however, is true only in some minor respects. For I 
have discovered that the essence and crux of what I was trying to 
say in those books was seldom understood; the framework and 
the context of my thought often hid the meaning. My intention 
here is to approach the same meaning from entirely different 
premises, and in terms which do not confuse thought with the 
multitude of irrelevant associations which time and tradition 
have hung upon them. 

In those books I was concerned to vindicate certain principles 
of religion, philosophy, and metaphysic by reinterpreting them. 


This was, I think, like putting legs on a snake—unnecessary and 
confusing, because only doubtful truths need defense. This book, 
however, is in the spirit of the Chinese sage Lao-tzu, that master 
of the law of reversed effort, who declared that those who justify 
themselves do not convince, that to know truth one must get rid 
of knowledge, and that nothing is more powerful and creative 
than emptiness—from which men shrink. Here, then, my aim is to 
show—backwards-fashion—that those essential realities of 
religion and metaphysic are vindicated in doing without them, 
and manifested in being destroyed. 

It is my happy duty to acknowledge that the preparation of this 
book has been made possible by the generosity of the foundation 
established by the late Franklin J. Matchette of New York, a man 
who devoted much of his life to the problems of science and 
metaphysic, being one of those somewhat rare businessmen who 
are not wholly absorbed in the vicious circle of making money to 
make money to make money. The Matchette Foundation is 
therefore dedicated to the pursuit of metaphysical studies, and, 
needless to say, it is to me a sign of insight and imagination on 
their part that they have been willing to interest themselves in so 
“contrary” an approach to metaphysical knowledge. 

Alan W. Watts 


San Francisco 
May 1951 


I. THE AGE OF ANXIETY 


By ALL OUTWARD APPEARANCES OUR LIFE IS A SPARK Of light between one 
eternal darkness and another. Nor is the interval between these 
two nights an unclouded day, for the more we are able to feel 
pleasure, the more we are vulnerable to pain—and, whether in 
background or foreground, the pain is always with us. We have 
been accustomed to make this existence worth-while by the belief 
that there is more than the outward appearance—that we live for 
a future beyond this life here. For the outward appearance does 
not seem to make sense. If living is to end in pain, 
incompleteness, and nothingness, it seems a cruel and futile 
experience for beings who are born to reason, hope, create, and 
love. Man, as a being of sense, wants his life to make sense, and 
he has found it hard to believe that it does so unless there is more 
than what he sees—unless there is an eternal order and an eternal 
life behind the uncertain and momentary experience of life-and- 
death. 

I may not, perhaps, be forgiven for introducing sober matters 
with a frivolous notion, but the problem of making sense out of 
the seeming chaos of experience reminds me of my childish desire 
to send someone a parcel of water in the mail. The recipient 
unties the string, releasing the deluge in his lap. But the game 
would never work, since it is irritatingly impossible to wrap and 
tie a pound of water in a paper package. There are kinds of paper 
which won’t disintegrate when wet, but the trouble is to get the 
water itself into any manageable shape, and to tie the string 
without bursting the bundle. 

The more one studies attempted solutions to problems in 
politics and economics, in art, philosophy, and religion, the more 
one has the impression of extremely gifted people wearing out 
their ingenuity at the impossible and futile task of trying to get 
the water of life into neat and permanent packages. 

There are many reasons why this should be particularly evident 
to a person living today. We know so much about history, about 


all the packages which have been tied and which have duly come 
apart. We know so much detail about the problems of life that 
they resist easy simplification, and seem more complex and 
shapeless than ever. Furthermore, science and industry have so 
increased both the tempo and the violence of living that our 
packages seem to come apart faster and faster every day. 

There is, then, the feeling that we live in a time of unusual 
insecurity. In the past hundred years so many long-established 
traditions have broken down—traditions of family and social life, 
of government, of the economic order, and of religious belief. As 
the years go by, there seem to be fewer and fewer rocks to which 
we can hold, fewer things which we can regard as absolutely 
right and true, and fixed for all time. 

To some this is a welcome release from the restraints of moral, 
social, and spiritual dogma. To others it is a dangerous and 
terrifying breach with reason and sanity, tending to plunge 
human life into hopeless chaos. To most, perhaps, the immediate 
sense of release has given a brief exhilaration, to be followed by 
the deepest anxiety. For if all is relative, if life is a torrent 
without form or goal in whose flood absolutely nothing save 
change itself can last, it seems to be something in which there is 
“no future” and thus no hope. 

Human beings appear to be happy just so long as they have a 
future to which they can look forward—whether it be a “good 
time” tomorrow or an everlasting life beyond the grave. For 
various reasons, more and more people find it hard to believe in 
the latter. On the other hand, the former has the disadvantage 
that when this “good time” arrives, it is difficult to enjoy it to the 
full without some promise of more to come. If happiness always 
depends on something expected in the future, we are chasing a 
will-o’-the-wisp that ever eludes our grasp, until the future, and 
ourselves, vanish into the abyss of death. 

As a matter of fact, our age is no more insecure than any other. 
Poverty, disease, war, change, and death are nothing new. In the 
best of times “security” has never been more than temporary and 
apparent. But it has been possible to make the insecurity of 
human life supportable by belief in unchanging things beyond the 
reach of calamity—in God, in man’s immortal soul, and in the 
government of the universe by eternal laws of right. 

Today such convictions are rare, even in religious circles. There 


is no level of society, there must even be few individuals, touched 
by modern education, where there is not some trace of the leaven 
of doubt. It is simply self-evident that during the past century the 
authority of science has taken the place of the authority of 
religion in the popular imagination, and that scepticism, at least 
in spiritual things, has become more general than belief. 

The decay of belief has come about through the honest doubt, 
the careful and fearless thinking of highly intelligent men of 
science and philosophy. Moved by a zeal and reverence for facts, 
they have tried to see, understand, and face life as it is without 
wishful thinking. Yet for all that they have done to improve the 
conditions of life, their picture of the universe seems to leave the 
individual without ultimate hope. The price of their miracles in 
this world has been the disappearance of the world-to-come, and 
one is inclined to ask the old question, “What shall it profit a man 
if he gain the whole world and lose his soul?” Logic, intelligence, 
and reason are satisfied, but the heart goes hungry. For the heart 
has learned to feel that we live for the future. Science may, 
slowly and uncertainly, give us a better future—for a few years. 
And then, for each of us, it will end. It will all end. However long 
postponed, everything composed must decompose. 

Despite some opinions to the contrary, this is still the general 
view of science. In literary and religious circles it is now often 
supposed that the conflict between science and belief is a thing of 
the past. There are even some rather wishful scientists who feel 
that when modern physics abandoned a crude atomistic 
materialism, the chief reasons for this conflict were removed. But 
this is not at all the case. In most of our great centers of learning, 
those who make it their business to study the full implications of 
science and its methods are as far as ever from what they 
understand as a religious point of view. 

Nuclear physics and relativity have, it is true, done away with 
the old materialism, but they now give us a view of the universe 
in which there is even less room for ideas of any absolute purpose 
or design. The modern scientist is not so naive as to deny God 
because he cannot be found with a telescope, or the soul because 
it is not revealed by the scalpel. He has merely noted that the 
idea of God is logically unnecessary. He even doubts that it has 
any meaning. It does not help him to explain anything which he 
cannot explain in some other, and simpler, way. 


He argues that if everything which happens is said to be under 
the providence and control of God, this actually amounts to 
saying nothing. To say that everything is governed and created by 
God is like saying, “Everything is up,”"—which means nothing at 
all. The notion does not help us to make any verifiable 
predictions, and so, from the scientific standpoint, is of no value 
whatsoever. Scientists may be right in this respect. They may be 
wrong. It is not our purpose here to argue this point. We need 
only note that such scepticism has immense influence, and sets 
the prevailing mood of the age. 

What science has said, in sum, is this: We do not, and in all 
probability cannot, know whether God exists. Nothing that we do 
know suggests that he does, and all the arguments which claim to 
prove his existence are found to be without logical meaning. 
There is nothing, indeed, to prove that there is no God, but the 
burden of proof rests with those who propose the idea. If, the 
scientists would say, you believe in God, you must do so on 
purely emotional grounds, without basis in logic or fact. 
Practically speaking, this may amount to atheism. Theoretically, 
it is simple agnosticism. For it is of the essence of scientific 
honesty that you do not pretend to know what you do not know, 
and of the essence of scientific method that you do not employ 
hypotheses which cannot be tested. 

The immediate results of this honesty have been deeply 
unsettling and depressing. For man seems to be unable to live 
without myth, without the belief that the routine and drudgery, 
the pain and fear of this life have some meaning and goal in the 
future. At once new myths come into being—political and 
economic myths with extravagant promises of the best of futures 
in the present world. These myths give the individual a certain 
sense of meaning by making him part of a vast social effort, in 
which he loses something of his own emptiness and loneliness. 
Yet the very violence of these political religions betrays the 
anxiety beneath them—for they are but men huddling together 
and shouting to give themselves courage in the dark. 

Once there is the suspicion that a religion is a myth, its power 
has gone. It may be necessary for man to have a myth, but he 
cannot self-consciously prescribe one as he can mix a pill for a 
headache. A myth can only “work” when it is thought to be truth, 
and man cannot for long knowingly and intentionally “kid” 


himself. 

Even the best modern apologists for religion seem to overlook 
this fact. For their most forceful arguments for some sort of return 
to orthodoxy are those which show the social and moral 
advantages of belief in God. But this does not prove that God is a 
reality. It proves, at most, that believing in God is useful. “If God 
did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him.” Perhaps. But 
if the public has any suspicion that he does not exist, the 
invention is in vain. 

It is for this reason that most of the current return to orthodoxy 
in some intellectual circles has a rather hollow ring. So much of it 
is more a belief in believing than a belief in God. The contrast 
between the insecure, neurotic, educated “modern” and the quiet 
dignity and inner peace of the old-fashioned believer, makes the 
latter a man to be envied. But it is a serious misapplication of 
psychology to make the presence or absence of neurosis the 
touchstone of truth, and to argue that if a man’s philosophy 
makes him neurotic, it must be wrong. “Most atheists and 
agnostics are neurotic, whereas most simple Catholics are happy 
and at peace with themselves. Therefore the views of the former 
are false, and of the latter true.” 

Even if the observation is correct, the reasoning based on it is 
absurd. It is as if to say, “You say there is a fire in the basement. 
You are upset about it. Because you are upset, there is obviously 
no fire.” The agnostic, the sceptic, is neurotic, but this does not 
imply a false philosophy; it implies the discovery of facts to 
which he does not know how to adapt himself. The intellectual 
who tries to escape from neurosis by escaping from the facts is 
merely acting on the principle that “where ignorance is bliss, ‘tis 
folly to be wise.” 

When belief in the eternal becomes impossible, and there is 
only the poor substitute of belief in believing, men seek their 
happiness in the joys of time. However much they may try to 
bury it in the depths of their minds, they are well aware that 
these joys are both uncertain and brief. This has two results. On 
the one hand, there is the anxiety that one may be missing 
something, so that the mind flits nervously and greedily from one 
pleasure to another, without finding rest and satisfaction in any. 
On the other, the frustration of having always to pursue a future 
good in a tomorrow which never comes, and in a world where 


everything must disintegrate, gives men an attitude of “What’s 
the use anyhow?” 

Consequently our age is one of frustration, anxiety, agitation, 
and addiction to “dope.” Somehow we must grab what we can 
while we can, and drown out the realization that the whole thing 
is futile and meaningless. This “dope” we call our high standard 
of living, a violent and complex stimulation of the senses, which 
makes them progressively less sensitive and thus in need of yet 
more violent stimulation. We crave distraction—a panorama of 
sights, sounds, thrills, and titillations into which as much as 
possible must be crowded in the shortest possible time. 

To keep up this “standard” most of us are willing to put up 
with lives that consist largely in doing jobs that are a bore, 
earning the means to seek relief from the tedium by intervals of 
hectic and expensive pleasure. These intervals are supposed to be 
the real living, the real purpose served by the necessary evil of 
work. Or we imagine that the justification of such work is the 
rearing of a family to go on doing the same kind of thing, in 
order to rear another family ... and so ad infinitum. 

This is no caricature. It is the simple reality of millions of lives, 
so commonplace that we need hardly dwell upon the details, save 
to note the anxiety and frustration of those who put up with it, 
not knowing what else to do. 

But what are we to do? The alternatives seem to be two. The 
first is, somehow or other, to discover a new myth, or 
convincingly resuscitate an old one. If science cannot prove there 
is no God, we can try to live and act on the bare chance that he 
may exist after all. There seems to be nothing to lose in such a 
gamble, for if death is the end, we shall never know that we have 
lost. But, obviously, this will never amount to a vital faith, for it 
is really no more than to say, “Since the whole thing is futile 
anyhow, let’s pretend it isn’t.” The second is to try grimly to face 
the fact that life is “a tale told by an idiot,” and make of it what 
we can, letting science and technology serve us as well as they 
may in our journey from nothing to nothing. 

Yet these are not the only solutions. We may begin by granting 
all the agnosticism of a critical science. We may admit, frankly, 
that we have no scientific grounds for belief in God, in personal 
immortality, or in any absolutes. We may refrain altogether from 
trying to believe, taking life just as it is, and no more. From this 


point of departure there is yet another way of life that requires 
neither myth nor despair. But it requires a complete revolution in 
our ordinary, habitual ways of thinking and feeling. 

The extraordinary thing about this revolution is that it reveals 
the truth behind the so-called myths of traditional religion and 
metaphysic. It reveals, not beliefs, but actual realities 
corresponding—in an unexpected way—to the ideas of God and 
of eternal life. There are reasons for supposing that a revolution 
of this kind was the original source of some of the main religious 
ideas, standing in relation to them as reality to symbol and cause 
to effect. The common error of ordinary religious practice is to 
mistake the symbol for the reality, to look at the finger pointing 
the way and then to suck it for comfort rather than follow it. 
Religious ideas are like words—of little use, and often misleading, 
unless you know the concrete realities to which they refer. The 
word “water” is a useful means of communication amongst those 
who know water. The same is true of the word and the idea 
called “God.” 

I do not, at this point, wish to seem mysterious or to be making 
claims to “secret knowledge.” The reality which corresponds to 
“God” and “eternal life” is honest, above-board, plain, and open 
for all to see. But the seeing requires a correction of mind, just as 
clear vision sometimes requires a correction of the eyes. 

The discovery of this reality is hindered rather than helped by 
belief, whether one believes in God or believes in atheism. We 
must here make a clear distinction between belief and faith, 
because, in general practice, belief has come to mean a state of 
mind which is almost the opposite of faith. Belief, as I use the 
word here, is the insistence that the truth is what one would 
“lief” or wish it to be. The believer will open his mind to the 
truth on condition that it fits in with his preconceived ideas and 
wishes. Faith, on the other hand, is an unreserved opening of the 
mind to the truth, whatever it may turn out to be. Faith has no 
preconceptions; it is a plunge into the unknown. Belief clings, but 
faith lets go. In this sense of the word, faith is the essential virtue 
of science, and likewise of any religion that is not self-deception. 

Most of us believe in order to feel secure, in order to make our 
individual lives seem valuable and meaningful. Belief has thus 
become an attempt to hang on to life, to grasp and keep it for 
one’s own. But you cannot understand life and its mysteries as 


long as you try to grasp it. Indeed, you cannot grasp it, just as 
you cannot walk off with a river in a bucket. If you try to capture 
running water in a bucket, it is clear that you do not understand 
it and that you will always be disappointed, for in the bucket the 
water does not run. To “have” running water you must let go of it 
and let it run. The same is true of life and of God. 

The present phase of human thought and history is especially 
ripe for this “letting go.” Our minds have been prepared for it by 
this very collapse of the beliefs in which we have sought security. 
From a point of view strictly, if strangely, in accord with certain 
religious traditions, this disappearance of the old rocks and 
absolutes is no calamity, but rather a blessing. It almost compels 
us to face reality with open minds, and you can only know God 
through an open mind just as you can only see the sky through a 
clear window. You will not see the sky if you have covered the 
glass with blue paint. 

But “religious” people who resist the scraping of the paint from 
the glass, who regard the scientific attitude with fear and 
mistrust, and confuse faith with clinging to certain ideas, are 
curiously ignorant of laws of the spiritual life which they might 
find in their own traditional records. A careful study of 
comparative religion and spiritual philosophy reveals that 
abandonment of belief, of any clinging to a future life for one’s 
own, and of any attempt to escape from finitude and mortality, is 
a regular and normal stage in the way of the spirit. Indeed, this is 
actually such a “first principle” of the spiritual life that it should 
have been obvious from the beginning, and it seems, after all, 
surprising that learned theologians should adopt anything but a 
cooperative attitude towards the critical philosophy of science. 

Surely it is old news that salvation comes only through the 
death of the human form of God. But it was not, perhaps, so easy 
to see that God’s human form is not simply the historic Christ, but 
also the images, ideas, and beliefs in the Absolute to which man 
clings in his mind. Here is the full sense of the commandment, 
“Thou shalt not make to thyself any graven image, nor the 
likeness of anything that is in heaven above; ... thou shalt not 
bow down to them, nor worship them.” 

To discover the ultimate Reality of life—the Absolute, the 
eternal, God—you must cease to try to grasp it in the forms of 
idols. These idols are not just crude images, such as the mental 


picture of God as an old gentleman on a golden throne. They are 
our beliefs, our cherished preconceptions of the truth, which 
block the unreserved opening of mind and heart to reality. The 
legitimate use of images is to express the truth, not to possess it. 

This was always recognized in the great Oriental traditions 
such as Buddhism, Vedanta, and Taoism. The principle has not 
been unknown to Christians, for it was implicit in the whole story 
and teaching of Christ. His life was from the beginning a 
complete acceptance and embracing of insecurity. “The foxes 
have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of 
Man hath not where to lay his head.” 

The principle is yet more to the point if Christ is regarded as 
divine in the most orthodox sense—as the unique and special 
incarnation of God. For the basic theme of the Christ-story is that 
this “express image” of God becomes the source of life in the very 
act of being destroyed. To the disciples who tried to cling to his 
divinity in the form of his human individuality he explained, 
“Unless a grain of corn fall into the ground and die, it remains 
alone. But if it dies, it brings forth much fruit.” In the same vein 
he warned them, “It is expedient for you that I go away, for if I 
go not away the Paraclete (the Holy Spirit) cannot come unto 
you.” 

These words are more than ever applicable to Christians, and 
speak exactly to the whole condition of our times. For we have 
never actually understood the revolutionary sense beneath them 
—the incredible truth that what religion calls the vision of God is 
found in giving up any belief in the idea of God. By the same law 
of reversed effort, we discover the “infinite” and the “absolute,” 
not by straining to escape from the finite and relative world, but 
by the most complete acceptance of its limitations. Paradox as it 
may seem, we likewise find life meaningful only when we have 
seen that it is without purpose, and know the “mystery of the 
universe” only when we are convinced that we know nothing 
about it at all. The ordinary agnostic, relativist, or materialist 
fails to reach this point because he does not follow his line of 
thought consistently to its end—an end which would be the 
surprise of his life. All too soon he abandons faith, openness to 
reality, and lets his mind harden into doctrine. The discovery of 
the mystery, the wonder beyond all wonders, needs no belief, for 
we can only believe in what we have already known, 


preconceived, and imagined. But this is beyond any imagination. 
We have but to open the eyes of the mind wide enough, and “the 
truth will out.” 


II. PAIN AND TIME 


AT TIMES ALMOST ALL OF US ENVY THE ANIMALS. They suffer and die, but 
they do not seem to make a “problem” of it. Their lives seem to 
have so few complications. They eat when they are hungry and 
sleep when they are tired, and instinct rather than anxiety seems 
to govern their few preparations for the future. As far as we can 
judge, every animal is so busy with what he is doing at the 
moment that it never enters his head to ask whether life has a 
meaning or a future. For the animal, happiness consists in 
enjoying life in the immediate present—not in the assurance that 
there is a whole future of joys ahead of him. 

This is not just because the animal is a relatively insensitive 
clod. Often enough his eyesight, his sense of hearing and smell, 
are far more acute than ours, and one can hardly doubt that he 
enjoys his food and sleep immensely. Despite his acute senses, he 
has, however, a somewhat insensitive brain. It is more specialized 
than ours, for which reason he is a creature of habit; he is unable 
to reason and make abstractions, and has extremely limited 
powers of memory and prediction. 

Unquestionably the sensitive human brain adds immeasurably 
to the richness of life. Yet for this we pay dearly, because the 
increase in over-all sensitivity makes us peculiarly vulnerable. 
One can be less vulnerable by becoming less sensitive—more of a 
stone and less of a man—and so less capable of enjoyment. 
Sensitivity requires a high degree of softness and fragility— 
eyeballs, eardrums, taste buds, and nerve ends culminating in the 
highly delicate organism of the brain. These are not only soft and 
fragile, but also perishable. There seems to be no effective way of 
decreasing the delicacy and perishability of living tissue without 
also decreasing its vitality and sensitivity. 

If we are to have intense pleasures, we must also be liable to 
intense pains. The pleasure we love, and the pain we hate, but it 
seems impossible to have the former without the latter. Indeed, it 
looks as if the two must in some way alternate, for continuous 


pleasure is a stimulus that must either pall or be increased. And 
the increase will either harden the sense buds with its friction, or 
turn into pain. A consistent diet of rich food either destroys the 
appetite or makes one sick. 

To the degree, then, that life is found good, death must be 
proportionately evil. The more we are able to love another person 
and to enjoy his company, the greater must be our grief at his 
death, or in separation. The further the power of consciousness 
ventures out into experience, the more is the price it must pay for 
its knowledge. It is understandable that we should sometimes ask 
whether life has not gone too far in this direction, whether “the 
game is worth the candle,” and whether it might not be better to 
turn the course of evolution in the only other possible direction— 
backwards, to the relative peace of the animal, the vegetable, and 
the mineral. 

Something of this kind is often attempted. There is the woman 
who, having suffered some deep emotional injury in love or 
marriage, vows never to let another man play on her feelings, 
assuming the role of the hard and bitter spinster. Almost more 
common is the sensitive boy who learns in school to encrust 
himself for life in the shell of the “tough-guy” attitude. As an 
adult he plays, in self-defense, the role of the Philistine, to whom 
all intellectual and emotional culture is womanish and “sissy.” 
Carried to its final extreme, the logical end of this type of 
reaction to life is suicide. The hard-bitten kind of person is 
always, as it were, a partial suicide; some of himself is already 
dead. 

If, then, we are to be fully human and fully alive and aware, it 
seems that we must be willing to suffer for our pleasures. Without 
such willingness there can be no growth in the intensity of 
consciousness. Yet, generally speaking, we are not willing, and it 
may be thought strange to suppose that we can be. For “nature in 
us” so rebels against pain that the very notion of “willingness” to 
put up with it beyond a certain point may appear impossible and 
meaningless. 

Under these circumstances, the life that we live is a 
contradiction and a conflict. Because consciousness must involve 
both pleasure and pain, to strive for pleasure to the exclusion of 
pain is, in effect, to strive for the loss of consciousness. Because 
such a loss is in principle the same as death, this means that the 


more we struggle for life (as pleasure), the more we are actually 
killing what we love. 

Indeed, this is the common attitude of man to so much that he 
loves. For the greater part of human activity is designed to make 
permanent those experiences and joys which are only lovable 
because they are changing. Music is a delight because of its 
rhythm and flow. Yet the moment you arrest the flow and 
prolong a note or chord beyond its time, the rhythm is destroyed. 
Because life is likewise a flowing process, change and death are 
its necessary parts. To work for their exclusion is to work against 
life. 

However, the simple experiencing of alternating pain and 
pleasure is by no means the heart of the human problem. The 
reason that we want life to mean something, that we seek God or 
eternal life, is not merely that we are trying to get away from an 
immediate experience of pain. Nor is it for any such reason that 
we assume attitudes and roles as habits of perpetual self-defense. 
The real problem does not come from any momentary sensitivity 
to pain, but from our marvelous powers of memory and foresight 
—in short from our consciousness of time. 

For the animal to be happy it is enough that this moment be 
enjoyable. But man is hardly satisfied with this at all. He is much 
more concerned to have enjoyable memories and expectations — 
especially the latter. With these assured, he can put up with an 
extremely miserable present. Without this assurance, he can be 
extremely miserable in the midst of immediate physical pleasure. 

Here is a person who knows that in two weeks’ time he has to 
undergo a surgical operation. In the meantime he is feeling no 
physical pain; he has plenty to eat; he is surrounded by friends 
and human affection; he is doing work that is normally of great 
interest to him. But his power to enjoy these things is taken away 
by constant dread. He is insensitive to the immediate realities 
around him. His mind is preoccupied with something that is not 
yet here. It is not as if he were thinking about it in a practical 
way, trying to decide whether he should have the operation or 
not, or making plans to take care of his family and his affairs if he 
should die. These decisions have already been made. Rather, he is 
thinking about the operation in an entirely futile way, which both 
ruins his present enjoyment of life and contributes nothing to the 
solution of any problem. But he cannot help himself. 


This is the typical human problem. The object of dread may not 
be an operation in the immediate future. It may be the problem 
of next month’s rent, of a threatened war or social disaster, of 
being able to save enough for old age, or of death at the last. This 
“spoiler of the present” may not even be a future dread. It may be 
something out of the past, some memory of an injury, some crime 
or indiscretion, which haunts the present with a sense of 
resentment or guilt. The power of memories and expectations is 
such that for most human beings the past and the future are not 
as real, but more real than the present. The present cannot be 
lived happily unless the past has been “cleared up” and the future 
is bright with promise. 

There can be no doubt that the power to remember and 
predict, to make an ordered sequence out of a helter-skelter chaos 
of disconnected moments, is a wonderful development of 
sensitivity. In a way it is the achievement of the human brain, 
giving man the most extraordinary powers of survival and 
adaptation to life. But the way in which we generally use this 
power is apt to destroy all its advantages. For it is of little use to 
us to be able to remember and predict if it makes us unable to 
live fully in the present. 

What is the use of planning to be able to eat next week unless I 
can really enjoy the meals when they come? If I am so busy 
planning how to eat next week that I cannot fully enjoy what I 
am eating now, I will be in the same predicament when next 
week’s meals become “now.” 

If my happiness at this moment consists largely in reviewing 
happy memories and expectations, I am but dimly aware of this 
present. I shall still be dimly aware of the present when the good 
things that I have been expecting come to pass. For I shall have 
formed a habit of looking behind and ahead, making it difficult 
for me to attend to the here and now. If, then, my awareness of 
the past and future makes me less aware of the present, I must 
begin to wonder whether I am actually living in the real world. 

After all, the future is quite meaningless and unimportant 
unless, sooner or later, it is going to become the present. Thus to 
plan for a future which is not going to become present is hardly 
more absurd than to plan for a future which, when it comes to 
me, will find me “absent,” looking fixedly over its shoulder 
instead of into its face. 


This kind of living in the fantasy of expectation rather than the 
reality of the present is the special trouble of those business men 
who live entirely to make money. So many people of wealth 
understand much more about making and saving money than 
about using and enjoying it. They fail to live because they are 
always preparing to live. Instead of earning a living they are 
mostly earning an earning, and thus when the time comes to 
relax they are unable to do so. Many a “successful” man is bored 
and miserable when he retires, and returns to his work only to 
prevent a younger man from taking his place. 

From still another point of view the way in which we use 
memory and prediction makes us less, rather than more, 
adaptable to life. If to enjoy even an enjoyable present we must 
have the assurance of a happy future, we are “crying for the 
moon.” We have no such assurance. The best predictions are still 
matters of probability rather than certainty, and to the best of our 
knowledge every one of us is going to suffer and die. If, then, we 
cannot live happily without an assured future, we are certainly 
not adapted to living in a finite world where, despite the best 
plans, accidents will happen, and where death comes at the end. 

This, then, is the human problem: there is a price to be paid for 
every increase in consciousness. We cannot be more sensitive to 
pleasure without being more sensitive to pain. By remembering 
the past we can plan for the future. But the ability to plan for 
pleasure is offset by the “ability” to dread pain and to fear the 
unknown. Furthermore, the growth of an acute sense of the past 
and the future gives us a correspondingly dim sense of the 
present. In other words, we seem to reach a point where the 
advantages of being conscious are outweighed by its 
disadvantages, where extreme sensitivity makes us unadaptable. 

Under these circumstances we feel in conflict with our own 
bodies and the world around them, and it is consoling to be able 
to think that in this contradictory world we are but “strangers 
and pilgrims.” For if our desires are out of accord with anything 
that the finite world can offer, it might seem that our nature is 
not of this world, that our hearts are made, not for the finite, but 
for infinity. The discontent of our souls would appear to be the 
sign and seal of their divinity. 

But does the desire for something prove that the thing exists? 
We know that it does not necessarily do so at all. It may be 


consoling to think that we are citizens of another world than this, 
and that after our exile upon earth we may return to the true 
home of our heart’s desire. But if we are citizens of this world, 
and if there can be no final satisfaction of the soul’s discontent, 
has not nature, in bringing forth man, made a serious mistake? 

For it would seem that, in man, life is in hopeless conflict with 
itself. To be happy, we must have what we cannot have. In man, 
nature has conceived desires which it is impossible to satisfy. To 
drink more fully of the fountain of pleasure, it has brought forth 
capacities which make man the more susceptible to pain. It has 
given us the power to control the future but a little—the price of 
which is the frustration of knowing that we must at last go down 
in defeat. If we find this absurd, this is only to say that nature has 
conceived intelligence in us to berate itself for absurdity. 
Consciousness seems to be nature’s ingenious mode of self- 
torture. 

Of course we do not want to think that this is true. But it would 
be easy to show that most reasoning to the contrary is but wishful 
thinking—nature’s method of putting off suicide so that the 
idiocy can continue. Reasoning, then, is not enough. We must go 
deeper. We must look into this life, this nature, which has 
become aware within us, and find out whether it is really in 
conflict with itself, whether it actually desires the security and the 
painlessness which its individual forms can never enjoy. 


Ill. THE GREAT STREAM 


WE SEEM TO BE LIKE FLIES CAUGHT IN HONEY. Because life is sweet we do 
not want to give it up, and yet the more we become involved in 
it, the more we are trapped, limited, and frustrated. We love it 
and hate it at the same time. We fall in love with people and 
possessions only to be tortured by anxiety for them. The conflict 
is not only between ourselves and the surrounding universe; it is 
between ourselves and ourselves. For intractable nature is both 
around and within us. The exasperating “life” which is at once 
lovable and perishable, pleasant and painful, a blessing and a 
curse, is also the life of our own bodies. 

It is as if we were divided into two parts. On the one hand 
there is the conscious “I,” at once intrigued and baffled, the 
creature who is caught in the trap. On the other hand there is 
“me,” and “me” is a part of nature—the wayward flesh with all 
its concurrently beautiful and frustrating limitations. “I” fancies 
itself as a reasonable fellow, and is forever criticizing “me” for its 
perversity—for having passions which get “I” into trouble, for 
being so easily subject to painful and irritating diseases, for 
having organs that wear out, and for having appetites which can 
never be satisfied—so designed that if you try to allay them 
finally and fully in one big “bust,” you get sick. 

Perhaps the most exasperating thing about “me,” about nature 
and the universe, is that it will never “stay put.” It is like a 
beautiful woman who will never be caught, and whose very 
flightiness is her charm. For the perishability and changefulness 
of the world is part and parcel of its liveliness and loveliness. This 
is why the poets are so often at their best when speaking of 
change, of “the transitoriness of human life.” The beauty of such 
poetry lies in something more than a note of nostalgia which 
brings a catch in the throat. 


Our revels now are ended. These our actors, 
As I foretold you, were all spirits, and 


Are melted into air, into thin air: 

And, like the baseless fabric of this vision, 

The cloud-capp’d towers, the gorgeous palaces, 
The solemn temples, the great globe itself, 

Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve, 

And, like this insubstantial pageant faded, 
Leave not a rack behind. 


There is more in this beauty than the succession of melodious 
images, and the theme of dissolution does not simply borrow its 
splendor from the things dissolved. The truth is rather that the 
images, though beautiful in themselves, come to life in the act of 
vanishing. The poet takes away their static solidity, and turns a 
beauty which would otherwise be only statuesque and 
architectural into music, which, no sooner than it is sounded, dies 
away. The towers, palaces, and temples become vibrant, and 
break from the excess of life within them. To be passing is to live; 
to remain and continue is to die. “Unless a grain of corn fall into 
the ground and die, it remains alone. But if it dies, it brings forth 
much fruit.” 

For the poets have seen the truth that life, change, movement, 
and insecurity are so many names for the same thing. Here, if 
anywhere, truth is beauty, for movement and rhythm are of the 
essence of all things lovable. In sculpture, architecture, and 
painting the finished form stands still, but even so the eye finds 
pleasure in the form only when it contains a certain lack of 
symmetry, when, frozen in stone as it may be, it looks as if it 
were in the midst of motion. 

Is it not, then, a strange inconsistency and an unnatural 
paradox that “I” resists change in “me” and in the surrounding 
universe? For change is not merely a force of destruction. Every 
form is really a pattern of movement, and every living thing is 
like the river, which, if it did not flow out, would never have 
been able to flow in. Life and death are not two opposed forces; 
they are simply two ways of looking at the same force, for the 
movement of change is as much the builder as the destroyer. The 
human body lives because it is a complex of motions, of 
circulation, respiration, and digestion. To resist change, to try to 
cling to life, is therefore like holding your breath: if you persist 
you kill yourself. 


In thinking of ourselves as divided into “I” and “me,” we easily 
forget that consciousness also lives because it is moving. It is as 
much a part and product of the stream of change as the body and 
the whole natural world. If you look at it carefully, you will see 
that consciousness—the thing you call “I”—is really a stream of 
experiences, of sensations, thoughts, and feelings in constant 
motion. But because these experiences include memories, we 
have the impression that “I” is something solid and still, like a 
tablet upon which life is writing a record. 

Yet the “tablet” moves with the writing finger as the river flows 
along with the ripples, so that memory is like a record written on 
water—a record, not of graven characters, but of waves stirred 
into motion by other waves which are called sensations and facts. 
The difference between “I” and “me” is largely an illusion of 
memory. In truth, “I” is of the same nature as “me.” It is part of 
our whole being, just as the head is part of the body. But if this is 
not realized, “I” and “me,” the head and the body, will feel at 
odds with each other. “I,” not understanding that it too is part of 
the stream of change, will try to make sense of the world and 
experience by attempting to fix it. 

We shall then have a war between consciousness and nature, 
between the desire for permanence and the fact of flux. This war 
must be utterly futile and frustrating—a vicious circle—because it 
is a conflict between two parts of the same thing. It must lead 
thought and action into circles which go nowhere faster and 
faster. For when we fail to see that our life is change, we set 
ourselves against ourselves and become like Ouroboros, the 
misguided snake, who tries to eat his own tail. Ouroboros is the 
perennial symbol of all vicious circles, of every attempt to split 
our being asunder and make one part conquer the other. 

Struggle as we may, “fixing” will never make sense out of 
change. The only way to make sense out of change is to plunge 
into it, move with it, and join the dance. 

Religion, as most of us have known it, has quite obviously tried 
to make sense out of life by fixation. It has tried to give this 
passing world a meaning by relating it to an unchanging God, 
and by seeing its goal and purpose as an immortal life in which 
the individual becomes one with the changeless nature of the 
deity. “Rest eternal grant unto them, O Lord, and let light 
perpetual shine upon them.” Likewise, it attempts to make sense 


out of the swirling movements of history by relating them to the 
fixed laws of God, “whose Word endureth for ever.” 

We have thus made a problem for ourselves by confusing the 
intelligible with the fixed. We think that making sense out of life 
is impossible unless the flow of events can somehow be fitted into 
a framework of rigid forms. To be meaningful, life must be 
understandable in terms of fixed ideas and laws, and these in turn 
must correspond to unchanging and eternal realities behind the 
shifting scene.1 But if this is what “making sense out of life” 
means, we have set ourselves the impossible task of making fixity 
out of flux. 

Before we can find out whether there is some better way of 
understanding our universe, we must see clearly how this 
confusion of “sense” with “fixity” has come about. 

The root of the difficulty is that we have developed the power 
of thinking so rapidly and one-sidedly that we have forgotten the 
proper relation between thoughts and events, words and things. 
Conscious thinking has gone ahead and created its own world, 
and, when this is found to conflict with the real world, we have 
the sense of a profound discord between “I,” the conscious 
thinker, and nature. This one-sided development of man is not 
peculiar to intellectuals and “brainy” people, who are only 
extreme examples of a tendency which has affected our entire 
civilization. 

What we have forgotten is that thoughts and words are 
conventions, and that it is fatal to take conventions too seriously. 
A convention is a social convenience, as, for example, money. 
Money gets rid of the inconveniences of barter. But it is absurd to 
take money too seriously, to confuse it with real wealth, because 
it will do you no good to eat it or wear it for clothing. Money is 
more or less static, for gold, silver, strong paper, or a bank 
balance can “stay put” for a long time. But real wealth, such as 
food, is perishable. Thus a community may possess all the gold in 
the world, but if it does not farm its crops it will starve. 

In somewhat the same way, thoughts, ideas, and words are 
“coins” for real things. They are not those things, and though they 
represent them, there are many ways in which they do not 
correspond at all. As with money and wealth, so with thoughts 
and things: ideas and words are more or less fixed, whereas real 
things change. 


It is easier to say “I” than to point to your own body, and to say 
“want” than to try to indicate a vague feeling in the mouth and 
stomach. It is more convenient to say “water” than to lead your 
friend to a well and make suitable motions. It is also convenient 
to agree to use the same words for the same things, and to keep 
these words unchanged, even though the things we are indicating 
are in constant motion. 

In the beginning, the power of words must have seemed 
magical, and, indeed, the miracles which verbal thinking has 
wrought have justified the impression. What a marvel it must 
have been to get rid of the nuisances of sign-language and 
summon a friend simply by making a short noise—his name! It is 
no wonder that names have been considered uncanny 
manifestations of supernatural power, and that men have 
identified their names with their souls or used them to invoke 
spiritual forces. Indeed, the power of words has gone to man’s 
head in more than one way. To define has come to mean almost 
the same thing as to understand. More important still, words have 
enabled man to define himself—to label a certain part of his 
experience “I.” 

This is, perhaps, the meaning of the ancient belief that the 
name is the soul. For to define is to isolate, to separate some 
complex of forms from the stream of life and say, “This is I.” 
When man can name and define himself, he feels that he has an 
identity. Thus he begins to feel, like the word, separate and static, 
as over against the real, fluid world of nature. 

Feeling separate, the sense of conflict between man, on the one 
hand, and nature, on the other, begins. Language and thought 
grapple with the conflict, and the magic which can summon a 
man by naming him is applied to the universe. Its powers are 
named, personalized, and invoked in mythology and religion. 
Natural processes are made intelligible, because all regular 
processes—such as the rotation of the stars and seasons—can be 
fitted to words and ascribed to the activity of the gods or God, 
the eternal Word. At a later time science employs the same 
process, studying every kind of regularity in the universe, 
naming, classifying, and making use of them in ways still more 
miraculous. 

But because it is the use and nature of words and thoughts to 
be fixed, definite, isolated, it is extremely hard to describe the 


most important characteristic of life—its movement and fluidity. 
Just as money does not represent the perishability and edibility of 
food, so words and thoughts do not represent the vitality of life. 
The relation between thought and movement is something like 
the difference between a real man running and a motion-picture 
film which shows the running as a series of “stills.” 

We resort to the convention of stills whenever we want to 
describe or think about any moving body, such as a train, stating 
that at such-and-such times it is at such-and-such places. But this 
is not quite true. You can say that a train is at a particular point 
“now!” But it took you some time to say “now!” and during that 
time, however short, the train was still moving. You can only say 
that the moving train actually is (i.e., stops) at a particular point 
for a particular moment if both are infinitely small. But infinitely 
small points and fixed moments are always imaginary points, 
being denizens of mathematical theory rather than the real world. 

It is most convenient for scientific calculation to think of a 
movement as a series of very small jerks or stills. But confusion 
arises when the world described and measured by such 
conventions is identified with the world of experience. A series of 
stills does not, unless rapidly moved before our eyes, convey the 
essential vitality and beauty of movement. The definition, the 
description, leaves out the most important thing. 

Useful as these conventions are for purposes of calculation, 
language, and logic, absurdities arise when we think that the kind 
of language we use or the kind of logic with which we reason can 
really define or explain the “physical” world. Part of man’s 
frustration is that he has become accustomed to expect language 
and thought to offer explanations which they cannot give. To 
want life to be “intelligible” in this sense is to want it to be 
something other than life. It is to prefer a motion-picture film to a 
real, running man. To feel that life is meaningless unless “I” can 
be permanent is like having fallen desperately in love with an 
inch. 

Words and measures do not give life; they merely symbolize it. 
Thus all “explanations” of the universe couched in language are 
circular, and leave the most essential things unexplained and 
undefined. The dictionary itself is circular. It defines words in 
terms of other words. The dictionary comes a little closer to life 
when, alongside some word, it gives you a picture. But it will be 


noted that all dictionary pictures are attached to nouns rather 
than verbs. An illustration of the verb to run would have to be a 
series of stills like a comic strip, for words and static pictures can 
neither define nor explain a motion. 

Even the nouns are conventions. You do not define this real, 
living “something” by associating it with the noise man. When we 
say, “This (pointing with the finger) is a man,” the thing to which 
we point is not man. To be clearer we should have said, “This is 
symbolized by the noise man.” What, then, is this? We do not 
know. That is to say, we cannot define it in any fixed way, 
though, in another sense, we know it as our immediate 
experience—a flowing process without definable beginning or 
end. It is convention alone which persuades me that I am simply 
this body bounded by a skin in space, and by birth and death in 
time. 

Where do I begin and end in space? I have relations to the sun 
and air which are just as vital parts of my existence as my heart. 
The movement in which I am a pattern or convolution began 
incalculable ages before the (conventionally isolated) event called 
birth, and will continue long after the event called death. Only 
words and conventions can isolate us from the entirely 
undefinable something which is everything. 

Now these are useful words, so long as we treat them as 
conventions and use them like the imaginary lines of latitude and 
longitude which are drawn upon maps, but are not actually found 
upon the face of the earth. But in practice we are all bewitched 
by words. We confuse them with the real world, and try to live in 
the real world as if it were the world of words. As a consequence, 
we are dismayed and dumbfounded when they do not fit. The 
more we try to live in the world of words, the more we feel 
isolated and alone, the more all the joy and liveliness of things is 
exchanged for mere certainty and security. On the other hand, 
the more we are forced to admit that we actually live in the real 
world, the more we feel ignorant, uncertain, and insecure about 
everything. 

But there can be no sanity unless the difference between these 
two worlds is recognized. The scope and purposes of science are 
woefully misunderstood when the universe which it describes is 
confused with the universe in which man lives. Science is talking 
about a symbol of the real universe, and this symbol has much 


the same use as money. It is a convenient timesaver for making 
practical arrangements. But when money and wealth, reality and 
science are confused, the symbol becomes a burden. 

Similarly, the universe described in formal, dogmatic religion is 
nothing more than a symbol of the real world, being likewise 
constructed out of verbal and conventional distinctions. To 
separate “this person” from the rest of the universe is to make a 
conventional separation. To want “this person” to be eternal is to 
want the words to be the reality, and to insist that a convention 
endure for ever and ever. We hunger for the perpetuity of 
something which never existed. Science has “destroyed” the 
religious symbol of the world because, when symbols are 
confused with reality, different ways of symbolizing reality will 
seem contradictory. 

The scientific way of symbolizing the world is more suited to 
utilitarian purposes than the religious way, but this does not 
mean that it has any more “truth.” Is it truer to classify rabbits 
according to their meat or according to their fur? It depends on 
what you want to do with them. The clash between science and 
religion has not shown that religion is false and science is true. It 
has shown that all systems of definition are relative to various 
purposes, and that none of them actually “grasp” reality. And 
because religion was being misused as a means for actually 
grasping and possessing the mystery of life, a certain measure of 
“debunking” was highly necessary. 

But in the process of symbolizing the universe in this way or 
that for this purpose or that we seem to have lost the actual joy 
and meaning of life itself. All the various definitions of the 
universe have had ulterior motives, being concerned with the 
future rather than the present. Religion wants to assure the future 
beyond death, and science wants to assure it until death, and to 
postpone death. But tomorrow and plans for tomorrow can have 
no significance at all unless you are in full contact with the 
reality of the present, since it is in the present and only in the 
present that you live. There is no other reality than present 
reality, so that, even if one were to live for endless ages, to live 
for the future would be to miss the point everlastingly. 

But it is just this reality of the present, this moving, vital now 
which eludes all the definitions and descriptions. Here is the 
mysterious real world which words and ideas can never pin 


down. Living always for the future, we are out of touch with this 
source and center of life, and as a result all the magic of naming 
and thinking has come to something of a temporary breakdown. 

The miracles of technology cause us to live in a hectic, 
clockwork world that does violence to human biology, enabling 
us to do nothing but pursue the future faster and faster. 
Deliberate thought finds itself unable to control the upsurge of 
the beast in man—a beast more “beastly” than any creature of the 
wild, maddened and exasperated by the pursuit of illusions. 
Specialization in verbiage, classification, and mechanized 
thinking has put man out of touch with many of the marvelous 
powers of “instinct” which govern his body. It has, furthermore, 
made him feel utterly separate from the universe and his own 
“me.” And thus when all philosophy has dissolved in relativism, 
and can make fixed sense of the universe no longer, isolated “I” 
feels miserably insecure and panicky, finding the real world a flat 
contradiction of its whole being. 

Of course there is nothing new in this predicament of 
discovering that ideas and words cannot plumb the ultimate 
mystery of life, that Reality or, if you will, God cannot be 
comprehended by the finite mind. The only novelty is that the 
predicament is now social rather than individual; it is widely felt, 
not confined to the few. Almost every spiritual tradition 
recognizes that a point comes when two things must happen: man 
must surrender his separate-feeling “I,” and must face the fact 
that he cannot know, that is, define the ultimate. 

These traditions also recognize that beyond this point there lies 
a “vision of God” which cannot be put into words, and which is 
certainly something utterly different from perceiving a radiant 
gentleman on a golden throne; or a literal flash of blinding light. 
They also indicate that this vision is a restoration of something 
which we once had, and “lost” because we did not or could not 
appreciate it. This vision is, then, the unclouded awareness of this 
undefinable “something” which we call life, present reality, the 
great stream, the eternal now—an awareness without the sense of 
separation from it. 

The moment I name it, it is no longer God; it is man, tree, 
green, black, red, soft, hard, long, short, atom, universe. One 
would readily agree with any theologian who deplores pantheism 
that these denizens of the world of verbiage and convention, 


these sundry “things” conceived as fixed and distinct entities, are 
not God. If you ask me to show you God, I will point to the sun, 
or a tree, or a worm. But if you say, “You mean, then, that God is 
the sun, the tree, the worm, and all other things?”—1I shall have 
to say that you have missed the point entirely. 


1 Later on in this book we shall see that these metaphysical ideas of the 
unchanging and the eternal can have another sense. They do not 
necessarily imply a static view of reality, and while ordinarily used as 
attempts to “fix the flux” they have not always been so. 


IV. THE WISDOM OF THE BODY 


WHAT IS EXPERIENCE? WHAT IS LIFE? WHAT IS MOTION? What is reality? To all 
such questions we must give St. Augustine’s answer to the 
question, “What is time?”—“I know, but when you ask me I 
don’t.” Experience, life, motion, and reality are so many noises 
used to symbolize the sum of sensations, thoughts, feelings, and 
desires. And if you ask, “What are sensations, et cetera?” I can 
only answer, “Don’t be silly. You know very well what they are. 
We can’t go on defining things indefinitely without going round 
in circles. To define means to fix, and, when you get down to it, 
real life isn’t fixed.” 

It was suggested at the end of the last chapter that this ultimate 
something which cannot be defined or fixed can be represented 
by the word God. If this be true, we know God all the time—but 
when we begin to think about it we don’t. For when we begin to 
think about experience we try to fix it in rigid forms and ideas. It 
is the old problem of trying to tie up water in parcels, or 
attempting to shut the wind in a box. 

Yet it has always been taught in religion that “God” is 
something from which one can expect wisdom and guidance. We 
have become accustomed to the idea that wisdom—that is, 
knowledge, advice, and information—can be expressed in verbal 
statements consisting of specific directions. If this be true, it is 
hard to see how any wisdom can be extracted from something 
impossible to define. 

But in fact the kind of wisdom which can be put in the form of 
specific directions amounts to very little, and most of the wisdom 
which we employ in everyday life never came to us as verbal 
information. It was not through statements that we learned how 
to breathe, swallow, see, circulate the blood, digest food, or resist 
diseases. Yet these things are performed by the most complex and 
marvelous processes which no amount of book-learning and 
technical skill can reproduce. This is real wisdom—but our brains 
have little to do with it. This is the kind of wisdom which we 


need in solving the real, practical problems of human life. It has 
done wonders for us already, and there is no reason why it should 
not do much more. 

Without any technical apparatus or calculations for prediction, 
homing-pigeons can return to their roosts from long distances 
away, migrant birds can revisit the same locations year after year, 
and plants can “devise” wonderful contraptions for distributing 
their seeds on the wind. They do not, of course, do these things 
“on purpose,” which is only to say that they do not plan and 
think them out. If they could talk, they could no more explain 
how it is done than the average man can explain how his heart 
beats. 

The “instruments” which achieve these feats are, indeed, 
organs and processes of the body—that is to say, of a mysterious 
pattern of movement which we do not really understand and 
cannot actually define. In general, however, human beings have 
ceased to develop the instruments of the body. More and more we 
try to effect an adaptation to life by means of external gadgets, 
and attempt to solve our problems by conscious thinking rather 
than unconscious “know-how.” This is much less to our 
advantage than we like to suppose. 

There are, for instance, “primitive” women who can deliver 
themselves of a child while working out in the fields, and, after 
doing the few things necessary to see that the baby is safe, warm, 
and comfortable, resume their work as before. On the other hand, 
the civilized woman has to be moved to a complicated hospital, 
and there, surrounded by doctors, nurses, and innumerable 
gadgets, force the poor thing into the world with prolonged 
contortions and excruciating pains. It is true that antiseptic 
conditions prevent many mothers and babies from dying, but why 
can’t we have the antiseptic conditions and the natural, easy way 
of birth? 

The answer to this, and many similar questions, is that we have 
been taught to neglect, despise, and violate our bodies, and to put 
all faith in our brains. Indeed, the special disease of civilized man 
might be described as a block or schism between his brain 
(specifically, the cortex) and the rest of his body. This 
corresponds to the split between “I” and “me,” man and nature, 
and to the confusion of Ouroboros, the mixed-up snake, who does 
not know that his tail belongs with his head. Happily, there have, 


in recent years, been at least two scientists who have called 
attention to this schism, namely Lancelot Law Whyte and Trigant 
Burrow.1 Whyte calls this disease the “European dissociation,” 
not because it is peculiar to European-American civilization, but 
because it is specially characteristic of it. 

Both Whyte and Burrow have given a clinical description or 
diagnosis of the schism, the details of which need not detain us 
here. It is simply saying in “medical” language that we have 
allowed brain thinking to develop and dominate our lives out of 
all proportion to “instinctual wisdom,” which we are allowing to 
slump into atrophy. As a consequence, we are at war within 
ourselves—the brain desiring things which the body does not 
want, and the body desiring things which the brain does not 
allow; the brain giving directions which the body will not follow, 
and the body giving impulses which the brain cannot understand. 

In one way or another civilized man agrees with St. Francis in 
thinking of the body as Brother Ass. But even theologians have 
recognized that the source of evil and stupidity lies not in the 
physical organism as a whole, but in the cut-off, dissociated brain 
which they term the “will.” 

When we compare human with animal desire we find many 
extraordinary differences. The animal tends to eat with his 
stomach, and the man with his brain. When the animal’s stomach 
is full, he stops eating, but the man is never sure when to stop. 
When he has eaten as much as his belly can take, he still feels 
empty, he still feels an urge for further gratification. This is 
largely due to anxiety, to the knowledge that a constant supply of 
food is uncertain. Therefore eat as much as you can while you 
can. It is due, also, to the knowledge that, in an insecure world, 
pleasure is uncertain. Therefore the immediate pleasure of eating 
must be exploited to the full, even though it does violence to the 
digestion. 

Human desire tends to be insatiable. We are so anxious for 
pleasure that we can never get enough of it. We stimulate our 
sense organs until they become insensitive, so that if pleasure is 
to continue they must have stronger and stronger stimulants. In 
self-defense the body gets ill from the strain, but the brain wants 
to go on and on. The brain is in pursuit of happiness, and because 
the brain is much more concerned about the future than the 
present, it conceives happiness as the guarantee of an indefinitely 


long future of pleasures. Yet the brain also knows that it does not 
have an indefinitely long future, so that, to be happy, it must try 
to crowd all the pleasures of Paradise and eternity into the span 
of a few years. 

This is why modern civilization is in almost every respect a 
vicious circle. It is insatiably hungry because its way of life 
condemns it to perpetual frustration. As we have seen, the root of 
this frustration is that we live for the future, and the future is an 
abstraction, a rational inference from experience, which exists 
only for the brain. The “primary consciousness,” the basic mind 
which knows reality rather than ideas about it, does not know the 
future. It lives completely in the present, and perceives nothing 
more than what is at this moment. The ingenious brain, however, 
looks at that part of present experience called memory, and by 
studying it is able to make predictions. These predictions are, 
relatively, so accurate and reliable (e.g., “everyone will die”) that 
the future assumes a high degree of reality—so high that the 
present loses its value. 

But the future is still not here, and cannot become a part of 
experienced reality until it is present. Since what we know of the 
future is made up of purely abstract and logical elements— 
inferences, guesses, deductions—it cannot be eaten, felt, smelled, 
seen, heard, or otherwise enjoyed. To pursue it is to pursue a 
constantly retreating phantom, and the faster you chase it, the 
faster it runs ahead, This is why all the affairs of civilization are 
rushed, why hardly anyone enjoys what he has, and is forever 
seeking more and more. Happiness, then, will consist, not of solid 
and substantial realities, but of such abstract and superficial 
things as promises, hopes, and assurances. 

Thus the “brainy” economy designed to produce this happiness 
is a fantastic vicious circle which must either manufacture more 
and more pleasures or collapse—providing a constant titillation 
of the ears, eyes, and nerve ends with incessant streams of almost 
inescapable noise and visual distractions. The perfect “subject” 
for the aims of this economy is the person who continuously 
itches his ears with the radio, preferably using the portable kind 
which can go with him at all hours and in all places. His eyes flit 
without rest from television screen, to newspaper, to magazine, 
keeping him in a sort of orgasm-with-out-release through a series 
of teasing glimpses of shiny automobiles, shiny female bodies, 


and other sensuous surfaces, interspersed with such restorers of 
sensitivity—shock treatments—as “human interest” shots of 
criminals, mangled bodies, wrecked airplanes, prize fights, and 
burning buildings. The literature or discourse that goes along 
with this is similarly manufactured to tease without satisfaction, 
to replace every partial gratification with a new desire. 

For this stream of stimulants is designed to produce cravings 
for more and more of the same, though louder and faster, and 
these cravings drive us to do work which is of no interest save for 
the money it pays—to buy more lavish radios, sleeker 
automobiles, glossier magazines, and better television sets, all of 
which will somehow conspire to persuade us that happiness lies 
just around the corner if we will buy one more. 

Despite the immense hubbub and nervous strain, we are 
convinced that sleep is a waste of valuable time and continue to 
chase these fantasies far into the night. Animals spend much of 
their time dozing and idling pleasantly, but, because life is short, 
human beings must cram into the years the highest possible 
amount of consciousness, alertness, and chronic insomnia so as to 
be sure not to miss the last fragment of startling pleasure. 

It isn’t that the people who submit to this kind of thing are 
immoral. It isn’t that the people who provide it are wicked 
exploiters; most of them are of the same mind as the exploited, if 
only on a more expensive horse in this sorry-go-round. The real 
trouble is that they are all totally frustrated, for trying to please 
the brain is like trying to drink through your ears. Thus they are 
increasingly incapable of real pleasure, insensitive to the most 
acute and subtle joys of life which are in fact extremely common 
and simple. 

The vague, nebulous, and insatiable character of brainy desire 
makes it particularly hard to come down to earth—to be material 
and real. Generally speaking, the civilized man does not know 
what he wants. He works for success, fame, a happy marriage, 
fun, to help other people, or to be a “real person.” But these are 
not real wants because they are not actual things. They are the 
by-products, the flavors and atmospheres of real things—shadows 
which have no existence apart from some substance. Money is the 
perfect symbol of all such desires, being a mere symbol of real 
wealth, and to make it one’s goal is the most blatant example of 
confusing measurements with reality. 


It is therefore far from correct to say that modern civilization is 
materialistic, that is, if a materialist is a person who loves matter. 
The brainy modern loves not matter but measures, no solids but 
surfaces. He drinks for the percentage of alcohol (“spirit”) and 
not for the “body” and taste of the liquid. He builds to put up an 
impressive “front” rather than to provide a space for living. 
Therefore he tends to put up structures which appear from the 
outside to be baronial mansions but are inwardly warrens. The 
individual living-units in these warrens are designed less for 
living as for creating an impression. The main space is devoted to 
a “living room” of proportions suitable to a large house, while 
such essential spaces for living (rather than mere “entertaining”) 
as the kitchen are reduced to small closets where one can hardly 
move—much less cook. Consequently these wretched little galleys 
provide fare which is chiefly gaseous—cocktails and “appetizers” 
rather than honest meals. Because we all want to be “ladies and 
gentlemen” and look as if we had servants, we do not soil our 
hands with growing and cooking real food. Instead we buy 
products designed for “front” and appearance rather than content 
—immense and tasteless fruit, bread which is little more than a 
light froth, wine faked with chemicals, and vegetables flavored 
with the arid concoctions of test tubes which render them so 
much impressive pulp. 

One might suppose that the most outright example of civilized 
man’s beastliness and animality is his passion for sex, but in fact 
there is almost nothing beastly or animal about it. Animals have 
sexual intercourse when they feel like it, which is usually in some 
sort of rhythmic pattern. Between whiles it does not interest 
them. But of all pleasures sex is the one which the civilized man 
pursues with the greatest anxiety. That the craving is brainy 
rather than bodily is shown by the common impotence of the 
male when he comes to the act, his brain pursuing what his genes 
do not at the moment desire. This confuses him hopelessly, 
because he simply cannot understand not wanting the great 
delicacy of sex when it is available. He has been hankering after 
it for hours and days on end, but when the reality appears his 
body will not co-operate. 

As in eating his “eyes are bigger than his stomach,” so in love 
he judges woman by standards that are largely visual and 
cerebral rather than sexual and visceral. He is attracted to his 


partner by the surface gloss, by the film on the skin rather than 
the real body. He wants something with a bone structure like a 
boy’s which is supposed to support the exterior curves and 
smooth undulations of femininity—not a woman but an inflated 
rubber dream. The function of sex itself remains, however, so 
much in the domain of “instinctual wisdom” that little can be 
done to increase its already intense pleasure, to make it faster, 
fancier, and more frequent. The only means of exploiting it is 
through cerebral fantasy, through surrounding it with coquetterie 
and suggestions of unspecified delights to come—as if a more 
ecstatic embrace could always be arranged through surface 
alterations. 

A particularly significant example of brain against body, or 
measures against matter, is urban man’s total slavery to clocks. A 
clock is a convenient device for arranging to meet a friend, or for 
helping people to do things together, although things of this kind 
happened long before they were invented. Clocks should not be 
smashed; they should simply be kept in their place. And they are 
very much out of place when we try to adapt our biological 
rhythms of eating, sleeping, evacuation, working, and relaxing to 
their uniform circular rotation. Our slavery to these mechanical 
drill masters has gone so far and our whole culture is so involved 
with it that reform is a forlorn hope; without them civilization 
would collapse entirely. A less brainy culture would learn to 
synchronize its body rhythms rather than its clocks. 

The capacity of the brain to foresee the future has much to do 
with the fear of death. One knows of many people who would 
have said with Stevenson, 


Under the wide and starry sky 
Dig me a grave and let me lie; 

Glad did I live and gladly die, 
And I laid me down with a will. 


For when the body is worn out and the brain is tired, the whole 
organism welcomes death. But it is difficult to understand how 
death can be welcome when you are young and strong, so that 
you come to regard it as a dread and terrible event. For the brain, 
in its immaterial way, looks into the future and conceives it a 
good to go on and on and on forever—not realizing that its own 


material would at last find the process intolerably tiresome. Not 
taking this into account, the brain fails to see that, being itself 
material and subject to change, its desires will change, and a time 
will come when death will be good. On a bright morning, after a 
good night’s rest, you do not want to go to sleep. But after a hard 
day’s work the sensation of dropping into unconsciousness is 
extraordinarily pleasant. 

Unfortunately, not very many of us die peacefully. We die 
through accidents and painful diseases, and it is tragic indeed 
when a person whose “mind” is still young and alert struggles 
uselessly with a dying body. I am sure, however, that the body 
dies because it wants to. It finds it beyond its power to resist the 
disease or to mend the injury, and so, tired out with the struggle, 
turns to death. If the consciousness were more sensitive to the 
feelings and impulses of the whole organism, it would share this 
desire, and, indeed, sometimes does so. We come close to it 
when, in serious sickness, we would just as soon die, though 
sometimes we survive, either because medical treatment 
reinvigorates the body, or because there are still unconscious 
forces in the organism which are able to heal. 

Accustomed, as it is, to think of man as a dualism of mind and 
body, and to regard the former as “sensible” and the latter as a 
“dumb” animal, our culture is an affront to the wisdom of nature 
and a ruinous exploitation of the human organism as a whole. We 
are perpetually frustrated because the verbal and abstract 
thinking of the brain gives the false impression of being able to 
cut loose from all finite limitations. It forgets that an infinity of 
anything is not a reality but an abstract concept, and persuades 
us that we desire this fantasy as a real goal of living. 

The externalized symbol of this way of thinking is that almost 
entirely rational and inorganic object, the machine, which gives 
us the sense of being able to approach infinity. For the machine 
can submit to strains far beyond the capacity of the body, and to 
monotonous rhythms which the human being could never stand. 
Useful as it would be as a tool and a servant, we worship its 
rationality, its efficiency, and its power to abolish limitations of 
time and space, and thus permit it to regulate our lives. Thus the 
working inhabitants of a modern city are people who live inside a 
machine to be batted around by its wheels. They spend their days 
in activities which largely boil down to counting and measuring, 


living in a world of rationalized abstraction which has little 
relation to or harmony with the great biological rhythms and 
processes. 

As a matter of fact, mental activities of this kind can now be 
done far more efficiently by machines than by men—so much so 
that in a not too distant future the human brain may be an 
obsolete mechanism for logical calculation. Already the human 
computer is widely displaced by mechanical and electrical 
computers of far greater speed and efficiency. If, then, man’s 
principal asset and value is his brain and his ability to calculate, 
he will become an unsaleable commodity in an era when the 
mechanical operation of reasoning can be done more effectively 
by machines. 

Already man uses innumerable gadgets to displace the work 
done by bodily organs in the animals, and it would surely be in 
line with this tendency to externalize the reasoning functions of 
the brain—and thus hand over the government of life to 
electromagnetic monsters. In other words, the interests and goals 
of rationality are not those of man as a whole organism. If we are 
to continue to live for the future, and to make the chief work of 
the mind prediction and calculation, man must eventually 
become a parasitic appendage to a mass of clockwork. 

There is, indeed, a viewpoint from which this “rationalization” 
of life is not rational. The brain is clever enough to see the 
vicious circle which it has made for itself. But it can do nothing 
about it. Seeing that it is unreasonable to worry does not stop 
worrying; rather, you worry the more at being unreasonable. It is 
unreasonable to wage a modern war, in which everybody loses. 
Neither side actually wants a war, and yet, because we live in a 
vicious circle, we start the war to prevent the other side from 
starting first. We arm ourselves knowing that if we do not, the 
other side will—which is quite true, because if we do not arm the 
other side will do so to gain its advantage without actually 
fighting. 

From this rational point of view we find ourselves in the 
dilemma of St. Paul—“To will is present with me; but how to 
perform that which is good I find not. For the good that I would I 
do not.” But this is not, as St. Paul supposed, because the will or 
the “spirit” is reasonable and the flesh perverse. It is because “a 
house divided against itself cannot stand.” The whole organism is 


perverse because the brain is split from the belly and the head 
unconscious of its union with the tail. 

There are few grounds for hoping that, in any immediate 
future, there will be any recovery of social sanity. It would seem 
that the vicious circle must become yet more intolerable, more 
blatantly and desperately circular before any large numbers of 
human beings awaken to the tragic trick which they are playing 
on themselves. But for those who see clearly that it is a circle and 
why it is a circle, there is no alternative but to stop circling. For 
as soon as you see the whole circle, the illusion that the head is 
separate from the tail disappears. 

And then, when experience stops oscillating and writhing, it 
can again become sensitive to the wisdom of the body, to the 
hidden depths of its own substance. 

Because I speak of the wisdom of the body and of the necessity 
for recognizing that we are material, this is not to be taken as a 
philosophy of “materialism” in the accepted sense. I am not 
asserting that the ultimate reality is matter. Matter is a word, a 
noise, which refers to the forms and patterns taken by a process. 
We do not know what this process is, because it is not a “what”— 
that is, a thing definable by some fixed concept or measure. If we 
want to keep the old language, still using such terms as 
“spiritual” and “material,” the spiritual must mean “the 
indefinable,” that which, because it is living, must ever escape 
the framework of any fixed form. Matter is spirit named. 

After all this, the brain deserves a word for itself! For the brain, 
including its reasoning and calculating centers, is a part and 
product of the body. It is as natural as the heart and stomach, 
and, rightly used, is anything but an enemy of man. But to be 
used rightly it must be put in its place, for the brain is made for 
man, not man for his brain. In other words, the function of the 
brain is to serve the present and the real, not to send man chasing 
wildly after the phantom of the future. 

Furthermore, in our habitual state of mental tension the brain 
does not work properly, and this is one reason why its 
abstractions seem to have so great a reality. When the heart is out 
of order, we are clearly conscious of its beating; it becomes a 
distraction, pounding within the breast. It seems most probable 
that our preoccupation with thinking and planning, together with 
the sense of mental fatigue, is a sign of some disorder of the 


brain. The brain should, and in some cases does, calculate and 
reason with the unconscious ease of the other bodily organs. After 
all, the brain is not a muscle, and is thus not designed for effort 
and strain. 

But when people try to think or concentrate, they behave as if 
they were trying to push their brains around. They screw up their 
faces, knit their brows, and approach mental problems as if they 
were something like heaving bricks. Yet you do not have to grind 
and strain to digest food, and still less to see, hear, and receive 
other neural impressions. The “lightning calculator” who can sum 
a long column of figures at a glance, the intellectual genius who 
can comprehend a whole page of reading in a few seconds, and 
the musical prodigy, such as Mozart, who seems to grasp 
harmony and counterpoint from babyhood, are examples of the 
proper use of man’s most marvelous instrument. 

Those of us who are not geniuses know something of the same 
ability. Take for example the anagram POCATELDIMC. You can 
work over these letters for hours, trying system after system of 
rearrangement in order to discover the scrambled word. Try, 
instead, just looking at the anagram with a relaxed mind, and ina 
very short space of time your brain will deliver the answer 
without the slightest effort.1 We rightly mistrust the “snap” 
answers of strained and wandering minds, but the rapid, 
effortless, and almost unconscious solution of logical problems is 
what the brain is supposed to deliver. 

Working rightly, the brain is the highest form of “instinctual 
wisdom.” Thus it should work like the homing instinct of pigeons 
and the formation of the foetus in the womb—without 
verbalizing the process or knowing “how” it does it. The self- 
conscious brain, like the self-conscious heart, is a disorder, and 
manifests itself in the acute feeling of separation between “I” and 
my experience. The brain can only assume its proper behavior 
when consciousness is doing what it is designed for: not writhing 
and whirling to get out of present experience, but being 
effortlessly aware of it. 


1 Of L. L. Whyte’s books, The Next Development in Man (Henry Holt, New 
York, 1943) is quite readable and deeply interesting, while The Unitary 
Principle in Physics and Biology (Henry Holt, New York, 1949) is strictly for 
the scientific reader. Burrow’s Social Basis of Consciousness (London, 1927) 


and The Structure of Insanity (London, 1932) are unhappily out of print, but 
most of the material is contained in his Neurosis of Man (Routledge, 
London, 1948). There are probably other scientists working on the same 
lines, but Iam not aware of them. 


1 I take my facts on this matter from Norbert Wiener’s remarkable book 
Cybernetics (New York & Paris, 1948). Dr. Wiener is one of the 
mathematicians chiefly responsible for the development of the more 
elaborate electrical computers. Having likewise an advanced knowledge of 
neurology, he is well able to judge the extent to which these inventions 
can reproduce the work of the human organism. His book contains the 
following pertinent observation: “It is interesting to note that we may be 
facing one of those limitations of nature, in which highly specialized 
organs reach a level of declining efficiency, and ultimately lead to the 
extinction of the species. The human brain may be as far along on its road 
to this destructive specialization as the great nose horns of the last of the 
titanotheres.” (p. 180.) 


1 If you don’t succeed within one minute, read on! Otherwise you will begin 
to be annoyed either with yourself, or with me, and the consequent strain 
will interfere with the process. 


V. ON BEING AWARE 


THE QUESTION “WHAT SHALL WE DO ABOUT IT?” Is only asked by those who 
do not understand the problem. If a problem can be solved at all, 
to understand it and to know what to do about it are the same 
thing. On the other hand, doing something about a problem 
which you do not understand is like trying to clear away darkness 
by thrusting it aside with your hands. When light is brought, the 
darkness vanishes at once. 

This applies particularly to the problem now before us. How 
are we to heal the split between “I” and “me,” the brain and the 
body, man and nature, and bring all the vicious circles which it 
produces to an end? How are we to experience life as something 
other than a honey trap in which we are the struggling flies? How 
are we to find security and peace of mind in a world whose very 
nature is insecurity, impermanence, and unceasing change? All 
these questions demand a method and a course of action. At the 
same time, all of them show that the problem has not been 
understood. We do not need action—yet. We need more light. 

Light, here, means awareness—to be aware of life, of 
experience as it is at this moment, without any judgments or 
ideas about it. In other words, you have to see and feel what you 
are experiencing as it is, and not as it is named. This very simple 
“opening of the eyes” brings about the most extraordinary 
transformation of understanding and living, and shows that many 
of our most baffling problems are pure illusion. This may sound 
like an over-simplification because most people imagine 
themselves to be fully enough aware of the present already, but 
we shall see that this is far from true.1 

Because awareness is a view of reality free from ideas and 
judgments, it is clearly impossible to define and write down what 
it reveals. Anything which can be described is an idea, and I 
cannot make a positive statement about something—the real 
world—which is not an idea. I shall therefore have to be content 
with talking about the false impressions which awareness 


removes, rather than the truth which it reveals. The latter can 
only be symbolized with words which mean little or nothing to 
those without a direct understanding of the truth in question. 

What is true and positive is too real and too living to be 
described, and to try to describe it is like putting red paint on a 
red rose. Therefore most of what follows will have to have a 
rather negative quality. The truth is revealed by removing things 
that stand in its light, an art not unlike sculpture, in which the 
artist creates, not by building, but by hacking away. 

We saw that the questions about finding security and peace of 
mind in an impermanent world showed that the problem had not 
been understood. Before going any further, it must be clear that 
the kind of security we are talking about is primarily spiritual and 
psychological. To exist at all, human beings must have a 
minimum livelihood in terms of food, drink, and clothing—with 
the understanding, however, that it cannot last indefinitely. But if 
the assurance of a minimum livelihood for sixty years would even 
begin to satisfy the heart of man, human problems would amount 
to very little. Indeed, the very reason why we do not have this 
assurance is that we want so much more than the minimum 
necessities. 

It must be obvious, from the start, that there is a contradiction 
in wanting to be perfectly secure in a universe whose very nature 
is momentariness and fluidity. But the contradiction lies a little 
deeper than the mere conflict between the desire for security and 
the fact of change. If I want to be secure, that is, protected from 
the flux of life, 1 am wanting to be separate from life. Yet it is this 
very sense of separateness which makes me feel insecure. To be 
secure means to isolate and fortify the “I,” but it is just the feeling 
of being an isolated “I” which makes me feel lonely and afraid. In 
other words, the more security I can get, the more I shall want. 

To put it still more plainly: the desire for security and the 
feeling of insecurity are the same thing. To hold your breath is to 
lose your breath. A society based on the quest for security is 
nothing but a breath-retention contest in which everyone is as 
taut as a drum and as purple as a beet. 

We look for this security by fortifying and enclosing ourselves 
in innumerable ways. We want the protection of being 
“exclusive” and “special,” seeking to belong to the safest church, 
the best nation, the highest class, the right set, and the “nice” 


people. These defenses lead to divisions between us, and so to 
more insecurity demanding more defenses. Of course it is all done 
in the sincere belief that we are trying to do the right things and 
live in the best way; but this, too, is a contradiction. 

I can only think seriously of trying to live up to an ideal, to 
improve myself, if I am split in two pieces. There must be a good 
“T” who is going to improve the bad “me.” “I,” who has the best 
intentions, will go to work on wayward “me,” and the tussle 
between the two will very much stress the difference between 
them. Consequently “I” will feel more separate than ever, and so 
merely increase the lonely and cut-off feelings which make “me” 
behave so badly. 

We can hardly begin to consider this problem unless it is clear 
that the craving for security is itself a pain and a contradiction, 
and that the more we pursue it, the more painful it becomes. This 
is true in whatever form security may be conceived. 

You want to be happy, to forget yourself, and yet the more you 
try to forget yourself, the more you remember the self you want 
to forget. You want to escape from pain, but the more you 
struggle to escape, the more you inflame the agony. You are 
afraid and want to be brave, but the effort to be brave is fear 
trying to run away from itself. You want peace of mind, but the 
attempt to pacify it is like trying to calm the waves with a flat- 
iron. 

We are all familiar with this kind of vicious circle in the form 
of worry. We know that worrying is futile, but we go on doing it 
because calling it futile does not stop it. We worry because we 
feel unsafe, and want to be safe. Yet it is perfectly useless to say 
that we should not want to be safe. Calling a desire bad names 
doesn’t get rid of it. What we have to discover is that there is no 
safety, that seeking it is painful, and that when we imagine that 
we have found it, we don’t like it. In other words, if we can really 
understand what we are looking for—that safety is isolation, and 
what we do to ourselves when we look for it—we shall see that 
we do not want it at all. No one has to tell you that you should 
not hold your breath for ten minutes. You know that you can’t do 
it, and that the attempt is most uncomfortable. 

The principal thing is to understand that there is no safety or 
security. One of the worst vicious circles is the problem of the 
alcoholic. In very many cases he knows quite clearly that he is 


destroying himself, that, for him, liquor is poison, that he actually 
hates being drunk, and even dislikes the taste of liquor. And yet 
he drinks. For, dislike it as he may, the experience of not drinking 
is worse. It gives him the “horrors,” for he stands face to face 
with the unveiled, basic insecurity of the world. 

Herein lies the crux of the matter. To stand face to face with 
insecurity is still not to understand it. To understand it, you must 
not face it but be it. It is like the Persian story of the sage who 
came to the door of Heaven and knocked. From within the voice 
of God asked, “Who is there” and the sage answered, “It is I.” “In 
this House,” replied the voice, “there is no room for thee and 
me.” So the sage went away, and spent many years pondering 
over this answer in deep meditation. Returning a second time, the 
voice asked the same question, and again the sage answered, “It 
is I.” The door remained closed. After some years he returned for 
the third time, and, at his knocking, the voice once more 
demanded, “Who is there?” And the sage cried, “It is thyself!” 
The door was opened. 

To understand that there is no security is far more than to 
agree with the theory that all things change, more even than to 
observe the transitoriness of life. The notion of security is based 
on the feeling that there is something within us which is 
permanent, something which endures through all the days and 
changes of life. We are struggling to make sure of the 
permanence, continuity, and safety of this enduring core, this 
center and soul of our being which we call “I.” For this we think 
to be the real man—the thinker of our thoughts, the feeler of our 
feelings, and the knower of our knowledge. We do not actually 
understand that there is no security until we realize that this “I” 
does not exist. 

Understanding comes through awareness. Can we, then, 
approach our experience—our sensations, feelings, and thoughts 
—dquite simply, as if we had never known them before, and, 
without prejudice, look at what is going on? You may ask, 
“Which experiences, which sensations and feelings, shall we look 
at?” I will answer, “Which ones can you look at?” The answer is 
that you must look at the ones you have now. 

That is surely rather obvious. But very obvious things are often 
overlooked. If a feeling is not present, you are not aware of it. 
There is no experience but present experience. What you know, 


what you are actually aware of, is just what is happening at this 
moment, and no more. 

But what about memories? Surely by remembering I can also 
know what is past? Very well, remember something. Remember 
the incident of seeing a friend walking down the street. What are 
you aware of? You are not actually watching the veritable event 
of your friend walking down the street. You can’t go up and 
shake hands with him, or get an answer to a question you forgot 
to ask him at the past time you are remembering. In other words, 
you are not looking at the actual past at all. You are looking at a 
present trace of the past. 

It is like seeing the tracks of a bird on the sand. I see the 
present tracks. I do not, at the same time, see the bird making 
those tracks an hour before. The bird has flown, and I am not 
aware of him. From the tracks I infer that a bird was there. From 
memories you infer that there have been past events. But you are 
not aware of any past events. You know the past only in the 
present and as part of the present. 

We are seeing, then, that our experience is altogether 
momentary. From one point of view, each moment is so elusive 
and so brief that we cannot even think about it before it has 
gone. From another point of view, this moment is always here, 
since we know no other moment than the present moment. It is 
always dying, always becoming past more rapidly than 
imagination can conceive. Yet at the same time it is always being 
born, always new, emerging just as rapidly from that complete 
unknown which we call the future. Thinking about it almost 
makes you breathless. 

To say that experience is momentary is really to say that 
experience and the present moment are the same thing. To say 
that this moment is always dying, or becoming past, and always 
being born, or coming out of the unknown, is to say the same 
thing of experience. The experience you have just had has 
vanished irretrievably, and all that remains of it is a sort of wake 
or track in the present, which we call memory. While you can 
make a guess as to what experience is coming next, in actual fact 
you do not know. Anything might happen. But the experience 
which is going on now is, as it were, a newborn infant which 
vanishes before it can even begin to get older. 

While you are watching this present experience, are you aware 


of someone watching it? Can you find, in addition to the 
experience itself, an experiencer? Can you, at the same time, read 
this sentence and think about yourself reading it? You will find 
that, to think about yourself reading it, you must for a brief 
second stop reading. The first experience is reading. The second 
experience is the thought, “I am reading.” Can you find any 
thinker, who is thinking the thought, I am reading?” In other 
words, when present experience is the thought, “I am reading,” 
can you think about yourself thinking this thought? 

Once again, you must stop thinking just, “I am reading.” You 
pass to a third experience, which is the thought, “I am thinking 
that I am reading.” Do not let the rapidity with which these 
thoughts can change deceive you into the feeling that you think 
them all at once. 

But what has happened? Never at any time were you able to 
separate yourself from your present thought, or your present 
experience. The first present experience was reading. When you 
tried to think about yourself reading, the experience changed, 
and the next present experience was the thought “I am reading.” 
You could not separate yourself from this experience without 
passing on to another. It was “ring around the rosy.” When you 
were thinking, “I am reading this sentence” you were not reading 
it. In other words, in each present experience you were only 
aware of that experience. You were never aware of being aware. 
You were never able to separate the thinker from the thought, the 
knower from the known. All you ever found was a new thought, a 
new experience. 

To be aware, then, is to be aware of thoughts, feelings, 
sensations, desires, and all other forms of experience. Never at 
any time are you aware of anything which is not experience, not a 
thought or feeling, but instead an experiencer, thinker, or feeler. 
If this is so, what makes us think that any such thing exists? 

We might say, for example, that the “I” who is the thinker is 
this physical body and brain. But this body is in no way separate 
from its thoughts and sensations. When you have a sensation, say, 
of touch, that sensation is part of your body. While that sensation 
is going on, you cannot move the body away from it any more 
than you can walk away from a headache or from your own feet. 
So long as it is present, that sensation is your body and is you. 
You can remove the body from an uncomfortable chair, but you 


cannot move it from the sensation of a chair. 

The notion of a separate thinker, of an “I” distinct from the 
experience, comes from memory and from the rapidity with 
which thought changes. It is like whirling a burning stick to give 
the illusion of a continuous circle of fire. If you imagine that 
memory is a direct knowledge of the past rather than a present 
experience, you get the illusion of knowing the past and the 
present at the same time. This suggests that there is something in 
you distinct from both the past and the present experiences. You 
reason, “I know this present experience, and it is different from 
that past experience. If I can compare the two, and notice that 
experience has changed, I must be something constant and 
apart.” 

But, as a matter of fact, you cannot compare this present 
experience with a past experience. You can only compare it with 
a memory of the past, which is a part of the present experience. 
When you see clearly that memory is a form of present 
experience, it will be obvious that trying to separate yourself 
from this experience is as impossible as trying to make your teeth 
bite themselves. There is simply experience. There is not 
something or someone experiencing experience! You do not feel 
feelings, think thoughts, or sense sensations any more than you 
hear hearing, see sight, or smell smelling. “I feel fine” means that 
a fine feeling is present. It does not mean that there is one thing 
called an “I” and another separate thing called a feeling, so that 
when you bring them together this “I” feels the fine feeling. There 
are no feelings but present feelings, and whatever feeling is 
present is “I.” No one ever found an “I” apart from some present 
experience, or some experience apart from an “I”—which is only 
to say that the two are the same thing. 

As a mere philosophical argument this is a waste of time. We 
are not trying to have an “intellectual discussion.” We are being 
aware of the fact that any separate “I” who thinks thoughts and 
experiences experience is an illusion. To understand this is to 
realize that life is entirely momentary, that there is neither 
permanence nor security, and that there is no “I” which can be 
protected. 

There is a Chinese story of one who came to a great sage, 
saying, “I have no peace of mind. Please pacify my mind.” The 
sage answered, “Bring out your mind (your ‘I’) before me, and I 


will pacify it.” “These many years,” he replied, “I have sought my 
mind, but I cannot find it.” “There,” concluded the sage, “it is 
pacified!” 

The real reason why human life can be so utterly exasperating 
and frustrating is not because there are facts called death, pain, 
fear, or hunger. The madness of the thing is that when such facts 
are present, we circle, buzz, writhe, and whirl, trying to get the 
“T” out of the experience. We pretend that we are amoebas, and 
try to protect ourselves from life by splitting in two. Sanity, 
wholeness, and integration lie in the realization that we are not 
divided, that man and his present experience are one, and that no 
separate “I” or mind can be found. 

While the notion that I am separate from my experience 
remains, there is confusion and turmoil. Because of this, there is 
neither awareness nor understanding of experience, and thus no 
real possibility of assimilating it. To understand this moment I 
must not try to be divided from it; I must be aware of it with my 
whole being. This, like refraining from holding my breath for ten 
minutes, is not something I should do. In reality, it is the only 
thing I can do. Everything else is the insanity of attempting the 
impossible. 

To understand music, you must listen to it. But so long as you 
are thinking, “I am listening to this music,” you are not listening. 
To understand joy or fear, you must be wholly and undividedly 
aware of it. So long as you are calling it names and saying, “I am 
happy,” or “I am afraid,” you are not being aware of it. Fear, 
pain, sorrow, and boredom must remain problems if we do not 
understand them, but understanding requires a single and 
undivided mind. This, surely, is the meaning of that strange 
saying, “If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of 
light.” 


1 The word “awareness” is used in the sense given to it by J. Krishnamurti, 
whose writings discuss this theme with extraordinary perception. 


VI. THE MARVELOUS MOMENT 


YOU ARE LISTENING TO A SONG. SUDDENLY I ask, “aT this moment, who are 
you?” How will you answer this question immediately and 
spontaneously, without stopping to find words? If the question 
does not shock you out of listening, you will answer by humming 
the song. If the question surprised you, you will answer, “At this 
moment, who are you?” But if you stop to think, you will try to 
tell me, not about this moment, but about the past. I shall get 
information about your name and address, your business and 
personal history. But I asked who you are, not who you were. For 
to be aware of reality, of the living present, is to discover that at 
each moment the experience is all. There is nothing else beside it 
—no experience of “you” experiencing the experience. 

Even in our most apparently self-conscious moments, the “self” 
of which we are conscious is always some particular feeling or 
sensation—of muscular tensions, of warmth or cold, of pain or 
irritation, of breath or of pulsing blood. There is never a 
sensation of what senses sensations, just as there is no meaning or 
possibility in the notion of smelling one’s nose or kissing one’s 
own lips. 

In times of happiness and pleasure, we are usually ready 
enough to be aware of the moment, and to let the experience be 
all. In such moments we “forget ourselves,” and the mind makes 
no attempt to divide itself from itself, to be separate from 
experience. But with the arrival of pain, whether physical or 
emotional, whether actual or anticipated, the split begins and the 
circle goes round and round. 

As soon as it becomes clear that “I” cannot possibly escape 
from the reality of the present, since “I” is nothing other than 
what I know now, this inner turmoil must stop. No possibility 
remains but to be aware of pain, fear, boredom, or grief in the 
same complete way that one is aware of pleasure. The human 
organism has the most wonderful powers of adaptation to both 
physical and psychological pain. But these can only come into full 


play when the pain is not being constantly restimulated by this 
inner effort to get away from it, to separate the “I” from the 
feeling. The effort creates a state of tension in which the pain 
thrives. But when the tension ceases, mind and body begin to 
absorb the pain as water reacts to a blow or cut. 

There is another story of a Chinese sage who was asked, “How 
shall we escape the heat?”—meaning, of course, the heat of 
suffering. He answered, “Go right into the middle of the fire.” 
“But how, then, shall we escape the scorching flame?” “No 
further pain will trouble you!” We do not need to go as far as 
China. The same idea comes in The Divine Comedy, where Dante 
and Virgil find that the way out of Hell lies at its very center. 

In moments of great joy we do not, as a rule, stop to think, “I 
am happy,” or, “This is joy.” Ordinarily, we do not pause to think 
thoughts of this kind until the joy is past its peak, or unless there 
is some anxiety that it will go away. At such times we are so 
aware of the moment that no attempt is made to compare its 
experience with other experiences. For this reason we do not 
name it, for names which are not mere exclamations are based on 
comparisons. “Joy” is distinguished from “sorrow” by contrast, by 
comparing one state of mind with the other. Had we never known 
joy, it would be impossible to identify sorrow as sorrow. 

But in reality we cannot compare joy with sorrow. Comparison 
is possible only by the very rapid alternation of two states of 
mind, and you cannot switch back and forth between the genuine 
feelings of joy and sorrow as you can shift your eyes between a 
cat and a dog. Sorrow can only be compared with the memory of 
joy, which is not at all the same thing as joy itself. 

Like words, memories never really succeed in “catching” 
reality. Memories are somewhat abstract, being a knowledge 
about things rather than of things. Memory never captures the 
essence, the present intensity, the concrete reality of an 
experience. It is, as it were, the corpse of an experience, from 
which the life has vanished. What we know by memory, we know 
only at secondhand. Memories are dead because fixed. The 
memory of your deceased grandmother can only repeat what 
your grandmother was. But the real, present grandmother could 
always do or say something new, and you were never absolutely 
sure what she would do next. 

There are, then, two ways of understanding an experience. The 


first is to compare it with the memories of other experiences, and 
so to name and define it. This is to interpret it in accordance with 
the dead and the past. The second is to be aware of it as it is, as 
when, in the intensity of joy, we forget past and future, let the 
present be all, and thus do not even stop to think, “I am happy.” 

Both ways of understanding have their uses. But they 
correspond to the difference between knowing a thing by words 
and knowing it immediately. A menu is very useful, but it is no 
substitute for the dinner. A guidebook is an admirable tool, but it 
is hardly to be compared with the country it describes. 

The point, then, is that when we try to understand the present 
by comparing it with memories, we do not understand it as 
deeply as when we are aware of it without comparison. This, 
however, is usually the way in which we approach unpleasant 
experiences. Instead of being aware of them as they are, we try to 
deal with them in terms of the past. The frightened or lonely 
person begins at once to think, “I’m afraid,” or, “I’m so lonely.” 

This is, of course, an attempt to avoid the experience. We don’t 
want to be aware of this present. But as we cannot get out of the 
present, our only escape is into memories. Here we feel on safe 
ground, for the past is the fixed and the known—but also, of 
course, the dead. Thus to try to get out of, say, fear we endeavor 
at once to be separate from it and to “fix” it by interpreting it in 
terms of memory, in terms of what is already fixed and known. In 
other words, we try to adapt ourselves to the mysterious present 
by comparing it with the (remembered) past, by naming and 
“identifying” it. 

This would be all very well if you were trying to get away from 
something from which you can get away. It is a useful process for 
knowing when to come in out of the rain. But it does not tell you 
how to live with things from which you cannot get away, which 
are already part of yourself. Your body does not eliminate poisons 
by knowing their names. To try to control fear or depression or 
boredom by calling them names is to resort to superstition of 
trust in curses and invocations. 

It is so easy to see why this does not work. Obviously, we try to 
know, name, and define fear in order to make it “objective,” that 
is, separate from “I.” But why are we trying to be separate from 
fear? Because we are afraid. In other words, fear is trying to 
separate itself from fear, as if one could fight fire with fire. 


And this is not all. The more we accustom ourselves to 
understanding the present in terms of memory, the unknown by 
the known, the living by the dead, the more desiccated and 
embalmed, the more joyless and frustrated life becomes. So 
protected from life, man becomes a sort of mollusc encrusted in a 
hard shell of “tradition,” so that when at last reality breaks 
through, as it must, the tide of pent-up fear runs wild. 

If, on the other hand, you are aware of fear, you realize that, 
because this feeling is now yourself, escape is impossible. You see 
that calling it “fear” tells you little or nothing about it, for the 
comparison and the naming is based, not on past experience, but 
on memory. You have then no choice but to be aware of it with 
your whole being as an entirely new experience. Indeed, every 
experience is in this sense new, and at every moment of our lives 
we are in the midst of the new and the unknown. At this point 
you receive the experience without resisting it or naming it, and 
the whole sense of conflict between “I” and the present reality 
vanishes. 

For most of us this conflict is ever gnawing within us because 
our lives are one long effort to resist the unknown, the real 
present in which we live, which is the unknown in the midst of 
coming into being. Living thus, we never really learn to live with 
it. At every moment we are cautious, hesitant, and on the 
defensive. And all to no avail, for life thrusts us into the unknown 
willy-nilly, and resistance is as futile and exasperating as trying to 
swim against a roaring torrent. 

The art of living in this “predicament” is neither careless 
drifting on the one hand nor fearful clinging to the past and the 
known on the other. It consists in being completely sensitive to 
each moment, in regarding it as utterly new and unique, in 
having the mind open and wholly receptive. 

This is not a philosophical theory but an experiment. One has 
to make the experiment to understand that it brings into play 
altogether new powers of adaptation to life, of literally absorbing 
pain and insecurity. It is as hard to describe how this absorption 
works as to explain the beating of one’s heart or the formation of 
genes. The “open” mind does this as most of us breathe: without 
being able to explain it at all. The principle of the thing is clearly 
something like judo, the gentle (ju) way (do) of mastering an 
opposing force by giving in to it. 


The natural world gives us many examples of the great 
effectiveness of this way. The Chinese philosophy of which judo 
itself is an expression—Taoism—drew attention to the power of 
water to overcome all obstacles by its gentleness and pliability. It 
showed how the supple willow survives the tough pine in a 
snowstorm, for whereas the unyielding branches of the pine 
accumulate snow until they crack, the springy boughs of the 
willow bend under its weight, drop the snow, and jump back 
again. 

If, when swimming, you are caught in a strong current, it is 
fatal to resist. You must swim with it and gradually edge to the 
side. One who falls from a height with stiff limbs will break them, 
but if he relaxes like a cat he will fall safely. A building without 
“give” in its structure will easily collapse in storm or earthquake, 
and a car without the cushioning of tires and springs will soon 
come apart on the road. 

The mind has just the same powers, for it has give and can 
absorb shocks like water or a cushion. But this giving way to an 
opposing force is not at all the same thing as running away. A 
body of water does not run away when you push it; it simply 
gives at the point of the push and encloses your hand. A shock 
absorber does not fall down like a bowling-pin when struck; it 
gives, and yet stays in the same place. To run away is the only 
defense of something rigid against an overwhelming force. 
Therefore the good shock absorber has not only “give,” but also 
stability or “weight.” 

This weight is likewise a function of the mind, and appears in 
the much-misunderstood phenomenon of laziness. Significantly 
enough, nervous and frustrated people are always busy, even in 
being idle, such idleness being the “laziness” of fear, not of rest. 
But the mind-body is a system which conserves and accumulates 
energy. While doing this it is properly lazy. When the energy is 
stored, it is just as happy to move, and yet to move skillfully— 
along the line of least resistance. Thus it is not only necessity, but 
also laziness, which is the mother of invention. One may observe 
the unhurried, “heavy” movements of a skillful laborer at some 
hard task, and even in going against gravity the good 
mountaineer uses gravity, taking slow, heavy strides. He seems to 
tack up the slope, like a sailboat against the wind. 

In the light of these principles, how does the mind absorb 


suffering? It discovers that resistance and escape—the “I” process 
—is a false move. The pain is inescapable, and resistance as a 
defense only makes it worse; the whole system is jarred by the 
shock. Seeing the impossibility of this course, it must act 
according to its nature—remain stable and absorb. 

To remain stable is to refrain from trying to separate yourself 
from a pain because you know that you cannot. Running away 
from fear is fear, fighting pain is pain, trying to be brave is being 
scared. If the mind is in pain, the mind is pain. The thinker has 
no other form than his thought. There is no escape. But so long as 
you are not aware of the inseparability of thinker and thought, 
you will try to escape. 

From this follows, quite naturally, absorption. It is no effort; 
the mind does it by itself. Seeing that there is no escape from the 
pain, the mind yields to it, absorbs it, and becomes conscious of 
just pain without any “I” feeling it or resisting it. It experiences 
pain in the same complete, unselfconscious way in which it 
experiences pleasure. Pain is the nature of this present moment, 
and I can only live in this moment. 

Sometimes, when resistance ceases, the pain simply goes away 
or dwindles to an easily tolerable ache. At other times it remains, 
but the absence of any resistance brings about a way of feeling 
pain so unfamiliar as to be hard to describe. The pain is no longer 
problematic. I feel it, but there is no urge to get rid of it, for I have 
discovered that pain and the effort to be separate from it are the 
same thing. Wanting to get out of pain is the pain; it is not the 
“reaction” of an “I” distinct from the pain. When you discover 
this, the desire to escape “merges” into the pain itself and 
vanishes. 

Discounting aspirin for the moment, you cannot remove your 
head from a headache as you can remove your hand from a 
flame. “You” equals “head” equals “ache.” When you actually see 
that you are the pain, pain ceases to be a motive, for there is no 
one to be moved. It becomes, in the true sense, of no 
consequence. It hurts—period. 

This, however, is not an experiment to be held in reserve, as a 
trick, for moments of crisis. It is a way of life. It means being 
aware, alert, and sensitive to the present moment always, in all 
actions and relations whatsoever, beginning at this instant. This, 
in turn, depends upon seeing that you have really no choice but 


to be aware—because you cannot separate yourself from the 
present and you cannot define it. You can, indeed, refuse to admit 
this, but only at the cost of the immense and futile effort of 
spending your whole life resisting the inevitable. 

Once this is understood, it is really absurd to say that there is a 
choice or an alternative between these two ways of life, between 
resisting the stream in fruitless panic, and having one’s eyes 
opened to a new world, transformed, and ever new with wonder. 
The key is understanding. To ask how to do this, what is the 
technique or method, what are the steps and rules, is to miss the 
point utterly. Methods are for creating things which do not yet 
exist. We are concerned here with understanding something 
which is—the present moment. This is not a psychological or 
spiritual discipline for self-improvement. It is simply being aware 
of this present experience, and realizing that you can neither 
define it nor divide yourself from it. There is no rule but “Look!” 

It is no mere poetic sentiment to say that, with the mind thus 
opened, we look into a new world, as new as on the first day of 
creation “when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons 
of God shouted for joy.” By trying to understand everything in 
terms of memory, the past, and words, we have, as it were, had 
our noses in the guidebook for most of our lives, and have never 
looked at the view. Whitehead’s criticism of traditional education 
is applicable to our whole way of living: 


We are too exclusively bookish in our scholastic 
routine.... In the Garden of Eden Adam saw the 
animals before he named them: in the traditional 
system, children named the animals before they saw 
them.1 


In the widest sense of the word, to name is to interpret 
experience by the past, to translate it into terms of memory, to 
bind the unknown into the system of the known. Civilized man 
knows of hardly any other way of understanding things. 
Everybody, everything, has to have its label, its number, 
certificate, registration, classification. What is not classified is 
irregular, unpredictable, and dangerous. Without passport, birth 
certificate, or membership in some nation, one’s existence is not 
recognized. If you do not agree with the capitalists, they call you 


a communist, and vice versa. A person who agrees with neither 
point of view is fast becoming unintelligible. 

That there is a way of looking at life apart from all conceptions, 
beliefs, opinions, and theories is the remotest of all possibilities 
from the modern mind. If such a point of view exists, it can only 
be in the vacant brain of a moron. We suffer from the delusion 
that the entire universe is held in order by the categories of 
human thought, fearing that if we do not hold to them with the 
utmost tenacity, everything will vanish into chaos. 

We must repeat: memory, thought, language, and logic are 
essential to human life. They are one half of sanity. But a person, 
a society, which is only half sane is insane. To look at life without 
words is not to lose the ability to form words—to think, 
remember, and plan. To be silent is not to lose your tongue. On 
the contrary, it is only through silence that one can discover 
something new to talk about. One who talked incessantly, 
without stopping to look and listen, would repeat himself ad 
nauseam. 

It is the same with thinking, which is really silent talking. It is 
not, by itself, open to the discovery of anything new, for its only 
novelties are simply rearrangements of old words and ideas. 
There was a time when language was constantly being enriched 
by new words—a time when men, like Adam, saw things before 
they named them. Today, almost all new words are 
rearrangements of old words, for we are no longer thinking 
creatively. By this I do not mean that we ought all to be popping 
with inventions and revolutionary discoveries. This is the— 
always rare—power of those who can both see the unknown and 
interpret it. For most of us, the other half of sanity lies simply in 
seeing and enjoying the unknown, just as we can enjoy music 
without knowing either how it is written or how the body hears 
it. 

Certainly the revolutionary thinker must go beyond thought. 
He knows that almost all his best ideas come to him when 
thinking has stopped. He may have struggled and struggled to 
understand a problem in terms of old ways of thinking, only to 
find it impossible. But when thought stops from exhaustion, the 
mind is open to see the problem as it is—not as it is verbalized— 
and at once it is understood. 

But going beyond thought is not reserved to men of genius. It is 


open to all of us in so far as “the mystery of life is not a problem 
to be solved, but a reality to be experienced.” It is given to many 
to be seers, but to few to be prophets. Many can listen to music, 
but few can perform and compose. But you cannot even listen if 
you can hear only in terms of the past. What should we make of 
one of Mozart’s symphonies if our ears were attuned only to the 
music of tom-toms? We might get the rhythms, but almost 
nothing of the harmony and melody. In other words, we should 
fail to discover an essential element of the music. To be able to 
hear, much less write, such a symphony men had to discover new 
noises—the vibrations of catgut, the sound of air in a tube, and 
the hum of a plucked wire. They had to discover the whole world 
of tone, as something entirely different from pulse. 

If I can only conceive pulse, I cannot appreciate tone. If I can 
think of painting only as a way of making colored photographs 
without a camera, I can see nothing but ineptitude in a Chinese 
landscape. We learn nothing of very much importance when it 
can be explained entirely in terms of past experience. If it were 
possible to understand all things in terms of what we know 
already, we could convey the sense of color to a blind man with 
nothing but sound, taste, touch, and smell. 

If this is true in the various arts and sciences, it is a thousand 
times more true when we come to the understanding of life in a 
larger sense and want to have some knowledge of the ultimate 
Reality, or God. It is surely absurd to seek God in terms of a 
preconceived idea of what God is. To seek thus is only to find 
what we know already, which is why it is so easy to deceive 
oneself into all manner of “supernatural” experiences and visions. 
To believe in God and to look for the God you believe in is simply 
to seek confirmation of an opinion. To ask for a revelation of 
God’s will, and then to “test” it by reference to your preconceived 
moral standards is to make a mockery of asking. You knew the 
answer already. Seeking for “God” in this way is no more than 
asking for the stamp of absolute authority and certainty on what 
you believe in any case, for a guarantee that the unknown and 
the future will be a continuation of what you want to retain from 
the past—a bigger and better fortress for “I.” Ein feste Burg! 

If we are open only to discoveries which will accord with what 
we know already, we may as well stay shut. This is why the 
marvelous achievements of science and technology are of so little 


real use to us. It is in vain that we can predict and control the 
course of events in the future, unless we know how to live in the 
present. It is in vain that doctors prolong life if we spend the 
extra time being anxious to live still longer. It is in vain that 
engineers devise faster and easier means of travel if the new 
sights that we see are merely sorted and understood in terms of 
old prejudices. It is in vain that we get the power of the atom if 
we are just to continue in the rut of blowing people up. 

Tools such as these, as well as the tools of language and 
thought, are of real use to men only if they are awake—not lost 
in the dreamland of past and future, but in the closest touch with 
that point of experience where reality can alone be discovered: 
this moment. Here life is alive, vibrant, vivid, and present, 
containing depths which we have hardly begun to explore. But to 
see and understand it at all, the mind must not be divided into “I” 
and “this experience.” The moment must be what it always is—all 
that you are and all that you know. In this house there is no room 
for thee and me! 


1 A. N. Whitehead, Science and the Modern World. (Cambridge, 1933) P. 249. 


VII. THE TRANSFORMATION OF LIFE 


THE WHITE MAN FANCIES HIMSELF AS A PRACTICAL person who wants to “get 
results.” He is impatient with theory, and with any discussion 
which does not immediately get down to concrete applications. 
This is why the behavior of Western civilization might be 
described, in general, as “Much Ado About Nothing.” The proper 
meaning of “theory” is not idle speculation but vision, and it was 
rightly said that “where there is no vision the people perish.” 

But vision in this sense does not mean dreams and ideals for 
the future. It means understanding of life as it is, of what we are, 
and what we are doing. Without such understanding it is simply 
ridiculous to talk of being practical and getting results. It is like 
walking busily in a fog: you just go round and round. You do not 
know where you are going, nor what results you really want. 

To minds that think in this way, what we have discussed so far 
may seem too theoretical. These ideas are all very well, but do 
they work? Yet I must ask, “What do you mean by work?” The 
usual “working test” of a philosophy is whether it makes people 
better and happier, whether it results in peace, cooperation, and 
prosperity. Yet this is a meaningless criterion without much 
“theoretical” understanding. What do you mean by happiness? 
What are “better” people better for? About what will you co- 
operate? What will you do with peace and prosperity? 

The answer to these questions depends entirely on what we are 
and what we actually want now. If, for example, we want at the 
same time both peace and isolation, brotherhood and security for 
“J,” happiness and permanence, our wants are contradictory. 
Their results, however practical we may be about getting them, 
will be further contradictions. It is the old story of wanting to 
have your cake and eat it—to which the only possible conclusion 
is that you put it in your stomach and keep it there until you have 
violent indigestion. 

If we must be nationalists and have a sovereign state, we 
cannot also expect to have world peace. If we want to get 


everything at the lowest possible cost, we cannot expect to get 
the best possible quality, the balance between the two being 
mediocrity. If we make it an ideal to be morally superior, we 
cannot at the same time avoid self-righteousness. If we cling to 
belief in God, we cannot likewise have faith, since faith is not 
clinging but letting go. 

When we have made up our minds as to what we do want, 
there remain indeed many practical and technical problems. But 
there is no point at all in discussing these until we have made up 
our minds. There is, in turn, no possibility of making up our 
minds so long as they are split in two, so long as “I” am one thing 
and “experience” another. If the mind is the directive force 
behind action, the mind and its vision of life must be healed 
before action can be anything but conflict. 

Something must therefore be said about the healed vision of 
life which comes with full awareness, for it involves a deep 
transformation of our view of the world. As well as words can 
describe it, this transformation consists in knowing and feeling 
that the world is an organic unity. 

In the ordinary way, we “know” this as a matter of information 
but do not feel it to be true. Certainly most people feel separate 
from everything that surrounds them. On the one hand there is 
myself, and on the other the rest of the universe. I am not rooted 
in the earth like a tree. I rattle around independently. I seem to 
be the center of everything, and yet cut off and alone. I can feel 
what is going on inside my own body, but I can only guess what 
is going on in others. My conscious mind must have its roots and 
origins in the most unfathomable depths of being, yet it feels as if 
it lived all by itself in this tight little skull. 

Nevertheless, the physical reality is that my body exists only in 
relation to this universe, and in fact I am as attached to it and 
dependent on it as a leaf on a tree. I feel cut off only because I am 
split within myself, because I try to be divided from my own 
feelings and sensations. What I feel and sense therefore seems 
foreign to me. And on being aware of the unreality of this 
division, the universe does not seem foreign any more. 

For I am what I know; what I know is I. The sensation of a 
house across the street or of a star in outer space is no less I than 
an itch on the sole of my foot or an idea in my brain. In another 
sense, I am also what I do not know. I am not aware of my own 


brain as a brain. In just the same way, I am not aware of the 
house across the street as a thing apart from my sensation of it. I 
know my brain as thoughts and feelings, and I know the house as 
sensations. In the same way and sense that I do not know my own 
brain, or the house as a thing-in-itself, I do not know the private 
thoughts in your brain. 

But my brain, which is also I, your brain and the thoughts 
within it, as well as the house across the street, are all forms of an 
inextricably interwoven process called the real world. Conscious 
or unconscious of it as I may be, it is all I in the sense that the 
sun, the air, and human society are just as vital to me as my brain 
or my lungs. If, then, this brain is my brain—unaware of it as I 
am—the sun is my sun, the air my air, and society my society. 

Certainly I cannot command the sun to be egg-shaped, nor 
force your brain to think differently. I cannot see the inside of the 
sun, nor can I share your private feelings. Yet neither can I 
change the shape or structure of my own brain, nor have a 
sensation of it as a contraption like a cauliflower. But if my brain 
is nonetheless I, the sun is I, the air is I, and society, of which you 
are a member, is also I—for all these things are just as essential to 
my existence as my brain. 

That there is a sun apart from my sensation of it is an 
inference. The fact that I have a brain, though I cannot see it, is 
likewise an inference. We know about these things only in theory, 
and not by immediate experience. But this “external” world of 
theoretical objects is, apparently, just as much a unity as the 
“internal” world of experience. From experience I infer that it 
exists. And because experience is a unity—I am my sensations—I 
must likewise infer that this theoretical universe is a unity, that 
my body and the world form a single process. 

Now there have been many theories about the unity of the 
universe. But they have not delivered human beings from the 
isolation of egotism, from conflict, and from the fear of life, 
because there is a world of difference between an inference and a 
feeling. You can reason that the universe is a unity without 
feeling it to be so. You can establish the theory that your body is 
a movement in an unbroken process which includes all suns and 
stars, and yet continue to feel separate and lonely. For the feeling 
will not correspond to the theory until you have also discovered 
the unity of inner experience. Despite all theories, you will feel 


that you are isolated from life so long as you are divided within. 

But you will cease to feel isolated when you recognize, for 
example, that you do not have a sensation of the sky: you are that 
sensation. For all purposes of feeling, your sensation of the sky is 
the sky, and there is no “you” apart from what you sense, feel, 
and know. This is why the mystics and many of the poets give 
frequent utterance to the feeling that they are “one with the All,” 
or “united with God,” or, as Sir Edwin Arnold expressed it— 


Foregoing self, the universe grows I. 


Sometimes, indeed, this feeling is purely sentimental, the poet 
being “one with Nature” just so long as she is on her best 
behavior. 

I live not in myself, but I become 

Portion of that around me; and to me 

High mountains are a feeling, but the hum 

Of human cities torture: I can see 

Nothing to loathe in nature, save to be 

A link reluctant in a fleshly chain, 

Classed among creatures, when the soul can flee, 

And with the sky, the peak, the heaving plain 

Of ocean, or the stars, mingle, and not in vain. 

This rural rapture from Byron is quite beside the point. He has 
only come to terms with nature to the extent that he has 
befriended his own human nature. The fly likes the sweetness of 
the honey, but not its stickiness, which makes him 


A link reluctant in a fleshly chain, 
Classed among creatures. 


The sentimentalist does not look into the depths of nature and see 


Sluggish existences grazing there, suspended, or slowly crawling 
close to the bottom... 


The leaden-eyed shark, the walrus, the turtle, the hairy sea-leopard, 
and the sting-ray, 

Passions there, wars, pursuits, tribes—sight in those ocean depths— 
breathing that thick breathing air. 


Man has to discover that everything which he beholds in nature 
—the clammy foreign-feeling world of the ocean’s depths, the 


wastes of ice, the reptiles of the swamp, the spiders and 
scorpions, the deserts of lifeless planets—has its counterpart 
within himself. He is not, then, at one with himself until he 
realizes that this “under side” of nature and the feelings of horror 
which it gives him are also “I.” 

For all the qualities which we admire or loathe in the world 
around us are reflections from within—though from a within that 
is also a beyond, unconscious, vast, unknown. Our feelings about 
the crawling world of the wasps’ nest and the snake pit are 
feelings about hidden aspects of our own bodies and brains, and 
of all their potentialities for unfamiliar creeps and shivers, for 
unsightly diseases, and unimaginable pains. 

I do not know whether it is true, but it is said that some of the 
great sages and “holy men” have an apparently supernatural 
power over beasts and reptiles which are always dangerous to 
ordinary mortals. If this is true, it is certainly because they are 
able to live at peace with the “beasts and reptiles” in themselves. 
They need not call the wild elephant Behemoth or the sea- 
monster Leviathan; they address them familiarly as “Long-Nose” 
and “Slimy.” 

The sense of unity with the “All” is not, however, a nebulous 
state of mind, a sort of trance, in which all form and distinction is 
abolished, as if man and the universe merged into a luminous 
mist of pale mauve. Just as process and form, energy and matter, 
myself and experience, are names for, and ways of looking at, the 
same thing—so one and many, unity and multiplicity, identity 
and difference, are not mutually exclusive opposites: they are 
each other, much as the body is its various organs. To discover 
that the many are the one, and that the one is the many, is to 
realize that both are words and noises representing what is at 
once obvious to sense and feeling, and an enigma to logic and 
description. 

A young man in search of spiritual wisdom put himself under 
the instruction of a celebrated holy man. The sage made him his 
personal attendant, and after some months the young man 
complained that thus far he had received no instruction. “What 
do you mean!” exclaimed the holy man. “When you brought me 
my rice, didn’t I eat it? When you brought me my tea, didn’t I 
drink it? When you made salutations to me, didn’t I return them? 
When have I ever neglected to give you instruction?” “I’m afraid I 


don’t understand,” said the young man, totally mystified. “When 
you want to see into it,” answered the sage, “see into it directly. 
When you begin to think about it, it is altogether missed.” 


Plucking chrysanthemums along the East fence; 
Gazing in silence at the southern hills; 

The birds flying home in pairs 

Through the soft mountain air of dusk— 

In these things there is a deep meaning, 

But when we are about to express it, 

We suddenly forget the words. 


The meaning is not the contemplative, twilight, and, perhaps, 
superficially idyllic atmosphere beloved of Chinese poets. This is 
already expressed, and the poet does not gild the lily. He will not, 
like so many Western poets, turn philosopher and say that he is 
“one with” the flowers, the fence, the hills, and the birds. This, 
too, is gilding the lily, or, in his own Oriental idiom, “putting legs 
on a snake.” For when you really understand that you are what 
you see and know, you do not run around the countryside 
thinking, “I am all this.” There is simply “all this.” 

The feeling that we stand face-to-face with the world, cut off 
and set apart, has the greatest influence on thought and action. 
Philosophers, for example, often fail to recognize that their 
remarks about the universe apply also to themselves and their 
remarks. If the universe is meaningless, so is the statement that it 
is so. If this world is a vicious trap, so is its accuser, and the pot is 
calling the kettle black. 

In the strictest sense, we cannot actually think about life and 
reality at all, because this would have to include thinking about 
thinking, thinking about thinking about thinking, and so ad 
infinitum. One can only attempt a rational, descriptive philosophy 
of the universe on the assumption that one is totally separate 
from it. But if you and your thoughts are part of this universe, 
you cannot stand outside them to describe them. This is why all 
philosophical and theological systems must ultimately fall apart. 
To “know” reality you cannot stand outside it and define it; you 
must enter into it, be it, and feel it. 

Speculative philosophy, as we know it in the West, is almost 
entirely a symptom of the divided mind, of man trying to stand 


outside himself and his experience in order to verbalize and 
define it. It is a vicious circle, like everything else which the 
divided mind attempts. 

On the other hand, the realization that the mind is actually 
undivided must have a corresponding and equally far-reaching 
influence on thought and action. As the philosopher tries to stand 
outside himself and his thought, so, as we have seen, the ordinary 
man tries to stand outside himself and his emotions and 
sensations, his feelings and desires. The result is a fantastic 
confusion and misdirection of conduct which discovery of the 
mind’s unity must bring to an end. 

So long as the mind is split, life is perpetual conflict, tension, 
frustration, and disillusion. Suffering is piled on suffering, fear on 
fear, and boredom on boredom. The more the fly struggles to get 
out of the honey, the faster he is stuck. Under the pressure of so 
much strain and futility, it is no wonder at all that men seek 
release in violence and sensationalism, and in the reckless 
exploitation of their bodies, their appetites, the material world, 
and their fellow men. What this must add to the necessary and 
unavoidable pains of existence is incalculable. 

But the undivided mind is free from this tension of trying 
always to stand outside oneself and to be elsewhere than here 
and now. Each moment is lived completely, and there is thus a 
sense of fulfillment and completeness. The divided mind comes to 
the dinner table and pecks at one dish after another, rushing on 
without digesting anything to find one better than the last. It 
finds nothing good, because there is nothing which it really 
tastes. 

When, on the other hand, you realize that you live in, that 
indeed you are this moment now, and no other, that apart from 
this there is no past and no future, you must relax and taste to the 
full, whether it be pleasure or pain. At once it becomes obvious 
why this universe exists, why conscious beings have been 
produced, why sensitive organs, why space, time, and change. 
The whole problem of justifying nature, of trying to make life 
mean something in terms of its future, disappears utterly. 
Obviously, it all exists for this moment. It is a dance, and when 
you are dancing you are not intent on getting somewhere. You go 
round and round, but not under the illusion that you are pursuing 
something, or fleeing from the jaws of hell. 


How long have the planets been circling the sun? Are they 
getting anywhere, and do they go faster and faster in order to 
arrive? How often has the spring returned to the earth? Does it 
come faster and fancier every year, to be sure to be better than 
last spring, and to hurry on its way to the spring that shall out- 
spring all springs? 

The meaning and purpose of dancing is the dance. Like music, 
also, it is fulfilled in each moment of its course. You do not play a 
sonata in order to reach the final chord, and if the meanings of 
things were simply in ends, composers would write nothing but 
finales. It might, however, be observed in passing that the music 
specially characteristic of our culture is progressive in some 
respects, and does at times seem to be decidedly on its way to a 
future climax. But when it gets there, it does not know what to do 
with itself. Beethoven, Brahms, and Wagner were particularly 
guilty of working up to colossal climaxes and conclusions, and 
then blasting away at the same chord over and over again, 
ruining the moment by being reluctant to leave it. 

When each moment becomes an expectation life is deprived of 
fulfillment, and death is dreaded for it seems that here 
expectation must come to an end. While there is life there is hope 
—and if one lives on hope, death is indeed the end. But to the 
undivided mind, death is another moment, complete like every 
moment, and cannot yield its secret unless lived to the full— 


And I laid me down with a will. 


Death is the epitome of the truth that in each moment we are 
thrust into the unknown. Here all clinging to security is 
compelled to cease, and wherever the past is dropped away and 
safety abandoned, life is renewed. Death is the unknown in which 
all of us lived before birth. 

Nothing is more creative than death, since it is the whole secret 
of life. It means that the past must be abandoned, that the 
unknown cannot be avoided, that “I” cannot continue, and that 
nothing can be ultimately fixed. When a man knows this, he lives 
for the first time in his life. By holding his breath, he loses it. By 
letting it go he finds it. 


Und so lang du das nicht hast, 


Dieses: stirb und werde, 
Bist du nur ein triiber Gast 
Auf der dunklen Erde. 1 


1 Goethe, West-6stlicher Divan. “As long as you do not know how to die and 
come to life again, you are but a sorry traveler on this dark earth.” 


VIII. CREATIVE MORALITY 


IT Is PERHAPS A PARADOX TO TALK ABOUT CREATIVE morality. For “morality” 
is derived from a word meaning custom and convention, and the 
regulation of life by rules. But morality has also come to mean 
the working of love in human relations, and in this sense we can 
speak of a morality which is creative. St. Augustine described it 
as, “Love, and do what you will.” But the problem has always 
been how to love what you do not like. 

If morality is the art of living together, it is clear that rules, or 
rather techniques, have a place in it. For many of the problems of 
a community are technical problems—the distribution of wealth 
and population, the proper management of natural resources, the 
organization of family life, the care of the sick and disabled, and 
the harmonious adaptation of individual differences. 

The moralist is therefore a technician who is consulted on these 
problems as one consults an architect on building a house or an 
engineer on erecting a bridge. Like medicine, shoe-making, 
cookery, tailoring, farming, and carpentry, living together 
requires a certain “know-how.” It demands the acquisition and 
use of certain skills. 

But the moralist has, in practice, become much more than a 
technical consultant. He has become a scold. From his pulpit or 
his study he harangues the human race, issuing praise and blame 
—mostly blame—like fire from the mouth of a dragon. For people 
do not take his advice. They ask how it is best to act under such- 
and-such circumstances. He tells them, and they seem to agree 
that he is right. But then they go away and do something 
different, for they find his advice too difficult or have a strong 
desire to do the opposite. This happens so regularly that the 
moralist loses his temper and begins to call them bad names. 
When this has no effect, he resorts to physical violence, 
implementing his advice with policemen, punishments, and 
prisons. For the community is its own moralist. It elects and pays 
judges, policemen, and preachers, as if to say, “When I am 


difficult, please kick me.” 

At first sight the problem seems to boil down to this: Morals 
are for avoiding an unfair distribution of pleasure and pain. This 
means that some individuals must get less pleasure and more 
pain. As a rule, these individuals will only submit to the sacrifice 
under the threat of still more pain if they do not co-operate. This 
is based on the assumption that every man is for himself, and 
observes the interests of the community only to the extent that 
these are obviously his own interests. 

From this, moralists have evolved the theory that man is 
basically selfish, or that he has an inherent bias towards evil. The 
“natural” man lives for one motive: to protect his body from pain 
and to associate it with pleasure. Because he can only feel with 
his own body, he has little interest in the feelings of other bodies. 
Therefore he will only take interest in other bodies under the 
stimulus of rewards and punishments, that is, by an exploitation 
of his self-interest in the interest of the community. 

Happily, the problem is not quite so simple. For among the 
things that give man pleasure are relations with other human 
beings—conversation, eating together, singing, dancing, having 
children, and cooperation in work which “many hands make 
light.” Indeed, one of the highest pleasures is to be more or less 
unconscious of one’s own existence, to be absorbed in interesting 
sights, sounds, places, and people. Conversely, one of the greatest 
pains is to be self-conscious, to feel unabsorbed and cut off from 
the community and the surrounding world. 

But this whole problem has no solution while we think about it 
in terms of the pleasure-pain motivation, or, indeed, in terms of 
any “motivation” at all. For man has a moral problem, which 
other community-living animals do not have, for the very reason 
that he is so much concerned with motives. If it is true that man 
is necessarily motivated by the pleasure-pain principle, there is 
no point whatsoever in discussing human conduct. Motivated 
conduct is determined conduct; it will be what it will be, no 
matter what anyone has to say about it. There can be no creative 
morality unless man has the possibility of freedom. 

This is where the moralists make their mistake. If they want 
man to change his way of life, they must assume that he is free, 
for if he is not, all the raging and protesting in the world will 
make no difference. On the other hand, a man who is acting from 


the fear of a moralist’s threats or from the lure of his promises is 
not making a free act! If man is not free, threats and promises 
may modify his conduct, but they will not change it in any 
essential respect. If he is free, threats and promises will not make 
him use his freedom. 

The meaning of freedom can never be grasped by the divided 
mind. If I feel separate from my experience, and from the world, 
freedom will seem to be the extent to which I can push the world 
around, and fate the extent to which the world pushes me 
around. But to the whole mind there is no contrast of “I” and the 
world. There is just one process acting, and it does everything 
that happens. It raises my little finger and it creates earthquakes. 
Or, if you want to put it that way, I raise my little finger and also 
make earthquakes. No one fates and no one is being fated. 

Of course this is a strange view of freedom. We are accustomed 
to think that, if there is any freedom at all, it resides, not in 
nature, but in the separate human will and its power of choice. 

But what we ordinarily mean by choice is not freedom. Choices 
are usually decisions motivated by pleasure and pain, and the 
divided mind acts with the sole purpose of getting “I” into 
pleasure and out of pain. But the best pleasures are those for 
which we do not plan, and the worst part of pain is expecting it 
and trying to get away from it when it has come. You cannot plan 
to be happy. You can plan to exist, but in themselves existence 
and non-existence are neither pleasurable nor painful. I am even 
assured by doctors that there are circumstances under which 
death can be a highly pleasant experience. 

The sense of not being free comes from trying to do things 
which are impossible and even meaningless. You are not “free” to 
draw a square circle, to live without a head, or to stop certain 
reflex actions. These are not obstacles to freedom; they are the 
conditions of freedom. I am not free to draw a circle if perchance 
it should turn out to be a square circle. I am not, thank heaven, 
free to walk out of doors and leave my head at home. Likewise I 
am not free to live in any moment but this one, or to separate 
myself from my feelings. In short I am not free when I am trying 
to do something contradictory, such as to move without changing 
position, or to burn my finger without feeling pain. 

On the other hand, I am free, the world process is free, to do 
anything which is not a contradiction. The question then arises: is 


it a contradiction, is it impossible, to act or to decide without 
pleasure as the ultimate aim? The theory that we must inevitably 
do what gives us the greater pleasure or the lesser pain, is a 
meaningless assertion based on verbal confusion. To say that I 
decide to do something because it pleases me says only that I 
decide to do it because I decide to do it. If “pleasure” is defined in 
the beginning as “what I prefer,” then what I prefer will always 
be pleasure. If I prefer pain, like a masochist, then pain will be 
pleasure. In short, the theory begs the question at the start by 
saying that pleasure means what we desire: therefore anything 
that we desire is pleasure. 

But I fall straight into contradiction when I try to act and 
decide in order to be happy, when I make “being pleased” my 
future goal. For the more my actions are directed towards future 
pleasures, the more I am incapable of enjoying any pleasures at 
all. For all pleasures are present, and nothing save complete 
awareness of the present can even begin to guarantee future 
happiness. I can act in order to eat tomorrow, or take a trip to the 
mountains next week, but there is really no way of being certain 
that this will make me happy. On the contrary, it is common 
experience that nothing ruins a “pleasure” so much as watching 
yourself in the midst of it to see whether it pleases you. You can 
only live in one moment at a time, and you cannot think 
simultaneously about listening to the waves and whether you are 
enjoying listening to the waves. Contradictions of this kind are 
the only real types of action without freedom. 

There is another theory of determinism which states that all 
our actions are motivated by “unconscious mental mechanisms,” 
and that for this reason even the most spontaneous decisions are 
not free. This is but another example of split-mindedness, for 
what is the difference between “me” and “mental mechanisms” 
whether conscious or unconscious? Who is being moved by these 
processes? The notion that anyone is being motivated comes from 
the persisting illusion of “I.” The real man, the organism-in- 
relation-to-the-universe, is this unconscious motivation. And 
because he is it, he is not being moved by it. In other words, it is 
not motivation; it is simply operation. Moreover, there is no 
“unconscious” mind distinct from the conscious, for the 
“unconscious” mind is conscious, though not of itself, just as the 
eyes see but do not see themselves. 


There remains the supposition that the whole operation, the 
whole process of action which is man-and-universe, is a 
determined series of events in which every event is the inevitable 
result of past causes. 

We cannot go into this problem exhaustively or even 
adequately. But it is perhaps enough to realize for the moment 
that this is one of the biggest “open questions” of science, which 
is far from reaching a decision. The idea that the past determines 
the present can be an illusion of language. Because we must 
describe the present in terms of the past, it would seem that the 
past “explains” the present. To say “how” something happened, 
we describe the chain of events of which it seemed to be a part. 

The bottle smashed. It fell to the floor. I let it go. My fingers 
were slippery. I had soap on my hands. Is it legitimate to put the 
word “because” between, these statements? We do so as a rule, 
for we can make the safe bet that if I let go of the bottle, it will 
fall to the floor. But this does not prove that I caused it to fall, or 
that it must have fallen. Events look inevitable in retrospect 
because when they have happened, nothing can change them. Yet 
the fact that I can make safe bets could prove equally well that 
events are not determined but consistent. In other words, the 
universal process acts freely and spontaneously at every moment, 
but tends to throw out events in regular, and so predictable, 
sequences. 

However this issue may be decided, the undivided mind 
certainly has the feeling of freedom, and certainly brings into the 
moral sphere a way of life which has all the marks of free and 
creative action. 

It is easy to see that most of the acts which, in conventional 
morals, are called evil can be traced to the divided mind. By far 
the greater part of these acts come from exaggerated desires, 
desires for things which are not even remotely necessary for the 
health of mind and body, granting that “health” is a relative term. 
Such outlandish and insatiable desires come into being because 
man is exploiting his appetites to give the “I” a sense of security. 

I am depressed, and want to get “I” out of this depression. The 
opposite of depression is elation, but because depression is not 
elation, I cannot force myself to be elated. I can, however, get 
drunk. This makes me wonderfully elated, and so when the next 
depression arrives, I have a quick cure. The subsequent 


depressions have a way of getting deeper and blacker, because I 
am not digesting the depressed state and eliminating its poisons. 
So I need to get even drunker to drown them. Very soon I begin 
to hate myself for getting so drunk, which makes me still more 
depressed—and so it goes. 

Or perhaps I have a large family, and am living in a mortgaged 
house on which I have spent all my savings. I have to work hard 
at a job in which I am not particularly interested in order to pay 
the bills. I don’t mind working so much, but I keep wondering 
what will happen if I get sick, or if a war comes and I am drafted. 
I would rather not think about these things, so I want to get “I” 
out of this worry. For I am sure that I shall get sick if it goes on. 
But it’s so hard to stop, and as this makes sickness more certain, 
the worrying digs deeper. I must find relief from this, and so in 
desperation I begin to “play the ponies,” trying to offset the 
worry with the daily hope that my horse may win. And so it goes. 

The conventional moralist has nothing to contribute to these 
problems. He can point out the frightful effects of alcoholism and 
gambling, but that is simply more fuel for depression and worry. 
He can promise rewards in heaven for suffering patiently 
endured, but that, too, is a gamble of a kind. He can attribute the 
depression or the worry to the social system, and urge the 
unfortunates to join the revolution. 

In short, he can either frighten the “I” or encourage it, in one 
case making the individual run away from himself, and in the 
other making him run after himself. He can paint glowing 
pictures of the virtues and encourage others to find strength in 
the examples of great men. He can succeed to the extent of 
arousing the most vigorous efforts to imitate saintliness, to curb 
the passions, and to practice restraint and charity in action. Yet 
none of this brings anyone to freedom, for behind all the 
imitation and the discipline there is still motive. 

If I am afraid, my efforts to feel and act bravely are moved by 
the fear, for I am afraid of fear, which is simply to say that my 
efforts to escape from what I am are moving in a circle. Beside 
the examples of saints and heroes I feel ashamed that I amount to 
nothing, and so I begin to practice humility because of my 
wounded pride, and charity because of my self-love. The urge is 
ever to make “I” amount to something. I must be right, good, a 
real person, heroic, loving, self-effacing. I efface myself in order 


to assert myself, and give myself away in order to keep myself. 
The whole thing is a contradiction. 

The Christian mind has always been haunted by the feeling that 
the sins of the saints are worse than the sins of the sinners, that in 
some mysterious way the one who is struggling for salvation is 
nearer to hell and to the heart of evil than the unashamed harlot 
or thief. It has recognized that the Devil is an angel, and as pure 
spirit is not really interested in the sins of the flesh. The sins after 
the Devil’s heart are the intricacies of spiritual pride, the mazes of 
self-deception, and the subtle mockeries of hypocrisy where mask 
hides behind mask behind mask and reality is lost altogether. 

The would-be saint walks straight into the meshes of this web 
because he would become a saint. His “I” finds the deepest 
security in a satisfaction which is the more intense for being so 
cleverly hidden—the satisfaction of being contrite for his sins, 
and contrite for taking pride in his contrition. In such an involved 
vicious circle the masks behind masks are infinite. Or, to put it in 
another way, he who would stand outside himself to kick himself, 
must then kick the self that stands outside. And so forever. 

So long as there is the motive to become something, so long as 
the mind believes in the possibility of escape from what it is at 
this moment, there can be no freedom. Virtue will be pursued for 
exactly the same reason as vice, and good and evil will alternate 
as the opposite poles of a single circle. The “saint” who appears 
to have conquered his self-love by spiritual violence has only 
concealed it. His apparent success convinces others that he has 
found the “true way,” and they follow his example long enough 
for the course to swing to its opposite pole, when license becomes 
the inevitable reaction to puritanism. 

Of course it sounds as if it were the most abject fatalism to have 
to admit that I am what I am, and that no escape or division is 
possible. It seems that if I am afraid, then I am “stuck” with fear. 
But in fact I am chained to the fear only so long as I am trying to 
get away from it. On the other hand, when I do not try to get 
away I discover that there is nothing “stuck” or fixed about the 
reality of the moment. When I am aware of this feeling without 
naming it, without calling it “fear,” “bad,” “negative,” etc., it 
changes instantly into something else, and life moves freely 
ahead. The feeling no longer perpetuates itself by creating the 
feeler behind it. 


We can perhaps see now why the undivided mind is not moved 
into those escapes from the present which are usually called 
“evil.” The further truth that the undivided mind is aware of 
experience as a unity, of the world as itself, and that the whole 
nature of mind and awareness is to be one with what it knows, 
suggests a state that would usually be called love. For the love 
that expresses itself in creative action is something much more 
than an emotion. It is not something which you can “feel” and 
“know,” remember and define. Love is the organizing and 
unifying principle which makes the world a universe and the 
disintegrated mass a community. It is the very essence and 
character of mind, and becomes manifest in action when the 
mind is whole. 

For the mind must be interested or absorbed in something, just 
as a mirror must always be reflecting something. When it is not 
trying to be interested in itself—as if a mirror would reflect itself 
—it must be interested, or absorbed, in other people and things. 
There is no problem of how to love. We love. We are love, and 
the only problem is the direction of love, whether it is to go 
straight out like sunlight, or to try to turn back on itself like a 
“candle under a bushel.” 

Released from the circle of attempted self-love, the mind of 
man draws the whole universe into its own unity as a single 
dewdrop seems to contain the entire sky. This, rather than any 
mere emotion, is the power and principle of free action and 
creative morality. On the other hand, the morality of rules and 
regulations based on rewards and punishments, even when these 
are as intangible as the pain of guilt and the pleasure of self- 
respect, has no relation to free action. It is a way of ruling slaves 
by “benevolent exploitation” of their illusions, and, however far 
pursued, can never lead to freedom. 

Where there is to be creative action, it is quite beside the point 
to discuss what we should or should not do in order to be right or 
good. A mind that is single and sincere is not interested in being 
good, in conducting relations with other people so as to live up to 
a rule. Nor, on the other hand, is it interested in being free, in 
acting perversely just to prove its independence. Its interest is not 
in itself, but in the people and problems of which it is aware; 
these are “itself.” It acts, not according to the rules, but according 
to the circumstances of the moment, and the “well” it wishes to 


others is not security but liberty. 

Nothing is really more inhuman than human relations based on 
morals. When a man gives bread in order to be charitable, lives 
with a woman in order to be faithful, eats with a Negro in order 
to be unprejudiced, and refuses to kill in order to be peaceful, he 
is as cold as a clam. He does not actually see the other person. 
Only a little less chilly is the benevolence springing from pity, 
which acts to remove suffering because it finds the sight of it 
disgusting. 

But there is no formula for generating the authentic warmth of 
love. It cannot be copied. You cannot talk yourself into it or rouse 
it by straining at the emotions or by dedicating yourself solemnly 
to the service of mankind. Everyone has love, but it can only 
come out when he is convinced of the impossibility and the 
frustration of trying to love himself. This conviction will not 
come through condemnations, through hating oneself, through 
calling self-love all the bad names in the universe. It comes only 
in the awareness that one has no self to love. 


IX. RELIGION REVIEWED 


WE BEGAN THIS BOOK WITH THE ASSUMPTION THAT Science and scientific 
philosophy give no grounds for religious belief. We did not argue 
the point, but took it as the point of departure. We adopted the 
prevalent view that the existence of God, of any absolutes, and of 
an eternal order beyond this world is without logical support or 
meaning. We accepted the notion that such ideas are of no value 
for scientific prediction, and that all known events can be 
explained more simply without them. At the same time, we said 
that religion had no need to oppose this view, for almost all the 
spiritual traditions recognize that there is a stage in man’s 
development when belief—in contrast to faith—and its securities 
have to be left behind. 

To this point, I do not think that we have claimed anything 
which cannot be verified by experiment, or asserted anything 
which seriously conflicts with a scientific view of the world. Yet 
we have now come to a position from which the principal ideas 
of religion and traditional metaphysics can once more become 
intelligible and meaningful—not as beliefs, but as valid symbols 
of experience. 

Science and religion are talking about the same universe, but 
they are using different kinds of language. In general, the 
statements of science have to do with the past and the future. The 
scientist describes events. He tells us “how” things happen by 
giving us a detailed account of what has happened. He finds that 
events occur in various frequencies and orders, and on this basis 
he makes bets or predictions in the light of which we can make 
practical arrangements and adaptations to the course of events. 
To make these bets, he does not need to know about God or 
eternal life. He needs to know the past—what has happened 
already. 

On the other hand, the statements of religion have to do with 
the present. But both religious and scientific people are under the 
impression that religion is more concerned with the past and the 


future. This is a natural misunderstanding, because religion seems 
to make assertions about how this world began and how it will 
end. It has long been connected with prophecy, which is surely 
the same thing as prediction. It states that this world was made by 
God, and that he made it for a purpose which will be fulfilled in 
the distant future, in “the life of the world to come.” It insists, 
furthermore, that man has an immortal soul, and prophesies that 
it will survive his physical death and live everlastingly. 

The scientist therefore seems justified in saying that such 
predictions cannot be verified, and that they are made with 
precious little reference to past events known to have happened. 
When he tries to discover the grounds upon which these 
predictions are made, he finds them emotional rather than 
rational. Religious people hope or believe that these things will be 
true. 

Nevertheless, in the history of every important religion there 
have been those who understood religious ideas and statements 
in a very different way. On the whole, this has been more true of 
the East than of the West, though Christian history contains a 
long list of men and women who could have talked on common 
ground with orthodox Hindus and Buddhists. 

From this other and, we think, deeper point of view, religion is 
not a system of predictions. Its doctrines have to do, not with the 
future and the everlasting, but with the present and the eternal. 
They are not a set of beliefs and hopes but, on the contrary, a set 
of graphic symbols about present experience. 

Traditionally, these symbols are of two kinds. One describes the 
religious way of understanding the present in the form of 
concrete images and stories. The other describes it in an abstract, 
negative language which is often similar to the language of 
academic philosophy. For convenience, we can call these two 
kinds of symbol the religious and the metaphysical. But we must 
remember that “metaphysic” in this sense is not speculative 
philosophy. It is not an attempt to anticipate science and give a 
logical description of the universe and its origins. It is a way of 
representing a knowledge of the present. Religious symbols are 
specially characteristic of Christianity, Islam, and Judaism, 
whereas doctrines of the Oriental type are more metaphysical. 

We said that science and religion are both talking about the 
same world, and throughout this book we have never been 


concerned with anything but everyday life, with things which can 
be seen, felt, and experienced. We shall therefore be told, by 
religious critics, that we are reducing religion to “naturalism,” 
that we are identifying God with nature, and making a mockery 
and travesty of religion by taking away “its essential supernatural 
content.” 

But when you ask theologians what they mean by the 
“supernatural,” they burst immediately into scientific language. 
They talk about a God having “concrete reality distinct from this 
universe,” and speak of him in terms of past history and future 
predictions. They insist that the supernatural world is not of the 
same “order” as the universe studied by science, but exists on 
another plane of being invisible to our natural senses. It begins to 
sound like something psychic, something of the same order as the 
phenomena of telepathy, clairvoyance, and clairaudience. 

Yet this is naturalism pure and simple; it is even pseudo- 
science. For science and naturalism are not necessarily concerned 
only with things visible to the senses. No one has seen electrons 
or quanta, nor been able to construct a sensual image of curved 
space. If psychic phenomena exist, there is no reason to suppose 
that they cannot be studied scientifically, and that they are not 
simply another aspect of “nature.” Indeed, science is concerned 
with innumerable things which cannot be experienced with the 
senses, and which are not present to immediate experience—for 
example, the entire past, the process of gravity, the nature of 
time, and the weights of planets and stars. These invisible things 
are inferred from immediate experience by logic. They are 
hypotheses which seem to give a reasonable explanation of 
observed events. The theological God is exactly the same thing—a 
hypothesis accounting for all experiences. 

When a theologian makes such a hypothesis he uses the 
methods of science and enters the field of science. He must 
expect, therefore, to be questioned, examined, and criticized by 
his fellow naturalists. 

But the difference between the natural and the supernatural 
can be understood in a simpler and much more useful way. If 
“nature” is the province of science, we can say that nature is this 
world as it is named, measured, and classified. Nature is the 
world which thought has analyzed and sorted into groups called 
“things.” It has, as we saw, given things an identity by naming 


them. It distinguishes motion from stillness by comparing 
something which moves rapidly in relation to something which 
moves slowly, though both move. 

Thus the whole world of nature is relative and is produced by 
thought and comparison. Is the head “really” distinct from the 
neck? Why shouldn’t we have made the “thing” called head 
include the “thing” called neck, just as it includes the nose? It is a 
convention of thought that head and neck are two things instead 
of one. In this sense, the ancient metaphysicians are perfectly 
right when they say that the whole universe is a product of the 
mind. They mean the universe of “things.” 

On the other hand, the supernatural and absolute world 
consists of the mysterious reality which we have so named, 
classified, and divided. This is not a product of the mind. But 
there is no way of defining or describing what it is. At every 
moment we are aware of it, and it is our awareness. We feel and 
sense it, and it is our feelings and sensations. Yet trying to know 
and define it is like trying to make a knife cut itself. What is this? 
This is a rose. But “a rose” is a noise. What is a noise? A noise is 
an impact of air waves on the eardrum. Then a rose is an impact 
of air waves on the eardrum? No, a rose is a rose ... is a rose is a 
rose is a rose.... 

Definition is simply making a one-to-one correspondence 
between groups of sense data and noises, but because noises are 
sense data, the attempt is ultimately circular. The real world 
which both provides these data and the organs wherewith to 
sense them remains unfathomably mysterious. 

From this point of view we need have no difficulty in making 
sense of some of the ancient scriptures. The Dhammapada, a 
collection of sayings of the Buddha, begins: “All that we are is the 
result of what we have thought. It is founded on our thoughts; it 
is made up of our thoughts.” This is, in effect, the same statement 
that opens St. John’s Gospel: “In the beginning was the Word, and 
the Word was with God, and the Word was God.... All things 
were made by him (the Word), and without him was not anything 
made that was made.” By thoughts, or mental words, we 
distinguish or “make” things. Without thoughts, there are no 
“things”; there is just undefined reality. 

If you want to be poetic, you can liken this undefined reality to 
the Father, because it is the origin or basis of “things.” You can 


call thought the Son “of one substance with the Father”—the Son 
“by whom all things were made,” the Son who must be crucified 
if we are to see the Father, just as we must look at reality without 
words to see it as it is. Thereafter the Son rises from the dead and 
returns to heaven, and, likewise, when we see reality as it is we 
are free to use thought without being fooled by it. It “returns to 
heaven” in the sense that we recognize it as part of reality, and 
not something standing outside it. 

Otherwise, we can use the negative, metaphysical language 
about this undefined reality. It is the infinite, not the definite. It 
is the eternal, the ever-present, not the past and future, not the 
conventions of thought and time. It is the unchanging in the sense 
that the idea of change is but another word, another definition, 
which the reality called change surpasses. Obviously, if all 
movement is relative, there is no absolute movement. It would be 
meaningless to say that all bodies in the universe are moving 
uniformly at ten thousand miles per minute, because “all” has 
excluded any other body with respect to which they could be said 
to move. 

Metaphysical language is negative because it is trying to say 
that words and ideas do not explain reality. It is not trying to 
persuade us that reality is something like a boundless mass of 
transparent jelly. It does not speak of some impalpable 
abstraction, but of this very world in which we live. This 
experience which we call things, colors, sounds, smells, tastes, 
forms, and weights is, in itself, no thing, no form, no number, no 
nothing—but at this moment we behold it. We are, then, 
beholding the God which traditional doctrines call the boundless, 
formless, infinite, eternal, undivided, unmoved, and unchanging 
Reality—the Absolute behind the relative, the Meaning behind 
thoughts and words.1 Naturally the Meaning is meaning-less 
because, unlike words, it does not have meaning but is meaning. 
By itself, a tree is meaningless, but it is the meaning of the word 
“tree.” 

It is easy to see that this kind of language, whether in its 
religious or metaphysical forms, can lead to all manner of 
misunderstanding. For when the mind is divided, and “I” wants to 
get away from present experience, the whole notion of a 
supernatural world is its happy hide-out. The “I” is resisting an 
unhappy change, and so clings to the “unchanging” Absolute, 


forgetting that this Absolute is also the “unfixed.” When life 
provides some bitter experience, the “I” can only support it with 
the guarantee that it is part of the plan of a loving Father-God. 
But this very guarantee makes it impossible to realize the “love of 
God,” which, as is well known, requires the giving up of “I.” 

The misunderstanding of religious ideas is vividly illustrated in 
what men have made of the doctrine of immortality, heaven, and 
hell. But now it should be clear that eternal life is the realization 
that the present is the only reality, and that past and future can 
be distinguished from it in a conventional sense alone. The 
moment is the “door of heaven,” the “straight and narrow way 
that leadeth unto life,” because there is no room in it for the 
separate “I.” In this experience there is no one experiencing the 
experience. The “rich man” cannot get through this door because 
he carries too much baggage; he is clinging to the past and the 
future. 

One might quote whole pages from the spiritual literature of all 
times and places to show that eternal life has been understood in 
this sense. The following from Eckhart will suffice: 


The Now-moment in which God made the first man and 
the Now-moment in which the last man will disappear, and 
the Now-moment in which I am speaking are all one in God, 
in whom there is only one Now. Look! The person who lives 
in the light of God is conscious neither of time past nor of 
time to come but only of one eternity.... Therefore he gets 
nothing new out of future events, nor from chance, for he 
lives in the Now-moment that is, unfailingly, “in verdure 
newly clad.” 


When you are dying and coming to life in each moment, would- 
be scientific predictions about what will happen after death are of 
little consequence. The whole glory of it is that we do not know. 
Ideas of survival and annihilation are alike based on the past, on 
memories of waking and sleeping, and, in their different ways, 
the notions of everlasting continuity and everlasting nothingness 
are without meaning. 

It needs but slight imagination to realize that everlasting time 
is a monstrous nightmare, so that between heaven and hell as 
ordinarily understood there is little to choose. The desire to 


continue always can only seem attractive when one thinks of 
indefinite time rather than infinite time. It is one thing to have as 
much time as you want, but quite another to have time without 
end. 

For there is no joy in continuity, in the perpetual. We desire it 
only because the present is empty. A person who is trying to eat 
money is always hungry. When someone says, “Time to stop 
now!” he is in a panic because he has had nothing to eat yet, and 
wants more and more time to go on eating money, ever hopeful 
of satisfaction around the corner. We do not really want 
continuity, but rather a present experience of total happiness. The 
thought of wanting such an experience to go on and on is the 
result of being self-conscious in the experience, and thus 
incompletely aware of it. So long as there is the feeling of an “I” 
having this experience, the moment is not all. Eternal life is 
realized when the last trace of difference between “I” and “now” 
has vanished—when there is just this “now” and nothing else. 

By contrast, hell or “everlasting damnation” is not the 
everlastingness of time going on forever, but of the unbroken 
circle, the continuity and frustration of going round and round in 
pursuit of something which can never be attained. Hell is the 
fatuity, the everlasting impossibility, of  self-love, _ self- 
consciousness, and self-possession. It is trying to see one’s own 
eyes, hear one’s own ears, and kiss one’s own lips. 

To see, however, that life is complete in each moment—whole, 
undivided, and ever new—is to understand the sense of the 
doctrine that in eternal life God, the undefinable this, is all-in-all 
and is the Final Cause or End for which everything exists. 
Because the future is everlastingly unattainable, and, like the 
dangled carrot, always ahead of the donkey, the fulfillment of the 
divine purpose does not lie in the future. It is found in the 
present, not by an act of resignation to immovable fact, but in 
seeing that there is no one to resign. 

For this is the meaning of that universal and ever-repeated 
religious principle that to know God, man must give up himself. 
It is as familiar as any platitude, and yet nothing has been harder 
to do, and nothing so totally misunderstood. How can a self, 
which is selfish, give itself up? Not, say the theologians, by its 
own power, but through the gift of divine grace, the power which 
enables man to achieve what is beyond his own strength. But is 


this grace given to all or to a chosen few, who, when they receive 
it, have no choice but to surrender themselves? Some say that it 
comes to all, but that there are those who accept its aid and those 
who refuse. Others say that it comes to a chosen elect, but still, 
for the most part, insist that the individual has the power to take 
it or leave it. 

But this does not solve the problem at all. It replaces the 
problem of holding or surrendering the self by the problem of 
accepting or refusing divine grace, and the two problems are 
identical. The Christian religion contains its own hidden answer 
to the problem in the idea that man can only surrender himself 
“in Christ.” For “Christ” stands for the reality that there is no 
separate self to surrender. To give up “I” is a false problem. 
“Christ” is the realization that there is no separate “I.” “I do 
nothing of myself.... I and the Father are one.... Before Abraham 
was, I am.” 

If there is any problem at all, it is to see that in this instant you 
have no “I” to surrender. You are completely free to do this at 
any moment, and nothing whatever is stopping you. This is our 
freedom. We are not, however, free to improve ourselves, to 
surrender ourselves, to lay ourselves open to grace, for all such 
split-mindedness is the denial and postponement of our freedom. 
It is trying to eat your mouth instead of bread. 

Is it necessary to underline the vast difference between the 
realization that “I and the Father are one,” and the state of mind 
of the person who, as we say, “thinks he is God”? If, still thinking 
that there is an isolated “I,” you identify it with God, you become 
the insufferable ego-maniac who thinks himself successful in 
attaining the impossible, in dominating experience, and in 
pursuing all vicious circles to satisfactory conclusions. 


I am the master of my fate; 
I am the captain of my soul! 


When the snake swallows his tail he has a swelled head. It is 
quite another thing to see that you are your “fate,” and that there 
is no one either to master it or to be mastered, to rule or to 
surrender. 

Must we also insist that this loss of “I” in God is not a mystic 
miasma in which the “values of personality” are obliterated? The 


“T” was not, is not, and never will be a part of human personality. 
There is nothing unique, or “different,” or interesting about it. On 
the contrary, the more human beings pursue it, the more uniform, 
uninteresting, and impersonal they become. The faster things 
move in circles, the sooner they become indistinguishable blurs. 
It is obvious that the only interesting people are interested 
people, and to be completely interested is to have forgotten about 
“yp” 

We can see, then, that the basic principles of philosophy, 
religion, and metaphysics may be understood in two entirely 
different ways. They can be seen as symbols of the undivided 
mind, expressions of the truth that in each moment life and 
experience are a complete whole. “God” is not a definition of this 
state but an exclamation about it. Ordinarily, however, they are 
used as attempts to stand outside oneself and the universe to 
grasp them and to rule them. This process is circular, however 
complex and devious. 

Because men have been circling for so many ages, the powers 
of technology have availed for little save to speed the process to a 
point of unbearable tension. Civilization is ready to fly apart by 
sheer centrifugal force. In such a predicament the self-conscious 
type of religion to which we have so long been accustomed is no 
cure, but part of the disease. If scientific thought has weakened 
its power we need have no regrets, for the “God” to which it 
could have brought us was not the unknown Reality which the 
name signifies, but only a projection of ourselves—a cosmic, 
discarnate “I” lording it over the universe. 

The true splendor of science is not so much that it names and 
classifies, records and predicts, but that it observes and desires to 
know the facts, whatever they may turn out to be. However much 
it may confuse facts with conventions, and reality with arbitrary 
divisions, in this openness and sincerity of mind it bears some 
resemblance to religion, understood in its other and deeper sense. 
The greater the scientist, the more he is impressed with his 
ignorance of reality, and the more he realizes that his laws and 
labels, descriptions and definitions, are the products of his own 
thought. They help him to use the world for purposes of his own 
devising rather than to understand and explain it. 

The more he analyzes the universe into infinitesimals, the more 
things he finds to classify, and the more he perceives the 


relativity of all classification. What he does not know seems to 
increase in geometric progression to what he knows. Steadily he 
approaches the point where what is unknown is not a mere blank 
space in a web of words but a window in the mind, a window 
whose name is not ignorance but wonder. 

The timid mind shuts this window with a bang, and is silent 
and thoughtless about what it does not know in order to chatter 
the more about what it thinks it knows. It fills up the uncharted 
spaces with mere repetition of what has already been explored. 
But the open mind knows that the most minutely explored 
territories have not really been known at all, but only marked 
and measured a thousand times over. And the fascinating mystery 
of what it is that we mark and measure must in the end “tease us 
out of thought” until the mind forgets to circle and to pursue its 
own processes, and becomes aware that to be at this moment is 
pure miracle. 

In ways that differ but little, this is the last word of Western 
and Eastern wisdom alike. The Hindu Upanishads say: 


He who thinks that God is not comprehended, by him God 
is comprehended; but he who thinks that God is 
comprehended knows him not. God is unknown to those 
who know him, and is known to those who do not know 
him at all. 


Goethe says it in words which, to the modern mind, may be 
plainer: 


The highest to which man can attain is wonder; and if the 
prime phenomenon makes him wonder, let him be content; 
nothing higher can it give him, and nothing further should 
he seek for behind it; here is the limit. 


Or there are the words of St. John of the Cross, one of the 
greatest seers of the Christian tradition: 


One of the greatest favors bestowed on the soul 
transiently in this life is to enable it to see so distinctly 
and to feel so profoundly that it cannot comprehend 
God at all. These souls are herein somewhat like the 
saints in heaven, where they who know him most 


perfectly perceive most clearly that he is infinitely 
incomprehensible; for those who have the less clear 
vision do not perceive so clearly as do these others 
how greatly he transcends their vision. 


In such wonder there is not hunger but fulfillment. Almost 
everyone has known it, but only in rare instants when the 
startling beauty or strangeness of a scene drew the mind away 
from its self-pursuit, and for a moment made it unable to find 
words for the feeling. We are, then, most fortunate to be living in 
a time when human knowledge has gone so far that it begins to 
be at a loss for words, not at the strange and marvelous alone, but 
at the most ordinary things. The dust on the shelves has become 
as much of a mystery as the remotest stars; we know enough of 
both to know that we know nothing. Eddington, the physicist, is 
nearest to the mystics, not in his airier flights of fancy, but when 
he says quite simply, “Something unknown is doing we don’t 
know what.” 

In such a confession thought has moved full circle, and we are 
again as children. To those still feverishly intent upon explaining 
all things, upon securing the water of life firmly in paper and 
string, this confession says nothing and means nothing but defeat. 
To others, the fact that thought has completed a circle is a 
revelation of what man has been doing, not only in philosophy, 
religion, and speculative science, but also in psychology and 
morals, in everyday feeling and living. His mind has been in a 
whirl to be away from itself and to catch itself. 


Ye suffer from yourselves, none else compels, 
None other holds you that ye live and die 
And whir upon the wheel, and hug and kiss 
its spokes of agony, 
Its tire of tears, its nave of nothingness. 


Discovering this the mind becomes whole: the split between I 
and me, man and the world, the ideal and the real, comes to an 
end. Paranoia, the mind beside itself, becomes metanoia, the mind 
with itself and so free from itself. Free from clutching at 
themselves the hands can handle; free from looking after 
themselves the eyes can see; free from trying to understand itself 


thought can think. In such feeling, seeing, and thinking life 
requires no future to complete itself nor explanation to justify 
itself. In this moment it is finished. 


1 This is likewise what Vedanta doctrine terms the Self, the atman, 
transcending all experienced “things.” 


What's next on 
your reading list? 


asnoy 
wopuey 
uInsuedg 


Discover your next 
great read! 


Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author. 


Sign up now. 


