ZEN 


and the 


BEAT 
WAY 


Zen and the Beat Way 


Alan Watts 


First published in 1997 by Tuttle Publishing 
an imprint of Periplus Editions (HK) Ltd. 


Copyright © 1997 Mark Watts 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced 
or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage 
and retrieval system, without prior written permission from Tuttle 
Publishing. 


The excerpt on page xviii-xix is from The Windbell, reprinted 
courtesy of Gordon Onslo-Ford and the San Francisco Zen Center. 


Library of Congress Cataloging- in-Publication Data 
Watts, Alan, 1915- 1973. 
Zen and the Beat Way/ Alan Watts. 

p. cm. 


Based on selections from Alan Watts's radio talks and tape 
recordings; adapted and written by David Cellers and Mark Watts. 


Cf. CIP pref. 

ISBN: 978-1-4629-0466-2 (ebook) 

1. Zen Buddhism. 1. Cellers, David. Il. Watts, Mark. 
Ill. Title 

BQ9266.W389 1997 

294.3'927 --dc21 


97-6843 


CIP 


Distributed by: 

Japan & Korea North America Asia Pacific 

Tuttle Publishing Tuttle Publishing Berkeley Books Pte. 
Ltd. 

Yaekari Building Distribution Center 61 Tai Seng Avenue, 
#02-12 


3rd Floor, 5-4-12 Airport Industrial ParkSingapore 534167 
Osaki Shinagawa-ku, 364 Innovation Drive Tel: (65) 280 1330 
Tokyo 141-0032 North Clarendon, Fax: (65) 280 6290 
Tel: (03) 5437 0171 VT 05759-9436 
Fax: (03) 5437 0755 Tel: (802) 773 8930 

Fax: (802) 773 6993 


First Edition, 1997 


Second printing, 2001 


Design by Kathryn Sky-Peck 
Printed in Singapore 


Contents 


Preface, vii 


Introduction, xi 


CHAPTER ONE 
Introduction to the Way Beyond the West, 1 


CHAPTER TWO 
The Beat Way of Life, 15 


CHAPTER THREE 
Consciousness and Concentration, 27 


CHAPTER FOUR 
Zen and the Art of the Controlled Accident, 39 


CHAPTER FIVE 
The Democratization of Buddhism, 63 


CHAPTER SIX 
Return to the Forest, 89 


Preface 


Z 
| Zen and the Beat Way is based upon selections from Alan 
Watts's early radio talks, many of which were first aired on the 


Pacifica Radio Network in the late fifties and early sixties, and 
sessions from two of his most compelling seminars in the mid- 
sixties. The original recordings have been adapted to the written 
page by David Cellers and Mark Watts. 


Our first selection, "Introduction to the Way Beyond the West," was 
broadcast on KPFK in Los Angeles on November 6, 1959, and 
offered Southern Californians their first opportunity to listen to the 
popular Alan Watts series broadcast by KPFA in Berkeley during the 
previous six years. The second and third talks, "The Beat Way of 
Life" and "Consciousness and Concentration," were originally 
broadcast on KPFA on August 11 and 15, 1959, and shortly 
thereafter on KPFK. The radio series has continued on these stations 
in various forms for more than forty years. By the early sixties, tape 
recordings of public lectures, rather than radio talks, were being 
broadcast. Our fourth selection, "Zen and the Art of the Controlled 
Accident," was one such lecture, recorded in La jolla, California, in 
early 1965, and "The Democratization of Buddhism" was recorded 
while on tour in japan in 1963. The final selection, "Return to the 
Forest," was recorded in 1960 and includes a commentary on joseph 
Campbell's work on the earliest counterculture traditions. 


Robert Wilson: What is Zen? 


Alan Watts: [Soft chuckling. ] 


Robert Wilson: Would you care to enlarge on that? 


Alan Watts: [Loud laughing. ] 


Introduction 


Z 
| During a 1960 "impolite interview" for Paul Krassner's free- 
thought magazine The Realist, Robert Anton Wilson asked Alan 


Watts what he thought about the Beat generation. Alan replied that 
the concept was "a journalistic invention, and having been invented 
and put on the market, many people bought it." Alan then began to 
reminisce about the real Beats: 


Now, I remember the real, original Dharma Bums 
of the 1945-46 era-young veterans hitchhiking 
across the country and stopping every place there 
was a "sage" who knew something about Eastern 
philosophy. Some even went to Switzerland to 
speak to jung, and many came to see me at 
Northwestern University. 

They weren't interested in jazz or drugs or hot 
rods, I assure you. Many of them are still around, 
but very few of them in the Village or North Beach. 
They're on farms or in little communities they 
created themselves. They are out of the rat races of 
keeping up with the joneses. 

They are the substance of which the Beat 
generation is the shadow. [p.1] 


By the late fifties the Beat movement was already a few 
incarnations removed from its origins, and clearly Alan Watts felt 
that Eastern thought had been inextricably tied to its genesis. And 
although it seems inevitable that many people will see the source of 
any social movement as its purest form, the phenomenon known as 
"the Beat way of life" was as much a reaction to the realities of 
mainstream American culture of that era as anything else. 
Politically, the 1950s were a dark period in American history. Cold- 
war paranoia found expression in McCarthyism and pitted the 
political process against free expression and the creative life. In the 
trials of Lenny Bruce and Lawrence Ferlinghetti, First Amendment 
rights came under attack. Today, freedom-of-speech questions are 


still judged according to their "redeeming social value," as they 
were in the trials of the fifties. The very act of being an artist or 
writer was in and of itself suspect, and the Beats reacted to the 
conservative climate with a well-balanced_synthesis of anarchism 
and idealism. But underneath this colorful social chaos, it is 
important to remember that originally the Beat movement was a 
way of life with connections to Zen, and from Zen to Hinduism, and 
from Hinduism back to the dawn of human culture. 


Recently I came across the following passage in Robert Lawlor's 
captivating book on Australian Aboriginal culture, Voices of the 
First Day: 


The materialistic industrial societies are 
increasingly caught in a round-the-clock whirl in 
which people are trapped, day after day, ina 
breathless grind of facing deadlines, racing the 
clock between several jobs, and trying to raise 
children and rush through the household chores at 
the same time. Agriculture and industrialism, in 
reality, have created a glut of material goods and a 
great poverty of time. Most people have a way of 
life devoid of everything except maintaining and 
servicing their material existence 12 to 14 hours 
every day. In contrast, the Aborigines [spent] 12 to 
14 hours a day in cultural pursuit. [p. 65]. 


As Lawlor points out, "their traditional way of life provided more 
time for the artistic and spiritual development of the entire society. 
Dance, ritual, music-in short, culture-was the primary activity." The 
Aborigines passed the message of their ancestors down through a 
rich tradition of ritual storytelling, and their myths reflect the 
qualities of one of the oldest and most interesting surviving human 
cultures. 


The Aboriginal view of creation is rooted in the idea of an original 
dreamtime, perhaps corresponding to a historical age, in which the 
conscious and unconscious aspects of mankind were unified "on the 
first day." Aboriginal ceremonies emphasize remembering that 
primal unity through ritual acts. According to their mythology, 
these ceremonies are visited by the Rainbow Serpent, described by 


Lawlor as "the original appearance of creative energy in the dream 
time." In the parallel Hindu myth of creation, the god Vishnu 
dreams the world into being while riding a great serpent in the 
cosmic ocean. In these Aboriginal and Hindu stories, one can see 
two similar tellings of the same essential myth. 


Robert Lawlor shares his interest in the mythology of the Proto- 
Australoid peoples common to Australia and ancient India with 
joseph Campbell, who was a great friend of Alan Watts and the 
posthumous editor of the works of Henrich Zimmer. Working from 
Zimmer's notes, Campbell wrote The Philosophies of India, which 
offered a tantalizing glimpse into the traditions from which 
Buddhism grew several thousand years ago. Sadhus of Dravidian 
ancestry still roam beyond the villages in India today, living much 
as the Aborigines did-without huts or clothes, in direct relationship 
and harmony with the physical and invisible worlds. As one 
becomes familiar with the religious psychologies in play, it is 
apparent that the unity of the human and the divine is embodied in 
the emergence of the individual from the dreaming of the godhead. 
This view is the essence of Hinduism and, ultimately, Buddhism. By 
contrast, the myths of creation adopted by the West place man on 
the earth beneath the celestial throne of an almighty Lord of the 
Heavens, to whom we owe not only our existence but also our 
complete obedience. Any aspiration or emulation of the deity is 
coupled with a fundamental separation from the deity. 


Alan Watts's life can be described in part as a journey away from 
the limited conception of the divine he came to know in his early 
training for the priesthood. It was a journey that took him from 
London to California, through encounters with D. T. Suzuki, joseph 
Campbell, and Gary Snyder, and from the Episcopal Church to the 
beatniks. 


As a young man attending King's School in Canterbury, prior to 
entering the church as an Episcopal priest, Alan Watts was troubled 
by the image of God as a "cosmic tyrant." It just didn't make sense 
to him. Why would an infinitely wise ruler treat his subjects so 
harshly for their sins? God, in His infinite wisdom, had created such 
sinners, after all. Watts began to frequent the bookstores of London 
in search of a more plausible and comprehensive view of the divine. 


He read extensively, and within a few years he had followed his 
curiosity about such matters to the Buddhist Society in London, a 
philosophical organization guided by Christmas Humphrys. There 
he came into contact with the way of liberation known as Zen 
Buddhism. He was later to meet D. T. Suzuki there, and instead of 
going to Oxford, Watts became deeply involved in the activities of 
the Buddhist Society, including the publication of its journal, The 
Middle Way. After contributing several articles, he became its editor 
and wrote a regular column. These articles were soon followed by a 
pamphlet entitled An Outline of Zen Buddhism and then by a short 
book, The Spirit of Zen. 


Alan Watts subsequently married Eleanor Everett, and they moved 
to America in 1938. In 1940, his book The Meaning of Happiness 
was published by Harper in New York. Much of the following 
decade was spent trying to fit in as a priest in the Episcopal Church. 
However, his early exposure to Zen Buddhism raised many difficult 
questions. In 1949, he wrote The Supreme Identity in a valiant 
attempt to reconcile Christianity with Buddhism and Vedanta, but 
in 1950 he left the church-and his wife-and soon married Dorothy 
DeWitt. Together they moved to a farmhouse in Millbrook, New 
York where later the same year he wrote The Wisdom of Insecurity. 


On New Year's Eve in 1950, Alan and Dorothy invited joseph 
Campbell and his wife, the accomplished dancer jean Erdman, to 
dinner along with the avant-garde composer john Cage and Luisa 
Coomaraswami. The evening's conversations ranged from 
discussions of possible early transpacific voyages from Asia to 
America, to the latest innovations in music and dance, and then on 
to Joseph's experiences on the West Coast. The evening made quite 
an impression on Alan, who had already decided to move to San 
Francisco. On February 6, 1951, he and Dorothy departed for 
California to begin a new life. 


Alan had accepted a teaching position offered by Fredric 
Spiegelberg at the Academy of Asian Studies in San Francisco. 
There he met poet Gary Snyder and Japanese artist Saburo 
Hasegawa. Both of them, in their own way, broadened his aesthetic 
appreciation of Zen and introduced him to various northern 
California artists and writers who were living what was known as 


the Beat way of life. When the academy moved to the Pacific 
Heights area of San Francisco, Spiegelberg asked Watts to give up 
his teaching position to serve as dean. The school was poorly 
organized, and the job proved to be quite stressful. On more than 
one occasion, Saburo invited Alan to stop by and enjoy a relaxing 
cup of tea in his office. The tea was Japanese green tea, offered in 
the style of the tea ceremony while participants were seated on the 
carpet. The tea ceremony eventually became quite popular in 
certain areas of San Francisco, due in part to the ongoing classes 
offered by Saburo's wife, Kiyoko. 


Traditional brushstroke calligraphy also gained a following in the 
Bay Area, due to the influence of both Saburo and Hodo Tobase. 
The well-known surrealistic painter Gordon Onslo-Ford became an 
avid student of Hasegawa's and later Tobase's, and both he and Alan 
fell in love with the paper, inks, and brushes used in calligraphy. 
Years later Gordon spoke of his first meeting with Saburo Hasegawa 
in an interview with Michael Wenger of the San Francisco Zen 
Center: 


I should perhaps say how my interest in calligraphy 
started. There was a well-known japanese painter 
called Sabra Hasegawa, who had been in New York, 
and had been a great friend of Franz Klein. 
Hasegawa was the editor of a calligraphy magazine 
in japan, and he was interested in the liaison 
between the East and the West. He was scheduled 
to talk at the Asian Academy. Alan Watts, who was 
then the dean, telephoned me and told me that he 
was going to stay for a week, and would I look after 
him, and I agreed. So I went to Hasegawa's lecture, 
which was absolutely brilliant. 

The next day I met Hasegawa and I took him for 
a walk in Muir Woods. We walked for two hours. 
Hasegawa was a man of tea. He was dressed in the 
most immaculate brown kimono. We walked for 
two hours, and he didn't say anything, and I didn't 
say anything. When we came back, I said to him, 
"Would you rather go and have some lunch at my 
house or would you rather go to my studio?" 


Hasegawa said "I would rather go to your studio." 
My studio was on board a ferry boat at that time. 
When we got on board, he looked around-he looked 
at the floor and he indicated that he would like to 
do some calligraphy. He started clearing the junk 
away and prepared a beautiful little place. Out of 
his sleeve he brought a wonderful stick of two- 
hundred-year-old ink and a beautiful roll of paper. 
And then he made a few characters. He made the 
character for infinity, and he made a one-two-three, 
which is a magnificent composition, as you know, 
because each line has to have a different weight 
and there is a different spacing between each line. 
That one-two-three was given to Alan Watts. Alan 
Watts said that D. T Suzuki was coming, and that 
he would point it out to him, an Hasegawa said 
that he would be so happy if D. T. Suzuki would 
walk by it without noticing it. 


The story about Hasegawa's calligraphy was one of Alan Watts's 
favorites and became familiar to listeners of a series of public radio 
talks Watts gave in Berkeley beginning in 1951. At the station he 
met program director Richard Moore, who years later at KQED in 
San Francisco would produce the Alan Watts television series 
Eastern Wisdom and Modem Life. 


During this period Watts's occasional evening lectures at the 
academy were well attended, and he soon became known for his 
comfortable speaking style and for the vitality of his philosophical 
inquires. His weekly radio show gained widespread popularity as he 
allowed his natural sense of humor to play into the context of his 
talks, and by the late fifties he was speaking quite playfully in such 
talks as "The Sense of Nonsense," "Unpreachable Religion," and "The 
Smell of Burnt Almonds." 


In his autobiography he wrote about the academy and his own role 
in the formative period of the counterculture movement: 


The American Academy of Asian Studies was one of 
the principal roots of what later came to be known, 
in the early sixties, as the San Francisco 


Renaissance, of which one must say, like Saint 
Augustine when asked about the nature of time, "I 
know what it is, but when you ask me, I don't." ... I 
know only that between, say, 1958 and 1970, a 
huge tide of spiritual energy in the form of poetry, 
music, philosophy, painting, religion, 
communications techniques in radio, television, 
and cinema, dancing, theater, and general life-style 
swept out of this city and its environs to affect 
America and the whole world, and that I have been 
intensely involved in it. It would be false modesty 
to say that I had little to do with it, and I am at 
once gratified and horrified to see how a younger 
generation has both followed and caricatured my 
philosophy. 


This philosophy included a blend of classical Eastern thought, 
insights and observations from his own mystical experiences, and a 
pragmatic view of man as an integral part of nature a full 
generation before ecological issues became popular. He felt, as he 
later told a group of college professors, that, in essence, mystical 
experience and ecological awareness were simply two ways of 
talking about the same experience, and he would refer to his topic 
by one or the other-depending upon his audience and inclination. 
At other times he presented an interpretation of religious 
experience revealing a Jungian influence, and at times he credited 
Buddha with being the world's first great psychotherapist for 
recognizing the psychological trap inherent in any view of a divine 
self. However, some of his most dramatic and controversial talks 
involved direct comparisons between psychotic and religious 
experiences. "If Christ were to show up today," he would ask, 
"would he be welcome in the church, or locked up in an insane 
asylum?" The local Beats enjoyed his irreverent expositions 
immensely, and Watts participated in evening coffeehouse 
discussions running into the early-morning hours, and in wild 
poetry readings where he recited interpretations of British nonsense 
poems. 


In 1953 Watts-now the father of two young children-moved from 
the San Francisco peninsula to the hills of Marin County just north 


of the Golden Gate Bridge. Here Gary Snyder's practical and 
scholarly interest in Zen was a continuing source of inspiration for 
Alan. When Robert Anton Wilson asked Alan about Gary Snyder 
during his interview for The Realist, Alan replied, "He's a true 
Dharma Bum, a man of complete integrity. He's just the way 
Kerouac describes him in The Dharma Bums-little, wiry, bearded, 
Oriental-looking, always dressed in clothes that are old and patchy 
but scrupulously clean. I don't practice Zen the way he does, but 
there are many ways of doing it. I think very highly of Gary." Alan 
was living with Dorothy and their growing clan of children in 
Homestead Valley, and Gary was living in a cottage on a nearby hill 
that was called alternatively Marin-an, or "the horse forest 
hermitage." Beat poets Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg were in 
town in those days, and they came to visit Gary, and naturally Alan 
became involved in their goings-on. One such affair was a famous 
party (recorded in The Dharma Bums) thrown by Locke McCorkle, 
who had a house down at the bottom of the hill below Gary's 
cottage. At the party, Kerouac, McCorkle, and Ginsberg all ended up 
running around naked, while Alan sat with old friends from Chicago 
dressed in their business suits. 


However, the most significant aspect of the scene for Alan was not 
the parties but Gary's little cottage on the hill. As he later recalled: 


Gary had figured out-really and truly-how to live 
the simple life. Everyone complained about 
beatniks being dirty, and having filthy pads, but 
here Gary had this sweet, clean, neat little place. 
And he explained to me how to get by on 
practically no money-where to go for second-day 
vegetables, how to get certain kinds of grains, how 
to use the Goodwill, and so on. He had a very nice 
place, and I felt that although I was trying to be 
involved in respectable public affairs because I had 
children to support, that the very existence of 
Gary's place gave the universe a little bit of 
stability. 


Shortly after the famous party, Gary went off to japan to begin "a 
real Zen study." For a time Alan continued his involvement in the 


San Francisco Beat scene and in 1959 wrote Beat Zen, Square Zen, 
and Zen, which eventually earned him the somewhat undeserved 
reputation as "father of the hip-pies." However, his 1956 classic, The 
Way of Zen, had become a bestseller, and while others appreciated 
the Beat trend for its purity as a literary movement, Alan became 
less interested in the Beat movement than in the assimilation of 
Oriental culture into Western society. He whimsically predicted that 
within a few years Asia would become covered with superhighways 
and neon-lit hamburger and hot dog stands, and that at the same 
time frustrated Tibetan lamas would be studying Buddhism at the 
University of Chicago. 


Alan's second marriage did not survive the wayward influences of 
the Beat movement, but he spent the rest of his life speaking and 
writing-humorously and with insight-about Taoist, Buddhist, and 
Hindu traditions. In his works he always expressed a particular 
affinity for what I think of as the earliest "beatniks": the Eastern 
wandering sages and masters who went "beyond the pale" and 
returned to the forest to regain the original state of being and to 
experience life as it was "on the first day" and as it is, underneath 
all our planning and thinking, even now. 


CHAPTER ONE 


Introduction to the Way 
Beyond the West 


4 
He A little over six years ago [1953], I began a series of radio 
programs that have been running ever since under the general title 


Way Beyond the West. I think I may as well give you a short 
explanation of that title. It obviously has a double meaning. The 
first is geographical. The West Coast of the United States faces Asia 
across the Pacific. The Asian world is therefore literally way beyond 
the West. The second reason for choosing this title is that the 
English word way is perhaps the nearest translation that we can 
make to the Chinese word tao. It is usually pronounced "dow." The 
Tao means many things. Primarily, it means the way of nature, the 
process of the universe. But it also means a way of life, a way of 
living in accordance with that process. For example, in Japan there 
are many crafts and arts, and even sports, that have been influenced 
by Eastern philosophy and are called "ways." You all know the word 
judo. Ju means "gentle," do is the Japanese way of pronouncing tao. 
Therefore, judo is the gentle way. Similarly, the japanese also speak 
of fencing as kendo, the way of the sword. They speak of the tea 
ceremony sometimes as chado, the way of tea. In japanese culture 
there are all sorts of these dos, and they not only indicate the 
technique or mastery of the technique of performing the given art 
but also imply that the art involves a way of life. Indeed, in almost 
the ancient Western medieval sense, every japanese art is a mystery. 
One used to speak, you see, of the mystery of being a goldsmith, the 
mystery of being a stonemason, the mystery of being a carpenter. 
Today that probably strikes us as extraordinarily peculiar 


terminology: But the meaning of it was that every mans vocation in 
life-what the Indians call svadharma, which means approximately 
ones own function, one's own calling-is also a way of initiation into 
the mystery of life. It has a sort of religious function. So then, the 
"way" in this title, Way Beyond the West, is the way of deeper 
understanding, or something like that. But why do I say that this 
way of deeper understanding is beyond the West? The answer, I 
think, is that we have lost the idea that our occupations are 
vocations. Not everybody has. But to a very large degree, our idea 
of an occupation is that it is a way of making money. We make a 
very, very destructive division between work and play. We spend 
eight hours, or whatever it may be, at work in order to earn the 
money to enjoy ourselves in the other eight hours. And that is a 
perfectly ridiculous way of living. It is much better to be very poor 
indeed than to do something so stupid as boring ourselves and 
wasting ourselves for eight hours in order to be able to enjoy 
ourselves the other eight hours. The result of this fantastic division 
between work and play is that work becomes drudgery, and play 
becomes empty. When we say that our occupation should also be 
our vocation, we are speaking of a conception of life within which 
work and play should be identical. 


It is interesting that Hindus, when they speak of the creation of the 
universe, do not call it the work of God, they call it the play of God, 
the Vishnu-lila, lila meaning "play." And they look upon the whole 
manifestation of all the universes as a play, as a sport, as a kind of 
dance-lila perhaps being somewhat related to our word lilt. We in 
the West have tended to lose the idea of our work, our profession, 
as being a way, a tao. Furthermore, our religions tend very much to 
lose sight of themselves as being a tao, or way. To a very large 
extent, Christianity, in what we might call its standard brand forms, 
does not quite fulfill the function that Buddhism and Vedanta, 
which is the central doctrine of Hinduism and Taoism, fulfill in 
Asian society. 


Now, mind you, these ways I am talking about in Asia are not 
followed by an enormous number of people, except in a kind of 
nominal, superficial way. And I am not trying to make any vast 
comparisons between Asian society and Western society or to say 
that the total Asian way of life is superior to ours. I do not think it 


is, but I do not think it is necessarily inferior, either; it is just 
different. But the fact remains that there is an aspect of Asian 
religion and philosophy that is very subdued in Western religion 
and philosophy, so that you might say that the Way, in the sense of 
the Chinese Tao, does not quite exist in the West, in any 
recognizable form. It does exist, yes. It exists unofficially, it exists 
occasionally, but it is never clearly recognized. So, therefore, I want 
to devote some time now to going quite thoroughly into what these 
Eastern Ways are. 


Now, when we are first introduced to such subjects as Buddhism or 
Vedanta or Taoism or Confucianism, we usually encounter them as 
some form of religion. We may have read books on comparative 
religion in which these phenomena are classified with Judaism, 
Christianity, Islam, and so on. But this is really very misleading. It is 
as misleading as if you were to get a textbook on botany, on 
flowers, and suddenly came across a few chapters on birds. You 
would think this was a rather odd classification. Well, if you know 
anything much about these forms of Asian spirituality, you get the 
same kind of a funny shock when you see them classified along 
with such things as Christianity or Judaism. This is not to say that 
they are superior to Christianity and Judaism; they are simply 
different. They have different functions. And when we classify them 
all as various forms of religion, then a discussion arises as to which 
is the best one for everybody or the best for you or me. But I think 
the difference is much more subtle than that. And I can best 
approach this difference by saying that in the West we have 
primarily three forms of wisdom-religious, philosophical and 
scientific-but a way in the Asian sense is none of these. 


First of all, the word religion comes from the Latin root religare, 
which means "a rule of life." Religare means "to bind, to bind 
oneself to something." We say of a person who has become a monk 
or a nun that he or she has gone into religion, which means that 
they have accepted a rule of life involving certain vows of poverty, 
chastity, and obedience, and other things as well. And the rule of 
life that constitutes a religion seems to me to consist of a creed, first 
of all, which is a system of revealed ideas about man and the 
universe and God, which one believes in and puts one's faith in. 


The great Asian ways that I am speaking of do not, strictly 
speaking, have any creeds. They do not involve belief. That is to 
say, they do not involve committing oneself to certain positive 
opinions about life. Almost to the contrary, they abandon ideas and 
opinions because what they are concerned with is not ideas, not 
theories, but experience; experience in the sense almost of 
sensuousness, for instance, as they say, you drink water and know 
for yourself that it is cold. So, it is knowledge rather than faith that 
they are concerned with. Faith, as I am using it here, refers to a 
system of belief rather than a sense of trust. Very often it seems to 
me that faith and belief could be opposed. Belief comes from the 
Anglo-Saxon root lief, which means "to wish." Belief is the fervent 
hope that certain things are true. Whereas I rather feel that faith is 
an openness of attitude, a readiness to accept the truth, whatever it 
may turn out to be. It is a commitment of oneself to life, to the 
universe, to ones own nature as it is, in the realization that we 
really have no alternative. When you get into the water to swim, 
you have to trust yourself to the water. If you tighten your muscles 
and cling to the water, you will sink. 


It seems to me that a religion, in addition to having a creed, also 
has a code. That is to say, it has a system of ethical and moral 
principles that one abides by because they are revealed as 
expressing, in the field of human conduct, the nature and will of the 
divine. And these Eastern ways do not have a code in that sense. 
One often speaks of the moral code of Buddhism, but this is a little 
inexact. What is involved here is not any attempt to make man 
accord with the nature of God or the will of God, but rather to 
suggest certain principles of action that are conducive to the 
discovery of the experience lying at the heart and the root of 
Buddhism. In addition to a creed and an ethical code, the idea of 
religion seems to me also to include a cult, a system of symbols and 
rites and ceremonials that in a certain way symbolically integrate 
the worshiper with the Godhead. And although there are rites and 
forms in Buddhism and Hinduism, not so much of worship but of 
thanksgiving, they are not regarded as very essential. They are not 
essential in the same way, for example, that Catholicism regards the 
rite of the mass as essential. So, all in all, it would be difficult to say 
that Buddhism and Vedanta and Taoism are religions, if Christianity 
or Judaism defines what we mean by religion. I do not want to 


dogmatize about the meaning of this word, but this is the way I use 
it, to mean a rule of life that has as its function the integration of a 
community, the binding together of a community. When one 
becomes a Jew, when one becomes a Christian, what one essentially 
does is join a society. We join a community. And in a way, we could 
say the function of a religion is what is called in Sanskrit loca san 
hai, which means the upholding of the world, the upholding of the 
order of the community. Every community must have rules. We 
must have rules of language in order to be able to communicate 
with one another. We must agree that we are going to use the noise 
cloud when referring to those things in the sky, instead of yun, the 
noise the Chinese use for them. We say "cloud"; they say "yun." 
Which is the right noise? It does not matter so long as the 
community in question agrees. This is what we call a convention. 
We agree by convention to drive on the right side of the road. So, 
every community needs a system of conventions, and it seems to me 
that what religion originally provided was, as it were, a divinely 
sanctioned system of conventions under which the community lives. 


Now, the function of Buddhism is not so much the creation of a 
community. The function of Confucianism is to create a community, 
to lay down rules and conventions for a community. Parts of 
Hinduism, what one calls the caste system or the Laws of Manu, are 
concerned with laying down the rules for a community. But 
Vedanta and Buddhism and Taoism have almost the opposite 
function, which is not to enforce the conventional rules but to 
liberate the mind from enchantment by social convention. This is 
not a revolution against social convention, it is a perception that the 
rules of society are only conventions and that, in other words, the 
rules of a society, of language, of thought, of conduct, are not 
identical with the laws of God-or if you prefer, the laws of nature, 
the processes of nature. 


We know perfectly well, for example, that it is very convenient to 
agree upon lines of latitude and longitude so that we can establish 
positions on the face of the globe. But we jolly well know that when 
we cross the equator we are not going to trip over a wire; it is an 
imaginary line, it is not really there. 


Well, in the same way, all sorts of things that we believe to be real- 


time, past and future, for instance--exist only conventionally. A 
person who lives for the future, who (like most of us) makes his 
happiness dependent upon what is coming in the future, is living 
within an illusion. He or she has confused a convention with a 
reality. As even our own proverb says "Tomorrow never comes." 


One of the functions of a way of the Tao is to deliver human beings 
from what Whitehead called "the fallacy of misplaced concreteness"; 
from confusing convention with reality; from confusing the laws of 
society with the actualities of the concrete, real world. It is in this 
sense, then, that the Tao is a way of liberation from social 
convention. 


Now, just as these ways are not religion, so are they not philosophy, 
in the Western sense of the word. Philosophy, as we know it 
academically in the West, consists of a primarily verbal activity: 
constructing ideas and speculating about man and life, about the 
nature of knowledge and the nature of being, and about the 
problems of ethics and aesthetics. And, of course, more recently 
modern analytical philosophy has concerned itself with the logical 
structure of ideas. It is fundamentally, we might say, 
antimetaphysical because it feels that a great many metaphysical 
ideas are simply the result of linguistic and logical confusions. But 
by and large, you see, philosophy is concerned with ideas and their 
expression in words-that is to say, with the building up of a purely 
intellectual structure. That is philosophy as we know it in the West: 
the academic kind of philosophy. 


Here again, Eastern ways are not philosophy. Just as they are not 
concerned with beliefs, they are also not concerned with intellectual 
theories, except in a purely secondary way. The heart of Buddhism 
and Vedanta is a transformation of man's consciousness, something 
that we in the West might call "mystical experience." 


I do not like the word mystical, because it often has very, very 
weird connotations. One might speak more strictly of metaphysical 
experience; but even here, I do not really like that phrase, either. I 
prefer something much more solid. The experience the Buddhists 
are concerned with, for instance, is very concrete. It is not anything 
abstract. Abstractions belong to the realm of theory. Instead, the 
transformation of consciousness that the Buddhists talk about is 


almost, you might say, a new way of using one's senses. And thus it 
is not at all wishy-washy; it is not at all misty-if the word mysticism 
has any associations with mist. 


And just as the Tao is not religion or philosophy, it is also not quite 
science-although in some respects it is very close to science. 


Scientists are very often men of real faith. An honest scientist is a 
person who wants to know what this world really is. They do not 
want to be bamboozled by theories and hypotheses; they want to 
face the facts. 


But the great interest of science, it seems to me, is not actually the 
facts or the concrete world but the representation of the concrete 
world in terms of certain codes-the codes of numbers, of algebraic 
symbols, or of formulae of various kinds-by which the scientist 
represents the world. These codes are rather like a photograph of a 
persons face reproduced in a newspaper. Look closely at a 
newspaper reproduction of a persons face and you will see that it is 
composed of a lot of little dots. Well, you jolly well know that a 
person's face is not really made out of a lot of little dots, even if you 
can arrange little dots on paper in such a way that they will look 
like a face. In other words, these dots merely re-present the face in 
terms of dots. Similarly, science re-presents human experiences, 
gained through our senses and through scientific instruments, in 
terms of linear symbols, in order to predict the future course of 
events. In other words, the practical function of science is 
prediction, and by such means the human control of the 
environment. 


It is at this point that a way of liberation departs from what we 
mean by science because the focus of its interest is not so much on 
the future, on what will happen, but on the present. Because, after 
all, if we open our eyes and do not let our mind interfere too much 
with what we are actually perceiving, it is surely clear that we live 
only in the present. It is always now. So, this may seem tautological 
and redundant. It may seem to be something that everybody knows. 
But it really is not. Most of us judge the duration of the present by 
the little lines on our watches that mark off the seconds. They are 
just as thin as they can be. Therefore, the present is no time at all. 
And so, you see, we in the West all get the feeling that we have no 


time. Everybody says, "I am so busy. I have no time for this or that 
or the other thing." This feeling arises because we are beguiled by 
time. We are beguiled by watches. We really believe that the 
present lasts only a split second. All these Eastern ways are 
concerned with waking up, with coming to be dehypnotized- in the 
sense that every culture hypnotizes us. Waking up is what 
Buddhism means by bodhi, or enlightenment. Buddha is a title; it 
means "the man who woke up" or "the awakened one." But the 
moment a child comes into the world, people start talking or 
suggesting to it, and they very soon persuade it that the world is in 
fact the way they and their particular culture view it. Well, as the 
song says, it ain't necessarily so. The concept of time is one of the 
great ways in which we are fooled. We believe that the past and the 
future are, as it were, more solid and of longer duration than the 
present. In other words, we live in a sort of hourglass with a big 
bulb at one end (the past) and a big bulb at the other end (the 
future); we are at the little neck in between, and we have no time. 
Whereas when our vision becomes changed, we see that the truth of 
the matter is that we have, in fact, an enormous present in which 
we live and that the purely abstract borders of this present are the 
past and the future. 


A coin has two faces, but they are merely surfaces; they are 
Euclidean and abstract; they have no thickness. The reality of the 
coin is the metal between the two surfaces. So, in somewhat the 
same way, the reality of time is the present lying between the past 
and the future, and the past and future are merely abstractions. 


Now, although Eastern ways share something of the scientist's spirit 
of openness and nondogmatism, they are not sciences. They are not 
primarily concerned with predicting the future. That is not to say 
that they reject the future. They just do not care about it. One 
might put it this way: there is no point in caring about the future 
and making plans unless you are capable of living completely in the 
present, because when your plans mature and the future comes, if 
you cannot live in the present, there is no use you can make of the 
plans that have matured. You cannot enjoy what has happened if 
you cannot live in the present. You will always be looking over the 
shoulder of the event that has become present for something else 
still to come. 


I have tried to show, by contrasting it with the three great forms of 
Western wisdom, what the Way beyond the West is all about. It 
exists for a minority in Asia, and I feel that in the present climate of 
Western science and philosophy, our great religious upheaval, and 
our discontent with our own traditions, it is enormously interesting 
and of great value to us. I am not-I must be very emphatic about 
this-a missionary for Zen Buddhism or Taoism trying to convert 
Western people to these things. On the contrary, I am trying to 
integrate their ideas with our own. American civilization is a 
syncretism of cultures of peoples, and this integration of Eastern 
and Western ideas is simply going to happen. And it is that 
integration that is the Way beyond the West. 


CHAPTER TWO 


The Beat Way of Life 


4 | 
—— Iam going to begin by quoting from a letter written by one 
friend of mine to another: 


Never before this trip to the Bay Area have I seen 
so many people striving to get in tune with nature, 
to abandon themselves to the dictates of their 
muscles, to transcend their egos, to identify with 
the cosmic pond scum, to produce controlled 
accident-in which the accent invariably is an 
accident because these people know nothing of 
control-to build houses out of natural materials, 
and then to wash the boards with concrete so as to 
enhance the naturalness, etc. It is astonishing that 
anyone gets any work done at all. 


I wonder why it is that the peculiar cluster of cultural phenomena 
that we call "the Beat way of life" arouses such antagonism. It is 
very difficult not to be involved in this kind of antagonism. People 
say to me, "You and you Taoist Zen types, what a mess you're 
making among the young people today, who don't have the hang of 
things yet. Supplying them with ideas from alien cultures in ways 
that are really completely subversive of the values that all right- 
thinking people support." 


I remember not so long ago walking around Greenwich Village on 
one of the main streets, I forget which it was, where there were a 
lot of cafes and coffee shops and secondhand bookstores. It was 


about eight o'clock on a summer evening, and the street was full of 
people standing around talking. They weren't making any trouble, 
they were just standing there talking, but they were the strangest- 
looking bunch of people you ever saw, with beards and ponytails 
and weird getups. They just looked so terribly un-American. And 
there was a cop on duty, and I was watching him. You could see he 
was beginning to get the fidgets. Nobody was throwing rocks; 
nobody was making impolite remarks about him. They were just 
talking. But suddenly he couldn't contain himself any longer, and he 
said, "Hey, break it up there, move along, move along, get out of 
here." And the crowd slowly started to shift and gather somewhere 
else. 


I remember, too, an article that was written in the Herald Examiner, 
I think. I cannot remember the author's name; he was a man who 
died in a plane crash with Mike Todd. I remember his saying that 
the real Americans were the fine fellows who were working on the 
missiles at Cape Canaveral and that all the poets, the painters, the 
sensation-seekers, and jazz fiends of San Francisco were just a 
bunch of poor sick little spoiled brats. And he was able to say this 
with a real convincing kind of tough-guy righteousness. Wherever 
there's a phenomenon like the Beats, the people who like to be 
righteously indignant about something have a perfectly wonderful 
opportunity to indulge themselves. Its like a good outbreak of sin. 
That's always so reassuring to the preacher because then he can get 
up in his pulpit and really lay down the law. 


Now, of course, as everybody knows, there are two distinct kinds of 
people involved in this Beat phenomenon. I say "distinct" simply for 
purposes of discussion, because in nature you never find two 
distinct kinds of anything. They wash into one another like the 
bands in a rainbow. But broadly speaking, part of what is called the 
Beat movement is simply this: a lot of young people have in recent 
years come to the conclusion that the thing to do in life is pursue 
what used to be called their own vocation or calling, come what 
may, even if it is not rewarding economically or in terms of status. 


I was talking just recently to a woman who is approaching middle 
age, I'd guess, who had spent most of her life doing something she 
did not want to do. She worked in some kind of a profession, and 


she hated it. She was pretty good at what she did, she had made a 
fair living, but she just hated doing it. It was not real, was not her. 
And so I said to her, "Well, then, what do you really want to do?" 
And she answered, "You know, I really want to fish." 


Now, if you tell somebody who's deeply involved in the economic 
rat race that what you really want to do is fish, they're usually 
going to say, "Good heavens, everybody would like to go off for a 
weekend and fish. That's play. But if you're going to fish for a 
living, you know, that's not playing anymore, thats a tough life." 
But what I said to her was, "Well, why don't you just do it?" And she 
said, "You know, maybe I could. Maybe I could invest in one of 
those boats that take tourists out fishing off Santa Barbara. But 
what would my friends in my profession say?" So I said, "Well, go 
ahead and do it. Because you will not lose any real friends by 
changing your status in that way. What on earth is the point of 
knocking yourself out eight hours a day doing something you do 
not like, that you have no real gift for, just to spend the rest of your 
time in a hectic pursuit of fun?" Nobody really does anything well 
unless they can put their whole heart into it. Therefore, a job that 
you are doing just to keep body and soul together, that you do not 
respect, is always something you will not do as well as you might. 
And so a lot of young men have come to the realization that instead 
of making money to live some other time-that is, after hours, or 
when they retire and are older-they have decided that they should 
do what they really want to do now, come what may, even if it 
means living in a shack. And since there are always women who 
feel the same way, or else will go along with a man who really 
knows where he is going, these men also have wives and families. 
They don't have to become celibate hermits. And so such people are 
painting because they know that is what they really want to do, or 
some of them are carpenters or unofficial architects or writers or 
poets. A lot of these people will work as carpenters or loggers or 
seamen, or something of that kind, until they earn enough money to 
knock off for a few months and do what they really want to do. 


This is one aspect of what has come to be called the Beat 
movement. It is what I would call the productive aspect. These 
people, as far as I can see, do not congregate in the notorious 
centers of the movement, like the North Beach in San Francisco or 


Greenwich Village, or Venice, California. Very often they live in a 
sort of exurbia, living a country kind of life. 


On the other hand, there are people who are what I would call 
imitators of this attitude. And these are, of course, the people about 
whom it is so very easy to get angry. 


We can say of them that they are just playing a role; they are 
merely imitators of what is actually a new way of life and a new 
force artistically. They are just pretenders. They have the beards, 
the blue jeans, the jazz records, the marijuana. But they don't do 
anything. They just play at being Beats. They lie around all the time 
and are completely unproductive. They are weak people, parasites, 
exploiting a new cult. 


Oh, yes, it is awfully easy to say that. They expose themselves to 
this kind of criticism, and it is real fun to throw bricks at them. But 
whenever we get angry about a person or a group of people, it is 
always instructive to look into our own unconscious situation and 
find out why we hate them so much or why we feel threatened 
enough by their way of life to get mad at them. Well, of course, the 
extreme beatnik way of life is the direct opposite of everything that 
every solid American citizen is supposed to be. It is an unproductive 
life. It is a lazy life, without ambition, and a rejection of the whole 
idea of being a good consumer. 


Now, I think Freud and jung had a very great insight when they 
pointed out that the constellation of motives in the unconscious 
mind is always likely to be the opposite of those that exist in the 
conscious mind, so that together they form a kind of compensatory 
relationship between what we are consciously and what we are 
unconsciously. Now, I think this can be carried too far. It can 
impose upon human beings a too logical, too mechanical, dualistic 
theory of the emotions. But, nevertheless, there is truth in it. 
Therefore, when a good American male gets angry because he 
thinks a fellow is a homosexual, it is perfectly clear that he is angry 
because he feels threatened by unconscious doubts about his own 
heterosexuality. In the same way, when solid citizens get angry 
when confronted by people simply doing what they want to do-or 
maybe just putting on an act, just playing a role because it is de 
rigeur-doesn't it mean that in our heart of hearts we feel. that these 


people constitute a threat? Doesn't it mean we feel the Beats are 
suggesting that the way of life we solid citizens are pursuing is not 
worth it, that there is something wrong with it? 


We criticize people like this for being unproductive because we 
believe in productivity As Wendell Willkie used to say in his 
election speeches back in 1940, "Only the productive can be strong, 
and only the strong can be free." But if we think about that 
statement, we begin to realize that it isn't true. It is perhaps true 
that only the productive can be strong, but when we go on to say 
that only the strong can be free, we are really saying that freedom 
can be maintained only by force, by strength. It is like a rather 
similar saying, that the price of freedom is eternal vigilance. And 
that statement, when we analyze what it is actually saying, means 
that only a police state can guarantee democracy because that is 
what eternal vigilance is: eternal vigilantes. In other words, 
according to this philosophy, freedom must be based on a kind of 
mutual mistrust, with everybody watching everybody else to see 
that no one oversteps the limits. In fact, that leads not to freedom 
but to everybody being his brothers policeman; everybody snooping 
after somebody else to be sure no one does anything wrong, like 
those police forces that take it upon themselves to prevent crime 
rather than simply to apprehend the criminal after the crime has 
occurred. Well, it is all very laudable theoretically What it means in 
reality, though, is everybody snooping and making a nuisance of 
themselves and suspecting everybody else. 


You cannot take a walk in Beverly Hills without being stopped by 
the police-because people down there do not walk, they drive. 
Therefore, if you are walking, you must be some kind of a 
suspicious character. It is not true, in other words, that freedom 
depends on that kind of strength. Freedom depends on the ability of 
people to trust one another. If a society is incapable of that kind of 
trust, it is also incapable of freedom. 


But if one really believes that only productivity can create strength- 
that a human being, in other words, has to justify himself or. herself 
by producing something-then maybe the psychoanalysts are right, 
and everything does go back to toilet training and mothers saying, 
"Have you produced today, have you done your duty?" I don't 


know. It seems to me in a way more likely that this emphasis on 
productivity goes back to the great age of scarcity, when if people 
did not work, they didn't have anything to eat. We do not have that 
situation today. In fact, we are working hard against it. Although 
our psychology hasn't kept pace with the idea, we are deliberately 
creating an economy in which machines do our work for us, and an 
abundance of food is produced. So we have got to learn how to loaf. 


All right. The Beats are simply loafing. But many solid citizens are 
productive only in a limited sense. They are involved in the system 
of production only so they can go back home after work and sit 
passively and watch television. And I do not know whether it is 
better to watch the average television show or to lie on your back 
in some pad, smoking marijuana and listening to jazz. What is the 
difference? It is only that one choice is an overt and obvious 
divergence from the social norm, and the other is not. But, you see, 
here is the problem. Unless human beings can accustom themselves 
to the idea of being in a state of leisure, they are not going to be 
able to adapt themselves to the economy that they themselves are 
creating. If one has to go on producing for the sake of producing, 
that is like an airplane in flight. It can never hover. It must go on 
doing what it is doing, or collapse. In a culture where everybody 
has to keep producing, even though plenty is produced already, all 
kinds of propaganda have to be generated to get people to buy up 
the surplus production. But in order to find the means to buy it, 
they have got to create surplus production. Well, this is a vicious 
circle of major dimensions. And although we may not like, 
aesthetically or morally, the role that the more irresponsible 
beatniks are playing, it is a role that in a way emerges almost of 
necessity in our particular kind of civilization. In other words, 
people who are going to be nonproductive, who are going to be 
fundamentally lazy, are going to idealize a life of a certain kind of 
poverty. And they are going to explore realms of experience that 
solid citizens have not explored and are indeed afraid to explore-the 
inner world, the world of imagination and fantasy and the 
unconscious. We are afraid to explore the unconscious, even though 
it is what I might call the real "New Frontier." We have already 
explored the geographical frontiers of this earth, and it is going to 
take us a terribly long time to get out into the outer reaches of the 
solar system, but the frontier of the inner world is there waiting for 


us. But it is frightening; it is unknown. 


Now, admittedly, a great many people who are involved in this 
"sensation-seeking way of life" may indeed be weak. They may 
indeed be nothing more than caricatures of something else that is 
real and has a purpose. Nevertheless, when has there ever been an 
artistic movement, a spiritual movement, a political movement, or a 
literary movement that did not have hangers-on, caricatures of the 
thing, who made themselves and the movement vulnerable to all 
kinds of ridicule? There have always been hangers-on. There are 
always going to be people who will imitate real things in a 
superficial manner. And it is so easy to focus on the superficial 
imitators, and judge the whole movement by them. This is always 
done by anybody who wants to laugh at something. If you want to 
attack Christianity or if you want to attack Buddhism, you always 
pick on its worst manifestations and attack them. And so it is with 
the situation today. But as the proverb says, Where there is smoke, 
there is fire. Superficial imitators are like smoke. Where you see 
smoke, look out for the fire. Where you find a weak caricature, you 
should always look beneath it to see what is being imitated. If there 
is all this hullabaloo today about, as my friend said in his letter, 
getting in tune with nature, transcending the ego, identifying with 
the cosmic pond scum, producing controlled accidents, and so on, it 
merely means that underneath this caricature there is enough going 
on that hangers-on think they can gain some status for themselves 
by copying it. To the extent that the thing being copied is real, the 
copy cannot do the real thing any serious harm. As I was saying 
earlier, if you set out to do what you really want to do, you may 
lose a lot of friends but you will not lose a single friend who is 
worth having. In the same way, a movement like the Beat way of 
life, for instance, or one interested in Oriental philosophy may be 
made vulnerable to ridicule because of its hangers-on, but they will 
not do it any real harm, and they will not lose it any friends worth 
having. 


CHAPTER THREE 


Consciousness and Concentration 
Beyond the West 


I want to start with two quotations. The first is from Freud's 
Civilization and Its Discontents. 


Originally, the 'ego includes everything; later it 
detaches itself from the external world. The ego 
feeling we are aware of now is thus only a 
shrunken vestige of a far more extensive feeling, a 
feeling which embraced the universe and expressed 
an inseparable connection of the ego with the 
external world. 


So much for Freud. The second is by Gardner Murphy, professor of 
psychology at Columbia University, from his book Personality. 


If, moreover; we are serious about understanding 
all we can of personality, its integration and 
disintegration, we must understand the meaning of 
depersonalization, those experiences in which 
individual self-awareness is abrogated and the 
individual melts into an awareness which is no 
longer anchored upon ‘self hood. Such experiences 
are described by Hinduism in terms of the ultimate 
unification of the individual with the Atman, the 
super individual cosmic entity which transcends 
both selfhood and materiality. Some men desire 
such experiences, others dread them. Our problem 


here is not their desirability, but the light they 
throw on the relativity of our present-day 
psychology of personality. Personality, ordered 
largely with reference to self-awareness, has until 
recently appeared to be the fundamental reality, 
but it must be seen against the background of a 
wide variety of cross-cultural conditions, and of 
developmental disassociational and degenerative 
states in our own culture. Some other mode of 
personality configuration in which self-awareness is 
less emphasized, or even lacking, may prove to be 
the general or the fundamental. 


I cite these two quotations just to suggest that it is not only so- 
called mystics and devotees of Oriental religions who feel that there 
is something a little wrong or unnatural about our ordinary way of 
feeling about ourselves and the surrounding world. The 
psychologist as well as the mystic may easily hit upon the idea that 
human beings are bedeviled by a fundamental twist of perception, a 
distortion of their whole feeling of life, which lies at the root of a 
large constellation of moral, psychological, and spiritual problems. 


As you know, the detection and straightening out of this twist is the 
great preoccupation of Indian and Chinese philosophy. As Gardner 
Murphy says, they look toward a state of consciousness in which 
individual self-awareness is abrogated and the individual melts into 
an awareness that is no longer anchored upon selfhood. 


This is not, however, to be understood as a kind of trance in which 
the individual is incapable of relating him- or herself to the 
practical affairs of everyday life. It is rather the perception of the 
same everyday world from a new standpoint, a standpoint from 
which the same facts and events have an entirely different sense. 


To a considerable extent (though with some exceptions), the 
philosophers of India and China have looked upon this 
transformation of awareness as the fruit of an arduous course of 
spiritual and psychological discipline, a discipline so rigorous and 
prolonged that it puts such a transformation of awareness beyond 
the attainment of all but a few spiritual heroes extraordinarily 
gifted with courage and willpower. 


In East and West alike, however, men are always looking for 
shortcuts or simplifications of these difficult tasks. Some of these 
shortcuts are perhaps no better than the phony correspondence 
courses that lure subscribers with promises of being able to amaze 
your friends after only six weeks' study of some marvelous, easy 
way of becoming a genius at the piano. Maybe the Oriental 
equivalent to this is the prayer wheel. 


However, laziness is the mother of invention, as well as of self- 
deception. For time and time again we find that we have made a 
certain problem incredibly difficult for ourselves by failing to 
understand it clearly or by failing to find the right technique for 
handling it. 


Think of the difficulty of doing complex multiplication or long 
division with Roman numerals or of moving heavy loads without 
wheels or of computing the movement of the planets before 
Copernicus's simplified view of the solar system. 


As a naturally lazy person, I have always been intrigued with the 
possibility of simplifying this whole basic problem of changing 
man's awareness. So often in these talks I have minimized the role 
of effort and willpower and struggle in this task, thus earning the 
disdain of puritans and muscular religionists who do not realize that 
in many respects, laziness is as creative as brawn and vigor. 


I suppose the trouble with these people is that they have basically 
an economic view of the spiritual life. For them, that life is subject 
to the laws of supply and demand. Whatever becomes common or 
usual must also become cheap. In this view, sages would turn into 
fools if they became as plentiful as fools. 


I do not think that this economic analogy is at all proper. I would 
rather compare the kind of awareness I am thinking about to 
something like eyesight. Just about everyone has it, and yet to 
everyone it is incredibly precious. There may be a great deal of 
difference in value in what we do with our eyes, between looking at 
TV commercials and looking at great works of art, but in both cases 
we are aware of the marvel and the work of sight itself. 


I would like, therefore, to talk about what is probably a very foolish 


notion of mine. I want to talk about it in a very tentative and 
experimental way, just as if I were thinking out loud. 


It may be a symptom of my natural laziness and nothing more than 
that, yet it is one of my strongest intuitions-and has been for years- 
that it is basically a very simple matter for people to shift from that 
I will call the egocentric to the universal mode of awareness. I am 
quite sure that there are very difficult ways of doing it as well. In 
time past, people came upon these ways and embodied them in 
traditions that have been handed down to others. We easily assume 
that the way we learned to do something is the only way to learn it; 
therefore, the most tortuous mountain path is the only path if you 
learned no other. 


For example, if you have watched Hindu dancing, you would have 
noticed the curious and fascinating gesture of moving the head from 
side to side so that it seems to float above the shoulders, detached 
from the neck. Now, you can spend months and almost sweat blood 
learning this trick unless someone points out that it comes quite 
naturally if you will simply hold up your arms and then try to touch 
your biceps with your ears. It is a little awkward at first, but very 
soon you get the hang of it, even though it's been described by 
experts as a strange dislocation of the neck that no Westerner can 
ever learn. It is the old story of the mysterious East, which is not 
really so mysterious after all. The apparent mystery is that Eastern 
teachers of any art, whether dancing or yoga, always tend to make 
you find out things for yourself, and you therefore often persist for 
ages on a completely wrong track. 


The central difficulty of almost all forms of spiritual discipline is 
that they require prolonged and intense concentration, usually upon 
objects that are as confined and uninteresting as anything can be. 
Think of nothing except the word om or mu, day and night, or, as in 
Eastern orthodoxy, the name of jesus. Somehow, in a fashion that is 
never clearly explained, intense concentration over a period of time 
brings about a fundamental alteration in the very structure of 
consciousness. Some say that it brings the surface consciousness to a 
state of such calm that we can, as it were, see down to the deepest 
levels of the mind, to a mode of consciousness more basic and 
natural than that to which we are accustomed. Others say that it is 


a form of self-hypnotism, giving us the power to control our own 
mind in such a way that we can think or feel anything we want. 
Others again say that concentration brings about a state of identity 
between subject and object, knower and known, in which the sense 
of the separate ego, the isolated self-conscious subject, disappears. 


When I first began to study these things, I was a student in England, 
and naturally most of my time was given over to reading. I was 
puzzled as to how concentration such as I've just described could be 
carried on in the midst of intellectual study. I laid my difficulty 
before a japanese Zen master and was amazed to receive the 
following reply: "It is difficult to conceive the exact idea of 
exercising Buddhist concentration or meditation in the West. No 
one can possibly concentrate intentionally upon a given object. That 
is a fact of truth; try it. Occasionally, one should concentrate on 
something without ones own intention. That concentration is deep 
and strong and lasts a long time. Sometimes it reaches to samadhi. 
If we speak philosophically, we might say that we are concentrating 
constantly, every day. We concentrate on every smallest thought 
that comes into and passes through our brain. Though it comes and 
passes so quickly, we never fail to concentrate ourselves in each of 
those thoughts. In fact, we focus our attention, concentrate, on the 
strongest thought, that which arouses most interest, that which 
presents itself at any moment. If it were not the strongest thought, 
we-of our own attention, using our everyday conscious mind-could 
not possibly concentrate upon it. Our concentration is always 
absorbed into the strongest thought. Speaking logically, we say, 'It 
is of no use to try to concentrate on a given thing,' yet we should 
concentrate every moment while we are living. In the first stage of 
meditation, we understand that our egoistic intention to 
concentrate on something is impossible. Therefore, we train 
ourselves to concentrate according to the power that is beyond our 
everyday consciousness, and yet is within us. In this manner we 
yield entirely to our true or real nature, which connects with all 
nature. To practice this, we must give up our own intention; shut 
off, as it were, our own brain action; cease to drive our mind in a 
egoistic sense. Just let go, as you go with a stream, not rowing your 
boat with your own strength or purpose. Go with the stream of 
nature. Do not try to go against the stream. This is practice for a 
beginner, but using it, you will find entrance into the way." 


For me, this answer was an eye-opener. Three things stood out in it. 
The first, which I had already realized, was that to the degree the 
act of concentration upon anything is intentional, it is self- 
frustrating. It is concentrating on concentrating. The second eye- 
opener was the notion, odd to me, that we are really concentrating 
all the time upon every successive thought, however brief. In other 
words, concentration, the absorption of the subject and the object, 
or vice versa, is the natural state of our consciousness. The third 
thing that stood out for me is not quite so easy to express, because 
it seems paradoxical. It is the idea of training ourselves to 
concentrate without intention, according to the power of nature 
that is beyond our everyday consciousness, and yet is within us. 
This apparent paradox becomes intelligible, however, if we have 
correctly understood the first two points. Trying intentionally to 
concentrate is self-frustrating because that is what the Zen people 
call "putting legs on a snake." It is a confusing irrelevance, trying to 
do what we are already doing. For as the second point reveals, the 
mind is necessarily and always concentrated already. The problem, 
therefore, is not so much to concentrate as to prolong concentration 
upon any one thought or impression. But this must be done 
naturally, according to the minds innate mode of functioning, and 
not by force. 


If, in other words, I understand that force or intentional 
concentration is impossible, if I really know this to be so, and thus 
give it up, I immediately and automatically acquire the feel of the 
mind's innate and natural concentration, and so am enabled to use 
that concentration. 


Now, what is the connection between this, the egoistic predicament, 
and the alteration of normal human consciousness from the 
egocentric to the universal? I think this connection becomes clear if 
one looks at the idea of intentional concentration in a wider 
context, as something more than an occasional attempt to perform a 
mental exercise. In this wider context, intentional concentration’ is 
the minds almost habitual attempt to concentrate upon or identify 
itself with whatever is pleasurable. It is the minds attempt to 
concentrate or force ones thoughts and feelings into constantly 
gratifying channels. Furthermore, it is also an attempt to force as 
much pleasure out of each moment as possible, to attend to it with 


all ones might, and in general, to dominate the mind with the mind. 
This is a misuse of the mind. It is an attempt to work the mind in a 
way that is against its natural functioning. It is like forcing a saw 
through wood instead of letting it do its own cutting. The good 
carpenter, letting the saw cut by itself, neither stops cutting nor lets 
his saw wander from the line.. He continues his work, as before. But 
it feels different from when he'd been forcing the saw, for now he is 
working with the nature of his instruments and media, not against 
it. This then is what the Zen master meant by shutting off ones own 
brain action and ceasing to drive ones mind in an egoistic sense. But 
this is a shutting off that is not the outcome of rigorous effort. On 
the contrary, it happens automatically once it becomes clear that 
forcing and driving the mind gets us nowhere, faster and faster. 


Now, the constant strain and frustration of forcing the mind is for 
most human beings an enduring and basic sensation, present in 
almost everything we do. It is precisely this sensation that 
constitutes the individual ego, the separate self we believe ourselves 
to be. Therefore, spiritual disciplines involving prolonged effort of 
concentration turn out to be very cumbersome, roundabout ways of 
self-transcendence, however effective they may be in the long run. 
For ultimately what is needed is not so much the muscle power of 
the will as a clear intelligence, a clear and undoubted vision of the 
total absurdity and unnaturalness of using the mind in a forced 
way, of trying to control the controller by psychological violence. 


Compared with ordinary yoga exercises and similar disciplines, 
seeing the absurdity of using the mind in this unnatural way is 
relatively easy. Furthermore, in relieving the constant strain that we 
call the ego, a new sensation of ease and, indeed, naturalness fills 
the whole of everyday experience. It is an unblocked sensation- 
which may be experienced or described as the feeling of voidness or 
oneness with the universe. 


If you have a New England conscience, however, you will be quite 
certain that anything which is easy or which feels easy is wrong. 
You will glory in effort for its own sake and babble about the 
inherent splendor of the struggle of the human spirit against nature, 
thinking it all the more glorious just because it is all so 
fundamentally tragic. The point being not so much to succeed as to 


do battle. Not to conquer’ but to toughen the character. 


Perhaps this is to some extent a matter of taste, but for me, all this 
kind of talk is pompous and asinine. And this may be just because I 
am an inherently lazy fellow. 


Now, there do seem to me to be times when verve and vigor are 
appropriate. Times when force works with, not against, nature. As 
Shakespeare said, "There is a tide in the affairs of men, which, taken 
at the flood, leads on to fortune." But when the tide is not at its 
flood, when mere brawn is up against granite, the effort to go 
against nature seems to me not so much tragically splendid as 
stupid. At best, one could say with the French general of the Charge 
of the Light Brigade, "C'est magnifique, mais ce n'est pas la guerre." 
To call it splendid is to base one's evaluation of man on his animal 
strength over what is more characteristically human-his 
intelligence. This misevaluation is perhaps based on the common 
distrust of intelligence, on the part of those who lack it, as 
something tricky, cunning, and weak-spined. But this misevaluation 
also reduces the standards of human character until they are more 
applicable to pachyderms and rocks than to human beings. For after 
all, is the final test of character really just in seeing how much 
suffering you can take? How much suffering you can endure always 
depends on how insensitive you are. But to be human is above all to 
be sensitive. And this means, I think, that the measure of character 
becomes, among other things, the quality rather than the quantity 
of your suffering. For the depth and quality of human consciousness 
is outlined and defined by its borders, beyond which there are 
things that it cannot take. Thus, our very weaknesses are our 
strength. As Lao-tzu said, "Suppleness and tenderness are the 
concomitants of life. Rigidity and hardness are the concomitants of 
death." 


CHAPTER FOUR 


Zen and the Art of 
the Controlled Accident 


Zen and Taoism in common involve not a se of doctrine- 
not a set of beliefs as we ordinarily understand religion-but a 


transformation of consciousness, that is to say, a transformation of 
the way in which we experience our own existence at every, 
moment. We might say that average individuals, not only in the 
West but also in the East, have a feeling of themselves as separate 
from their surroundings-from other people, from the earth, from 
space. They feel this in ways that are expressed in all the phrases of 
common speech. We talk about coming into the world: "I came into 
this world." As a matter of fact, we didn't. We came out of it, in the 
same way that an apple comes out of an apple tree-as an expression 
of the tree. We say, "I am facing facts," as if facts-the things 
happening around us-were something we confronted as a being 
alien to and different from us, as if we were meeting them as total 
strangers. 


In the West we talk about the conquest of nature, which is a very 
hostile phrase. To understand the Chinese point of view, lets 
consider the relationship between bees and flowers. There are no 
flowers where there are no bees. There are no bees where there are 
no flowers. They go together, like our head and our feet. Or as the 
head of a cat goes with the tail of a cat. If we watched a cat walk 
past a narrow crack in a fence, we would first see the head, and 
then the tail. And if the cat turned around and walked past again, 
we would see first the,head, and then the tail. If we had never seen 
a cat before, we might assume that our experience of the head of 


the cat was one event and that our experience of the tail was 
another event. We might assume that they were separate from each 
other, and only related as cause to effect. But if our crack in the 
fence were widened, we would see that it was all one cat and that 
the head and the tail go together. 


We have a way of attending to life, which we call "conscious 
attention," and its like a narrow crack in a fence. We can think of 
only one thing at a time. Our speech reflects this. This is one of our 
ways of experiencing the world: bit by bit. A chicken, for example, 
does not come out of an egg as a cut-up fryer; it comes out as an 
entire chicken, and if we want to eat it, we have to cut it up. But 
the world that we live in and experience is not cut up into separate 
things and events. It all goes together in the same way that the bees 
and the flowers go together, but we don't notice it. We have a way 
of thinking that splits everything up; we feel separate from the 
whole domain of nature. The disciplines of Taoism and Zen are 
supposed to change our consciousness in such a way that we no 
longer feel that we're an isolated unit locked up within a bag of 
skin. Instead, we actually experience the fact that our real self-the 
real us-is everything that there is; that all reality is concentrated 
and expressing itself at the point known as our personal organism. 


There are, of course, intimations of this in the West, just as there 
are in the East. For example, there is Western astrology-something 
that is partly superstitious in my view. Astrology does not seem to 
me to be an effective method of predicting the future. But it has 
some sense to it, in that when a child is born, the parents consult an 
astrologer, and the astrologer draws a map of the baby's soul, o: 
character. The map consists of a symbolic picture of the universe as 
it was the moment the child was born. And if the picture of the 
child's soul is the same thing as a picture of the universe, the soul is 
not inside the body. The body, rather, is within the soul. Your soul 
is the entire pattern of reality-of everything that is-focused at the 
point you experience as "here and now," just as you can focus the 
sun on a small point with a magnifying glass. 


In the science of ecology, which studies the relationship between 
organisms and environments, one is acutely aware-in an intellectual 
way-that an organism, whether human or animal or insect or plant, 


is not merely something "in" an environment, as we are "in" this 
room, but rather that the organism and its environment behave 
together. They go with each other. The sense of the saying in the 
Gospels "Figs do not grow on thistles, nor grapes on thorns" has this 
application. So does the idea that human beings must grow in a 
cosmos that is itself intelligent. If human beings are intelligent-and 
we define "intelligence" as the human way of thinking and feeling- 
then the universe must be intelligent, too. We do not get an 
intelligent organism in an unintelligent environment. An apple tree 
does not grow apples all the time; planets and stars do not produce 
life all the time. But every so often they do. So if an apple tree may 
be said to "apple," this kind of universe in which we live can be said 
to "people." It is a peopling world, and we go with it. The problem 
is that we don't ordinarily feel that way. We feel that we're 
strangers on the earth, and so we talk about the conquest of nature 
and facing facts and all that nonsense. 


So what is proposed here is the transformation of everyday 
consciousness into a new kind of sensation-the sensation that what 
is going on outside you is all one process with what is going on 
inside you and that you are all there is. 


We shall not necessarily know this objectively, the way we know an 
object is across the room. Let me give an illustration. Conscious 
attention, which is the faculty we use most to get around, is rather 
like the headlight of a car. The headlight illumines the road in front 
but does not shine on the wiring that connects it with the battery, 
and the battery with the engine. In just that way we are not 
ordinarily aware of how we are aware. As a result, we don't 
understand our connection to the world-we are unaware of what 
our real self is. Therefore, we get anxious. We fear that death may 
be the end of us, and that somehow we shall just pass out of this 
world altogether, and that will be that. 


This is, of course, the purest superstition, because everyone, in fact, 
is indestructible. We as individual organisms-as what we call 
physical bodies-come and go like leaves on a tree, but the tree 
remains: and we are the tree. In the saying of Jesus, "I am the vine, 
you are the branches." That I am- "Before Abraham was, I am"-is the 
self, and what the Hindus call the brahman arid the Chinese call the 


tao. And the tao is curious. The basic idea is that life is a flowing 
dance that consists of going on and stopping-what the Chinese call 
yang and yin. Yang is the southern, or sunny, side of a mountain. It 
is the sunny, south side of a mountain or the north bank of a river, 
wherever the sun falls. Yin is then the shadow side. Now imagine a 
mountain with only one side or a river with only one bank. Nobody 
can. 


Life is entirely a game of "now you see it, now you don't," on, off- 
like the crests and troughs of waves. You cannot have a wave unless 
you have both a crest and a trough. This. is true in hydraulics and 
in electronics. Without the one, you do not have the other. And so 
the relationship between these two things is called "mutual 
arriving," which is the most important term in Taoist philosophy. It 
is symbolized by the yin/yang symbol, which means "reciprocal" or 
"mutual," and it's based on an old ideogram for a plant growing, 
arising, coming into being. The fundamental idea is that the yang 
and the yin come into being together. You never find one without 
the other. There is a kind of secret conspiracy, like Tweedledum 
and Tweedledee agreeing to have a battle. So although yin and 
yang are different in the way that front and back are different, high 
and low are different, being and nonbeing are different-they always 
go together. 


So "to be, or not to be" is not the universal question. It is the 
question for the West. For all existentialist thinking, "to be, or not to 
be" really is the question. And when it is the question, man must 
necessarily be anxious. The moment we know that we exist, we face 
the possibility that we might cease to be. And so we tremble. But 
when "to be, or not to be" is not the question, we as individuals 
come to feel that we are not something strange in this world. We 
come to feel that we are an expression of the world, and that the 
world is us. We are more than our physical bodies. Our physical 
body is "us," in one sense, and has a certain degree of independence. 
But at the same time, it is an expression of the entire universe, as a 
wave is an expression of the ocean. The ocean waves to us and says, 
"Yoo-hoo, I am here." In the same way, the whole cosmos waves at 
us and says, "Hi," and waves at the other waves and says, "Hello, 
glad to meet you." But we are all really the one center expressing 
itself, playing in an infinite variety of ways. 


"Well, what does this lead to," you ask, "in terms of practical 
consequences?" For one thing, it leads to a respect for the external 
world as ones own body. It leads to knowing how to get in tempo 
with the world, to act with rather than against the grain. And this is 
the most important lesson that ancient China has to teach the 
modern technological West. Because in technology, we have a 
fantastic power for altering-not only the external environment but 
ourselves. Through technology, neurosurgery, and drugs, we can 
affect our brains and begin to interfere with our own characters. 


The most asinine thing for us to do would be to live in this lovely 
environment and spoil it by living in it. So if you were a skillful 
architect who worked on the principle of the tradition of Taoist and 
Zen architecture, you would go to the environment in which you 
planned to build-let us say it is a great hill-and say to it, "Good 
morning." You might even bow and say, "I want to live here, what 
kind of house would you like to have on you?" And the hill might 
answer, "I'd like a house that would disrupt me as little as possible, 
because I have a game going on here. I have a huge complexity of 
plants and insects and small animals who manage to keep me here. 
These plants prevent avalanches, and so on." And the hill would 
suggest to the sensitive artist, or architect, a way to build a house 
that wouldn't interfere with the ecology of the hill. And the 
architect would think, "How will I do this?" and come up with a 
solution. 


But instead of being sensitive to the game being played by the hill, 
we go into the hills with bulldozers and terrace them to make room 
for houses that are appropriate only for flatland. We need the 
flatland for agriculture, so people should live in the hills. But in 
order to do so, we have to understand how to treat hills. Look at the 
way the hills on the north and the east sides of Kyoto have been 
civilized. They have the most beautiful way of concealing houses in 
the hills, so you hardly know they're there. They didn't use 
bulldozers. Or the exquisite way Japanese farmers have adapted 
their land to the landscape with contour farming, so that a 
mountainous country, of which 80 percent of the land is nonarable, 
has been made 80 percent self-supporting. They farm the sea; the 
Japanese eat seaweed and other things that very few of us in the 
West will eat. And all along the California coast there is a 


fantastic,abundance of kelp, which is delicious if you know how to 
cook it. But we have to learn these lessons, because we're going to 
have a terrible time if we don't. This is the principle that is called in 
Taoist philosophy wu wei, which means "not to force things." I've 
come to believe this is the best English translation. It is sometimes 
translated as "not doing, no artificiality, no interference." But our 
word forcing, as in a forced laugh, forcing a lock, forced behavior, 
forced kindness, forced love-forcing in that sense-is the opposite of 
wu wei. Wu wei means action in accordance with the character of 
the moment. 


You can't avoid interfering with the world. Everything you do alters 
your environment. And nobody knows this more than a chemist or 
physicist. The scientist realizes that whenever he so much as 
inspects the behavior of electrons, the very means of his inspection 
will alter the way in which they behave. Shine a light on something 
to look at it, and that bombardment of light affects your subject, 
especially at the nuclear level. This process goes on constantly. To 
know things is to change them. You cannot escape interfering. 
Therefore, the idea is to learn how to interfere skillfully. That Js the 
meaning of wu wei: how to act with the grain of the world. 


There is one other idea that has to be understood, and that is li. It is 
a Chinese term that goes along with wu wei. It is not found in 
ancient Taoism-though it is based in a Taoist view of the world-but 
appears later, in Ch'an, or Chinese Zen. 


Li is a fascinating expression. It originally meant "markings in jade, 
grain in wood, fiber in muscle." Western scholars have translated it 
as "reason, or principle," but this is not a very good translation. Li is 
the word used in China to designate the character of the order of 
nature. So, our scholars tend to translate it as "the laws of nature." 
But the Chinese have no words that we can correctly translate as 
"the laws of nature," because they do not look upon nature as 
obeying laws. They look upon it as orderly; but not legal. 


We cannot write down the rules for something like fair play. We 
know them without being told, and they are too subtle to be put 
into words. In the same way, we cannot precisely describe the 
human nervous system. It is too complicated and will always elude 
us, although we get closer and closer to describing it. 


The judge who understands that justice goes beyond the law is 
informed by the principle of li. Li means the markings in jade. 
When you get a piece of jade and look at its markings, you do not 
think of them as chaotic. When you see a dirty old ashtray with 
cigarette butts in it, and rolled up bits of paper, you know its a 
mess. But when you study the patterns on rocks or the shapes of 
clouds or the outlines of trees, you know that they're not orderly in 
the sense of being symmetrical, but you know that they're beautiful. 
Painters, in the Western tradition, copy clouds and say, "Well, 
theres a picture. I know what clouds are about." But clouds don't 
mean anything. Clouds are not a picture of anything. They are just 
clouds. They are just clouding. 


There is a poem with the line "Blue mountains are spontaneously 
blue mountains, white clouds are spontaneously white clouds." They 
just do that; it is their game. We know that they are not chaotic-we 
recognize that they possess an order-but we cannot quite pin down 
wherein that order lies. We know it is order, and we can analyze it 
physically and chemically-we can learn about surface tension and 
bubble formation and why clouds form the way they do-but we get 
only an approximate understanding of the order that underlies these 
phenomena. When surveyors measure land, they reduce it to so 
many small triangles. They measure those triangles, and that 
measures the land. But that is only an approximation; we never get 
it exactly right. So, there is always an ungraspable and indefinable 
principle of order in things, and that is li. And that explains why 
Chinese art appreciates, in all that it does, a certain element of the 
uncontrolled. 


Some Chinese painters like to let everything go wild. But the ideal 
they are all aiming at-and you have to be a tremendous master to 
achieve it-is to let everything go wild within limits, to create a 
situation that is orderly overall but that allows for unexpected, 
random surprises. And they look upon daily life in exactly the same 
way. 


Bees are quite remarkable for this reason: every bee does exactly 
what it feels like doing, and yet the hive is orderly. Imagine that. 
Suppose you could get up every day and live in such a way that you 
always did exactly what you wanted. You didn't pay attention to 


schedules or to what anybody else was doing. You simply did as 
you pleased. And it so happened that what you felt like doing was 
what everybody else felt like doing, and this produced an orderly 
performance. The bees, in a sense, are in that situation. To follow 
the Tao is to learn the art of doing exactly what you feel like doing. 
At the same time it is wu wei-it does not force; it does not impose. 


To do that-to act naturally-we have to understand another Chinese 
word, tzuran, which means "that which is so of itself." We translate 
tzuran as "nature," although it is very unlike our word nature. It 
means "that which happens naturally." When we say that something 
"comes naturally" or that something is "second nature" to us, we 
approach the meaning of tzuran. In his writings on the tao, Lao-tzu 
says, 'The Taos method is to be so of itself." 


We have in the West an image of the universe as something that is 
being run by somebody. The Lord God is in control. He made it all; 
He engineered it all; He understands it; He remains in control. The 
Chinese view of the universe is exactly the opposite. It looks upon 
the universe as not being controlled at all, as being perfectly orderly 
of itself. So, Lao-tzu says, 'The great Tao flows everywhere, both to 
the left and to the right. It loves and nourishes all things, but does 
not lord it over them. And when good things are accomplished, it 
lays no claim to them." 


I know, for example, of a religious order in japan in which there are 
about two hundred men and women who live very simply, in 
families, and they are fantastically happy people. They run their 
gardens and farms, and buzz around town visiting people who are 
sick or otherwise incapable of caring for themselves. They come 
right in and clean the whole house; they do all the washing and 
clean out the toilets, and then they just disappear. It is a very 
curious thing, but they just vanish. 


There is a poem in Zen which says, "Entering the forest, he does not 
disturb a blade of grass. I Entering the water, he does not make a 
ripple." He was so in accord with the scene, and he flowed so easily 
through it, that nobody noticed. 


Water not disturbed by waves settles down of itself. A mirror not 
covered with dust is clear and bright. The mind should be like this. 


Many people think that living the spontaneous, or completely 
natural, life, as it is understood by these Far Eastern philosophers, 
means to act according to whim. Around A.D. 1000, for example, 
there was a great Zen monk who had a peculiar way of painting. He 
had long hair, and he would get very drunk on rice wine. Then he 
would soak his hair in ink and slosh it all over the paper. He would 
do a Rorschach test on the result, decide what kind of landscape it 
was, and put on the finishing touches. And suddenly, out of this 
apparent mess, a great landscape would be evoked. And the whole 
art lay in applying the finishing touches. 


If a person who is untrained in painting makes a mess with the 
brush, it is liable to be nothing more than a mess. Whereas if a 
person who has had the feeling of painting in him for a long time 
makes a mess with a brush, it will look interesting. That is why if 
you try to copy the best painters in modern abstract, nonobjective 
painting, you will find it very difficult to do so. For there is more to 
spontaneity than capriCe and disorder. 


Wouldn't it be great if we could live absolutely on the spur of the 
moment? To never make any particular plans unless we made them 
spontaneously; to never worry about whether we had made the 
right decision; to never wonder if we'd been selfish or unselfish; to 
never hesitate. One of the great applications ofZen was to the art of 
fencing. In fencing, we learn to be spontaneous, because here, of all 
places, it is true that he who hesitates is lost: If we are engaged in 
combat and stop to think about what sort of a defense or attack we 
ought to make, we're finished. 


The way they teach spontaneity in fencing is very interesting. As a 
student, of course, you live with your teacher. And in the beginning 
you are given a janitorial job-you clean up, wash dishes, put away 
bedding. And while you're going about your daily business, the 
master surprises you with a practice sword made of four strips of 
bamboo tied loosely together. He hits you suddenly, out of 
nowhere. And you're expected to defend yourself with anything 
available- with the bedding, with the broom, with the pots and 
pans. But you never know when the attack is coming or from what 
direction. And you begin to get tense. You go everywhere on alert, 
watching, waiting to see which direction the blow will come from. 


You go down a certain passage, feeling certain that the master is 
lurking. around the far corner. You're all set for him, and then 
you're suddenly hit from behind. So eventually you just give up. 
There is absolutely no way to prepare yourself for these attacks, and 
you finally start wandering around with the feeling that if you're 
going to be hit, you're going to be hit. And then you're ready to 
begin fencing. Because if you prepare for an attack from a specific 
direction, and the attack comes from elsewhere, you have to 
withdraw from the direction in which you had expected it before 
you can respond to the attack. And by then it's too late. 


So, instead, you must develop a mind of no expectation. That state 
is called mushin, or munin. This is a very important Zen expression. 
Mushin almost means "an empty mind." You could also call it "no 
heart," because the character shin means both "heart" and "mind." 
But it isn't quite the same as our word heartless. Nor is it the same 
as our word mindless, in the sense of "stupid." To be in the state of 
mushin is to have a mind like a mirror. Of this, a Taoist sage said, 
"The perfect man employs his mind as a mirror. It grasps nothing, it 
refuses nothing. It receives but does not keep." When something 
passes in front of a mirror, the mirror reflects it instantly The mirror 
doesn't wait to reflect it. The Taoists also say, "When the moon 
rises, all bodies of water instantly reflect the moon." They don't 
bother with irrelevant physics about the speed of light. They say, 
"When you clap your hands, the sound issues immediately It doesn't 
stop to consider whether it will issue." And similarly, when a flint is 
struck, sparks issue instantly. To emulate this, you cannot try to be 
quick. If a Zen master corners you with a peculiar situation-if he 
puts you in a quandary, expecting a spontaneous action-do not try 
to hurry. I have watched Suzuki wait a whole minute before 
answering a question. But he did not hesitate. He was not at all 
embarrassed by this wait. He can answer with silence just as well as 
with a formal response. The point is, Do something. 


Two young Americans who wanted to study Zen were taken to 
interview the master by a japanese monk who acted as interpreter, 
and one of the Americans had some experience. After they had tea 
together, the master said, in a very easy way, "Well, what do you 
gentlemen know about Zen?" And the American threw his fan, 
which he hadn't unfolded, straight at the masters face. The master 


moved slightly to one side, and the fan went right through the rice- 
paper wall behind him. The master laughed like a child. That is the 
sort of game they get into. 


Once a master was going through a forest with a group of students, 
picked up a tree branch, and turned to one of his students. "What is 
it?" he asked, and the student hesitated. So the master hit him with 
the branch. Then the master turned quickly to another student and 
repeated, "What is it?" And the student said, "Give it to me. Let me 
see it and I'll tell you." So the master tossed the branch to the 
student, and the student took it and hit the master. 


Now, you may think all this is kind of rough stuff, so let me give 
you another story on a rather different level. 


A certain Zen priest was at a big party. And dinner was being 
served by a geisha girl who was so elegant and so skillful in serving 
that he suspected she might have had some Zen training. So he 
decided to try her out. He nodded to her, and she immediately 
came to his place, sat down in front of his little low table, imd 
bowed. He said, "I would like to give you a present." And she said, 
"I would be most honored." There were hibachis on the tables-with 
iron chopsticks for the coals-and he took out a piece of charcoal 
with the chopsticks and offered it to her. She wound the long 
sleeves of her kimono around her hands and took the charcoal. 
Then she went to the kitchen, disposed of the charcoal, changed her 
burnt robe, and came back. She sat down in front of the master, 
bowed again, and said, "I would like to give you a present." The 
master said, "I would be most honored." So she picked up the iron 
chopsticks and offered him a piece of charcoal. And he pulled out a 
cigarette and said, 'That is just what I wanted." And he lit the 
cigarette. 


The masters spontaneity in that situation was like that of a good 
comedian who, in a completely unprepared way, can turn any 
situation into a jest. There are many experts-like Dorothy Parker-in 
that sort of repartee, and in Zen it has been developed to a very 
high degree. But it requires a protected, highly disciplined 
environment. If you suddenly started to act on the spur of the 
moment, without the slightest deliberation, people would avoid you 
and call the police: In the practice of Zen, therefore, you begin to 


act spontaneously within the confines of a monastery or school, in a 
community that understands the game. In a Zen environment there 
are rigid rules, but there are also certain instances when all those 
rules go hang. The point is this: when you first begin to act 
spontaneously, you're not used to it, and your responses are usually 
unintelligent and inappropriate. When, through practice, it becomes 
second nature to act in the state of mushin-or no-mind-without 
deliberation, you will find that you are accustomed to responding 
quite appropriately, as the Zen master did in lighting his cigarette 
from the charcoal. 


So, in the art of swordsmanship when the student gives up 
defending himself and preparing his mind for attack, he achieves a 
mirrormind. This is also likened to a wooden barrel full of water. 
When you make a hole in the barrel, the water instantly flows out 
the hole. The water is always available to flow-it doesn't have to 
choose. You could also say that mushin is what Krishnamurti calls 
"choicelessness." Choice, in this sense, is not quite the same thing as 
decision. Choice means dithering. You know those people who 
wiggle their pens a little-their pens dither over the paper-before 
they start to write: In the same way, many people constantly dither 
in their lives because they are anxious, and dithering is an 
expression of anxiety. 'To be, or not to be: that is the question." But 
what is the question about, "to be, or not to be"? "To be" and "not to 
be" go together. They arise mutually. 


So the structure of a Zen community allows you to learn how to act 
without deliberation-to return, in a sense, to the state of innocence. 
This does not mean that you give up thinking. It doesn't mean that 
you become an anti-intellectual. One can learn-in the later phases of 
Zen training-how to intellectualize spontaneously, how to think and 
deliberate spontaneously. The saying is "Stand or walk as you will, 
but whatever you do, don't wobble." This is difficult because the 
human mind is a feedback system, and feedback has a peculiar 
susceptibility to nervousness. There was a young man who said, 
"Though it seems that I know that I know, what I would like to see 
is the 'I' that knows 'me' when I know that I know that I know." In 
this way, we think about thinking and we worry about worrying; 
and when that really gets bad, we worry because we worry about 
worrying. Now this is exactly analogous to the kinds of vibrations 


that are set up in certain mechanical systems. On television I once 
told the audience, "I'm going to show you a picture of anxiety," and 
I asked the cameraman to tum the camera on the studio monitor. 
And when he aimed the camera at the monitor's screen-when he 
began to take a picture of the picture, as it were-the screen began to 
oscillate, and jagged lines began to dance across it. Now, that is 
what is meant by hesitation, attachment, blocking-all the things Zen 
discipline is designed to overcome. It is because the human being 
has such a peculiarly and beautifully organized nervous system, 
with a tremendously subtle brain capable of all kinds of thinking 
about thinking. You can drive yourself crazy this way, and this is 
what we are doing. Our civilization and our social institutions 
reflect this in hundreds of ways. This is true of any civilization 
because all civilization is based on the development of self- 
consciousness and feedback-that is to say, on the properties of self- 
control, of learning to criticize and correct what you have done. But 
who is the critic? Is the critic reliable? If you criticize yourself, who 
will criticize the critic? To put it another way, who will guard the 
guards? Who will take care of the policemen? Who will govern the 
president? That is the big problem. The Chinese and the japanese 
got tied up in it because they were both very high orders of 
civilization. And when this happens, there has to be a break. 
Somebody has to start throwing things. 


So Zen functions in the japanese culture as a means of liberation 
from the tangle of being too civilized. The japanese tend to be 
tremendously concerned with propriety, good manners, and keeping 
up with the joneses. Frequently in Japan when friends meet or take 
leave, they say "Ah, so," and one bows, and the other bows, and the 
first bows again; and it goes back and forth, each trying to see who 
gets the last bow. They also worry terribly about gifts. When 
visiting, it is customary to arrive with a gift, and the guest will 
wonder, "Is our gift as nice as the last one they gave us? Is it 
suitable for the occasion? Is there some symbolism in this gift that 
connects with the recipients name or birthday?" They think about 
such things interminably. And, thus, the ordinary culture has a 
great deal of social nervousness in it. People giggle. You often see 
girls covering their mouths as if to say, "I'm not really giggling." All 
sorts of funny things happen because of this immense social 
awareness and nervousness. And Zen breaks that up. Only it does so 


in a way that has high artistry to it. 


In the history of ceramics, the Chinese developed some of the most 
elegant work imaginable. You are probably aware of the great work 
of the Sung and Korean potters. They often used gorgeous, textured 
greens, and many of their pieces look almost as if they have been 
carved out of jade. That led to the high techniques of the Ming 
dynasty, with translucent porcelain, white clay, and the most subtle 
designs of all. And that style went on to japan, filling the houses of 
the very rich people you find in books like The Tale of Genji. The 
lovely things they had around their houses were unbelievable-the 
lacquer, the boxes in pure gold. It was delicious stuff. But it got to 
the point where it was like having too many eclairs and ice cream. 
And the people who practiced Zen suddenly developed an eye for 
the beauty of the ordinary. 


There were two reasons for this. One was that they became 
fascinated with what happens spontaneously-with what pattern a 
brush would make when handled roughly, for instance, and the 
hairlines were allowed to show. And second, because they practiced 
zazen, which is sitting quietly with a completely open mind. Zazen 
gradually sharpens your senses, until you start seeing and hearing 
things with astonishing clarity. There is a famous haiku poem: "The 
old pond, I a frog jumps in, I plop." In Japanese, that plop is a 
phrase that means the sound of the water. There is another haiku 
just like it: "In the dark forest, I a berry drops, I the sound of the 
water." Someone suddenly realized that the sound of water is 
marvelous all by itself. 


Or consider the cheapest Korean rice bowls-the poorest, cheapest 
kind, for peasants to eat out of. It suddenly struck one of these Zen 
masters that these bowls were incomparably beautiful objects. 
Nobody had been aware of this before. They also had the simplest 
bamboo ladles, and one day somebody noticed that this ordinary, 
everyday kitchen utensil was just lovely. And in the same way they 
found that it was quite as satisfactory to listen to the kettle boiling 
as to listen to an elaborate concert. 


So a man named Sanuriku and others began to have parties for a 
very few guests in primitive, mud huts and in their gardens. Using 
the simplest utensils-each carefully chosen by a superb artist-they 


would sit and drink tea and enjoy the uncomplicated life. And so 
was born the tea ceremony. 


The advent of the tea ceremony was terribly important for the 
Japanese. It was going back to the primitive, after they'd grown sick 
of too much civilization. And yet, really, it was going on to the 
primitive, rather than back, because it happened in the context of 
an extremely refined civilization and culture. They were not 
barbarians. Today, the tea ceremony is an extremely congenial get- 
together, full of easy conversation, simple and unostentatious 
manners, and lovely things to look at. 


I was once present at a tea ceremony in japan celebrated by an 
American Zen monk. He was a mountaineer and always had with 
him the kind of equipment you take into the mountains. And I said 
to him, "It would be very nice to have a tea ceremony. You did it 
once before, and it was so pleasant, would you serve it again?" And 
he said, "Yes, by all means." The first time he had served the tea 
ceremony in the simple and direct style of Zen monks. This is much 
more comfortable than the way the tea ceremony is served by all 
those well-educated ladies who titter about on tiptoe, hoping they 
won't make a mistake. This time the American monk came in with a 
mountaineering primer stove and an old paint pot with an 
aluminum mug inside it. He set these down and ritually pumped up 
the stove. Then he took the aluminum mug out of the paint pot, 
poured water into the pot, and set it on the stove. He did everything 
in the style of tea ceremony, even though he was using a dirty old 
primer stove. Suddenly, the stove began to flame like the god Futo, 
and he mixed the tea with a whisk in the traditional way and then 
handed us' the aluminum cup. He had all the perfect, lovely 
manners. It is the custom, after you have drunk, to pass around the 
utensils for inspection. We found that the aluminum cup had the 
year 1945 stamped on it, and we got into a long discussion about 
styles of aluminum cups made in 1945. It was the funniest thing, 
and it was also a complete makeover of the tea ceremony into the 
modern idiom. 


The tea drunk in a tea ceremony is a powdered green tea that you 
don't steep like ordinary tea. You whisk it and a small amount of 
hot water into a froth. They call it liquid jade, and it's a bit of an 


acquired taste for most Westerners. It tastes a little like a mixture of 
matai tea and Guinness stout. But when you get used to it, it's very 
invigorating, and a strong mixture of it is a good thing to use if you 
want to stay awake all night and work. 


Legend has it that Zen monks developed an interest in tea because 
they needed to stay awake during their practice of meditation. 
Bodhidharma is always drawn with his eyes wide-open, and there is 
a reason for this: he fell asleep while meditating, and he was so 
furious when he woke up that he cut his eyelids off. They dropped 
to the ground, and up came the first tea plants. That is why their 
leaves are shaped like eyelids and why tea has been drunk for 
staying awake ever since. So tea is the Buddhist drink, just like wine 
is the Christian drink, coffee is the Islamic drink, and milk, the 
Hindu drink. Every religion has its drink. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


The Democratization of Buddhism 


So then, out of this kind of appreciation, born of stillness and 
a delight in seeing how nature takes its course, came the entire cult 


of Zen art, with its special kind of primitivity, its special ceramics, 
its special calligraphic styles, and its special gardens-all of which 
are manifestations of "the controlled accident." 


Consider this water jar. The bottom has been left unglazed. But 
look, see how the glaze has been allowed to run. Its not at all what 
we would call neat. I have watched a man pick up an unpainted 
plate and, as he applies the glaze, just go whoosh once with the 
brush-and its done. There is another man who glazes by wood 
smoke, and he may put as many as eleven hundred pieces in his 
kiln. He wraps each piece in straw, and wherever the straw touches, 
it leaves a splash of orange against a purple background. The straw 
arranges itself according to the nature of straw. It doesn't follow 
strict human direction. And when he opens up the kiln and brings 
the things out, he looks eagerly to see what the straw has done. 


This principle of letting glaze run to see what happens is wu wei. It 
is noninterference. This is mushin also: no-purpose. It can also be 
translated as "no specific intent." And, of course, sometimes this 
noninterference doesn't work. The master picks up the plate or bowl 
and says, 'This is not very interesting," and rejects it. 


What then are the canons of taste that decide whether he accepts 
one of these accidents or rejects it? Because here an additional 
principle of control enters. In the practice of calligraphy, for 


instance, a man may sit down with a huge pile of paper in front of 
him and do piece after piece after piece, and if it isn't just right, he 
throws it away. Eventually he finds one that is just right. 


There is a famous story of a Zen master who was doing calligraphy 
and had a very smart monk who was his assistant standing beside 
him. And the monk said, "Uh-uh," to each one the master did. "You 
could do better than that." And "Oh, no, no, come now, you know 
you can do much better than that." His master got more and more 
furious, and when the monk had to go out to the benjo-to the toilet- 
he thought, "Quick, while he is away. ... " And he did another piece. 
When the monk came back and looked at it, he said, "A 
masterpiece." 


So what determines this element of selection? How do you know 
which drawing or bowl or plate to choose? Take another example. 
There was a tea caddy, made out of clay, and when Sanu Riku was 
having tea ceremony, he saw this tea caddy and made no comment 
on it. And the owner was so disappointed that he smashed it. But 
one of his friends picked the broken pieces out of the trash can and 
took them to a mender, saying, "Look, mend this with gold." And 
the mender used gold cement and put the caddy back together, and 
it had spidery lines of gold all over its surface. And when Riku saw 
it, he was just enchanted, and it became one of the most valuable 
tea caddies in japanese collections-spidery lines of gold just 
following the apparently chance marks produced when it was 
smashed. 


There was a competition at the Art Institute of Chicago, in a 
sculpture class: each student was given a cubic foot of plaster of 
paris and told to do something with it. The prize was won by a 
woman who looked at this cube and said, "It has no character, it 
doesn't want to be anything." So she flung it on the floor, smashing 
it all up. She made dents in it and banged off the corners and put 
cracks in it. Then she looked at it again and said, "Ah, now I know 
what it wants to be." And so she followed the grain in it, as it were, 
made-by all these cracks, and she produced a marvelous piece of 
sculpture. 


There is a very ingenious sculptor by the name of Donald Hord, 
who is a master at following the grain in wood. It seems to suggest 


to him the muscles and the flow of the kind of body that he is 
making. 


Well, thats the thing. When a master decides whether an accident 
has come off, what he looks for is this: the piece to be the perfect 
harmony of man and nature, of order -and randomness. 


There is a curious thing about the human mind. When we play 
games, we get the most fascination from those that satisfactorily 
combine skill and chance. Games like bridge and poker have an 
admirable combination of these two elements. And we can go on 
playing those games again and again, because we don't feel 
completely at the mercy of chance, as we do with dice-unless we 
cheat-and we don't feel completely at the mercy of skill, as we do 
with chess. So there is a sort of optimum middle where order and 
randomness go together. That is what a master is looking for in a 
work of art: the optimal combination of order and randomness. 


Art works such as Persian miniatures, the jewelry of Cellini, or 
Chinese porcelain emphasize skill too much; they contain too much 
order. They are like those houses you go into where you dare not 
put an ash in the tray because everything is so clean and so tidy 
that you can't touch - it. One prefers a house that looks a little lived 
in. It is more genial, more comfortable; it somehow invites you to 
sit down and put your feet on the table. At the other extreme, 
however, is the kind of home where everything is covered in dirt, 
filthy clothes are thrown in the corner, and the people have paint 
all over them. That goes too far in the opposite direction. We don't 
want that, either. What we want is that curious thing in the middle. 


Now, the most difficult thing to do is hold to the middle. Its like 
walking a tightrope. That is why the path of Buddhism is called the 
razor's edge. In the course of history, what happens when this kind 
of work becomes fashionable is that people begin to affect these 
styles. For example, Seshu, the great master ink-painter, would 
sometimes paint with a handful of straw instead of a brush, in order 
to get the sort of rough effect that he wanted. But later on there 
came people who could take an ordinary paintbrush and so exactly 
ink that brush that it would give precisely the messy effect that 
imitated Seshu's discovery. They also learned to ink a brush in such 
a way-and this is terribly decadent-that they could dab grapes on a 


vine and have dark ink where the shadow was supposed to be, and 
no ink at all where the highlights were supposed to be. That is 
when they started getting mixed up with Western ideas about 
shadows and perspective. They didn't have that earlier. But they 
were so skilled in the handling of ink that they would do this sort of 
thing, imitating all the so-called rough, natural effects of the great 
Zen artists. Today in japan a younger generation of artists has 
decided that its time to break away from all that. 


Or imagine modern haiku parties and the writing of modern haiku 
poetry. Basho who was the great seventeenth-century master of 
haiku, said, "Get a three-foot-high child to write haiku," because 
haiku are the sort of direct, guileless things that children say. But 
now, instead, there are magazines devoted to haiku poetry. In every 
issue there will be ten thousand haikus written by people all over 
the country, and they are so stilted and so affected that one wishes 
one had never heard of haiku. 


The same thing is starting over here. You should see the entries 
they get in the haiku competitions that japan Airlines and others 
sponsor. After a while, it all becomes dated, stilted. And 
somewhere, again, a new thing has to break out, which it is always 
doing. 


But there is no formula for fixing the stilted thing so that you can 
do it again and again and again. The moment you start doing it 
again and again, it isn't the same thing anymore. The real thing has 
escaped. 


Do you remember when, some time ago, there was a fashion for 
having wrought-iron fish-just the outline of the fish. Some artist 
originally put this fish together, and it looked great. But then you 
suddenly found them in every gift shop and dime store in the world, 
and they looked perfectly terrible. 


So this is the mysterious thing-not only in the arts but in lifestyles, 
in everything-as soon as you ask, "What is the technique for getting 
this thing?" and people tell you, "Well, this is how to do it," the real 
thing is gone. It's the same in education. And in music. The moment 
you start teaching something, what question are you asking? 


Is there some method whereby in our schools we could produce 
from each music department, at every graduation ceremony, three 
musicians of the stature of Bach or Mozart? If we knew how to do 
that, such knowledge would prevent us from being surprised by the 
work of these people. 


There is a Zen poem that says, "If you ask where the flowers come 
from, even the God of Spring doesn't know." Certainly the God of 
Spring should know where the flowers come from. The truth of the 
matter, though, is He doesn't. And in the same way, if you asked the 
Lord God, "How do You create the universe?" He would say, "I have 
no special method." 


This is known in Zen as budji, the most difficult virtue to attain. 
Budji means "nothing special" or "no business" or "no artificiality." 
Budji is when something does not stand out like a sore thumb. But 
it is absolutely different from being modest. A budji person may be 
immodest, in the sense that if he knows he can do something well 
he just says he can. Budji is the mysterious quality of "no special 
method." Because if there is a special method-if we know the 
method and we know it infallibly-it ceases to be interesting. There 
are no surprises left. And the moment the element of surprise is 
gone, the zest for life is gone. 


That is why it is very difficult to teach Zen to yourself- because you 
cannot easily surprise yourself. The essence of this kind of Zen 
spontaneity is response to a surprise. You don't know what the 
master is going to do, and he surprises you. It's like trying to cure 
hiccups. It's very difficult to cure yourself because when you pat 
yourself on the back, you know when you're going to do it. You're 
ready for it. But when somebody else comes up and slams you on 
the back, it is a surprise. And what you needed was a surprise. Or 
like a joke: what makes you laugh is the element of surprise. That is 
why jokes are not funny after they have been explained. So, in the 
same way, all these Zen stories, if explained, have no effect. They 
are intended to produce what I would call metaphysical laughter. 
But this can come only as a surprise. And to be surprised . . . well, 
there is no way of premeditating it. 


You are probably familiar with Zen in the Art of Archery, by Eugene 
Herrigel. He had to learn to pull the bowstring in the manner of the 


japanese archer and let it go, but not on purpose. He had to let it go 
without thinking first, 'T'll let it go," and then let go. He had to let it 
go unintentionally. And that really bugged Herrigel. How do you do 
something without intention, especially if you're aiming at a target? 
Well, the point is that if you think before you shoot, its too late. The 
target has moved. That is why we have beginner's luck. If you 
simply point at something without thinking, as if your finger were a 
gun, you could probably hit whatever you point at. 


I will never forget the first time I ever used a slingshot. A friend of 
mine was with me and was aiming carefully but not hitting the 
target. And I just picked it up and ping, I hit it. But I couldn't do it 
again. So, the beginner has a certain kind of naturalness. 


There was a master by the name of Ikkyu, who was a great leg- 
puller. And he had in front of his house a very gnarled, contorted 
pine tree-one of the things that the japanese really love. And he put 
up a notice beside it that read "I, Ikkyu, will pay one hundred yen"- 
which was a fair amount of money in those days-"to anyone who 
can see this tree straight." Well, soon there was a whole crowd of 
people around that tree, lying on the ground, twisting their necks 
and looking at it from all sorts of angles, and there was absolutely 
no way of seeing the tree with a straight trunk. Ikkyu had a friend 
named Rosen, who was a priest of another sect. A smart boy went 
over to see him and asked, "What about Master Ikkyus tree?" 


"Oh," said Rosen, "it is perfectly simple. You go tell him the answer 
to seeing the tree straight is to look straight at it." So, the boy 
returned to Ikkyu and said, "I claim the reward. You see the trunk 
straight by looking straight at it." And Ikkyu looked at him in a 
funny way and forked over the hundred yen, saying, "I think you 
have been talking to Rosen down the street." 


Now, in that way, just look straight at it. Here is the bowstring-let 
go of it. Don't get sidetracked into all this fimble-fambling, mimble- 
mambling jumble humble about the right technique of letting go of 
it. Just let go of it, damn it. But thats very difficult. It is as is if I 
were to say to you, "Now, everybody, lets be unself-conscious." 


So, at last you learn to let go of the thing, and you are again as a 
child. This is original innocence. This is the meaning of the answer 


when a Zen master was asked, "What do you do here in this Zen 
institution?" The master said, "We eat when hungry, and we sleep 
when tired." "But," the questioner replied, "that is being just like 
everybody else. They all do that." The master answered, 'They do 
not. When they eat, they do not eat. They think of all sorts of 
extraneous matters. When they tire, they do not sleep. They dream 
all kinds of dreams." 


Nobody ever transforms himself into an enlightened pattern of life 
by dividing himself into two pieces-Good I and Bad Me, wherein 
Good I preaches to Bad Me and tries to make him over. If a human 
being were divided, we would be like a rider on a horse. The rider 
is the soul, and the horse is the body; or the rider is reason, and the 
horse is passion-the rider is control, and the horse is the 
uncontrolled. In otherwords, we have the opposition of the ego 
allied with the superego, trying to ride the ego aligned with the id. 
Freuds metaphors and his construction of the psychic anatomy are 
derived from Plato, with the image of the soul riding the animal 
horse. Now this metaphor is a total failure, because there is a secret 
connection-a sort of backstairs, as it were-between Good I and Bad 
Me. Good I can look down at Bad Me and say, "Uh-uh-uh, you 
oughtn't to be like that." But all the time, Bad Me is sending its 
energy up the backstairs to Good I, and motivating Good I to go 
"Uh-uh-uh" at Bad Me. If it were not for the energy of Bad Me, I 
would be better, one thinks. I'd be more proud of myself. 


So there is something about self-conscious spirituality-about 
religions involving preaching and moralizing and talking to oneself 
in a split and divided way; Good I against Bad Me--that is 
profoundly phony. 


One of the main streams of the Buddhist way of life is what might 
be called the religion of nonreligion: to find, to demonstrate, to 
convey the most highly spiritual through what is the most everyday 
and ordinary, and to make no division between the two. So you 
might say the more everyday it is, the more truly spiritual it is, and 
the more it appears to be spiritual-that is to say, something different 
from, aside from, apart from everyday life-the more false that kind 
of spirituality will be. 


This reaches a peak in the history of japanese culture in the 


seventeenth century, when there were four superbly important men: 
Basho, the haiku poet; Bankei, a Zen teacher; Hakuin, another Zen 
teacher; and Sengai, a Zen painter. 


I want to say something about the work and genius of these four 
men, and the movement in japanese history that they represent, 
which might be called the democratization of the esoteric. There is 
something about this idea that is of extraordinary interest to 
Americans, because, for better or worse, we live - in a culture in 
which there is nothing esoteric. There are no secrets except those 
things that cannot be understood, which in a way are always 
esoteric. Only a few people can understand them; therefore, these 
secrets don't need to be guarded. If, for example, you publish a 
textbook on nuclear physics, in the sense that it is published, the 
subject ceases to be esoteric. Yet, it remains esoteric because so few 
people can understand it. 


In our world, for example, teachers try their utmost to make 
themselves understood. They knock themselves out to make their 
message comprehensible without tears. But as I have explained, in 
Oriental cultures teachers expect the student to make the effort to 
attain the understanding. So, the teachers are difficult, and you 
must put yourself out to understand them. They are not going to 
make it easy for you, because of the belief that whatever comes to 
you too easily does not really come to you at all. 


However, there was in seventeenth-century Japan a movement, 
among those people whom you might call esoteric, to make their 
understanding available to the masses. Remember the idea-arising 
out of Buddhist compassion-that the aim in life, of a Bodhisattva, is 
to bring enlightenment to as many other sentient beings as possible. 
And yet, the problem is that when you seek to popularize 
something, how do you do it without making it vulgar, cheap, 
watered down, insipid? These four men were in their own quite 
different ways geniuses at answering that question. 


Let us start with Basho. He did not invent haiku poetry, but he 
brought it to a degree of development whereby it was possible for 
ordinary people who were not very literate to become poets. To 
understand the situation in which Basho arose, you must realize 
that japanese poetry grows on the tree of Chinese tradition and that 


by the seventeenth century, Chinese poetry was as difficult to 
follow as, say, T. S. Eliot is today To understand Eliot's The Four 
Quartets, you have to know an enormous amount of world 
literature and some very obscure books because it is a complex 
texture of allusions to other works. You have to know what these 
other works are in order to get the point. So this is poetry: written 
strictly for literati. And the Chinese brought this to a high degree of 
perfection, until poets were writing only for other poets. They were 
not getting anything across to people who spoke only everyday 
language. And this happened also in japan. If you read a novel like 
The Tale of Genji, you would read all about the light-footed amours 
of those very, very cultivated people, with their little poems and 
things, and the subtle kinds of allusions they made. 


In the same way, the tea ceremony became overrefined, until there 
were suggestions in the shade of a cup that were intended to remind 
you of something, a complicated set of associations that the master 
had planned. People indulged in all kinds of fantastic one- 
upmanship, in seeing who did or did not recognize the subtle chains 
of association, recognition of which depended upon a great deal of 
learning. Well, you see that it is a very elaborate game. And the 
intent and the object of the game is not really delight but seeing 
who can out-associate whom. So these seventeenth-century masters 
rebelled against that kind of thing. They wanted tea and poetry and 
painting and Zen to be appreciated for themselves and to be 
appreciated by anybody with basic human equipment. So Basho 
said that in order to write haiku, one should be taught by a child 
three feet high, because a statement that such a child would make 
would be a poem. And to the degree that what the child said was a 
simple image-just the kind of vivid statement that children often 
make-without philosophizing, it would be a profound poem. 


"You light the fire, / and then I will show you something wonderful, 
/ a great ball of snow." That is a haiku poem. Each of the following 
poems simply presents an image, and no more. 


A brushwood gate, / and for a lock, / this snail. 


Leaf fallen, / flying back to the branch, / butterfly. 


You see there is something a little bit clever about those two, and 
for that very reason they are not the best kind of haiku. Better still 
is something like this: 


"In the dense fog, / what is being shouted between 
/ hill and boat." 


You see the image of a river estuary hidden by fog, and you know 
there is someone down there in the boat talking to someone up on 
the hill, but you cannot make it out. You can't quite put your finger 
on it. That quality in japanese aesthetics is called yugen, and it is 
made up of two Chinese characters, both of which mean "the dark, 
the deep, the mysterious." Yugen is not like a. great abyss full of 
black clouds and lightning in which there might be a dragon, 
however. Yugen is the subtly mysterious, which the poet Seami said 
was like wandering on and on in a great forest without thought of 
return or watching flying geese appear and disappear in the clouds 
or watching distant fishing boats disappear behind islands. 


Now, what in all these images is the connecting link? That is yugen. 


We feel, from a Western standpoint, that haiku are unfinished. They 
are simply titles; first lines of something that could go on to 
elaborate and express everything. But in this kind of artistry, one 
leaves the best part unsaid, because the work of the poet is not to 
impress everybody with how clever he is, and leave them 
speechless, but to evoke something in the listener. In exactly the 
same way, the art of the painter-in the tradition of Sung Chinese 
painting-is to leave something to the beholders imagination; hence, 
there is what is called "one-corner painting." 


A painter like Mahiwon-or Byon, as he is known in japanese-is a 
master of one-corner painting. He indicates a line of hills 
somewhere near the top, and down at the bottom there is a single 
drifting boat and a fisherman. This is all there is. The path, as it 
were, comes to an end in the parsley. To understand this, you have 
to go back to childhood. Remember how as a child you loved to 
explore paths and get right down among the stalks of grasses and 
weeds, to see where it all goes? One of the eternal children's stories 
is that you were one day walking along a little lane and discovered 
a door in a wall that you had never seen before. You opened it, and 


it led into a magical garden where all the bushes were covered in 
jewels, and there were marvelous birds and fantastic songs. And 
you came out because you had to get home in time for dinner, and 
the next day you looked for that door again but you couldn't find it 
anywhere. You knew it was there-it was just between this fence and 
that fence. But today it isn't there. And yet somehow it is always 
there. 


So, for every child there is always a kind of funny place that leads 
to somewhere else, and you don't figure out exactly where it leads 
because that would spoil it. You mustn't know. And all this haiku 
poetry, and this kind of painting that the Sung artists so 
marvelously mastered, seeks to evoke that sense of what I would 
call possibility or potentiality, without actually filling in any details. 
And that is real magic. This is the way to suggest the abysmally 
evil, and it is likewise the way to suggest the ineffably beautiful. Do 
not fill in the details. Indicate; do not explain. 


Let us take some other examples. Consider the famous Ryoan-ji 
Garden in Japan. The most important thing about Japanese gardens 
is the background in which you find them. You cannot take Ryoan- 
ji, as people have attempted to do, and reconstruct it in Brooklyn 
unless you reconstruct the background, too, and that is going to be 
pretty difficult to do. Now what is that background? There is a wall 
along the back of the garden, a rather low wall, but just high 
enough because it lies on the crest of a slope. Beyond it the hill 
descends. All you see beyond the wall is trees. So, too, in many of 
the gardens around the temples in Japan, you will see over the wall 
perhaps a roof, and then beyond that, treetops. And those treetops, 
although the temple is in the middle of a dense city, somehow 
suggest that outside the garden is a forest. 


There is something else. You know the quality of sky as you see it 
over the tops of the hills that lie between you and the - ocean: there 
is something very distant in the blue of that sky, suggesting miles 
and miles and miles of space, and gulls and pelicans drifting away 
into the distance. Openness. Something that, in other words, your 
spirit goes out into and has nowhere to land. Now, that kind of 
quality is yugen. And the trick in haiku is to evoke the mood of 
yugen, a certain sort of mysterious suggestiveness, by very simple 


means that do not actually pin anything down. That is the point of 
haiku poetry, to put this possibility within the reach of people who 
had within themselves the capability, the sensitivity, to appreciate 
the yugen feeling or another feeling that is called sabi. Sabi is akin 
to yugen. It refers to a certain kind of solitariness or loneliness, 
good loneliness-not the loneliness that plucks at the heart strings 
and makes you long for friends. That is not sabi. Sabi is when you 
love to be alone and are at peace in this loneliness. 


There is also another mood, but still akin to these two, which in 
japanese is called aware. It is spelled like our word aware only 
pronounced "a-war-e." And this, like yugen and sabi, is difficult to 
translate. It is a sense of sadness, but delightful sadness. 


There is a poem which says, "Even in the mind of a no-mind man, 
there is aware when the snipe leaves the marsh on an autumn 
evening." Think of late autumn, when all nature is foggy and cold 
and the leaves have almost gone, and the last sign of life-the bird, 
the snipe-leaves and goes somewhere else, perhaps farther south, 
when the last geese have migrated and winter has set in. It is to say 
that even in the mind of a no-mind mind-that is to say, in the mind 
of a buddha, who has no egocentric feelings-even in the mind of 
such a person, there comes a clutch of sadness. Aware is a sort of 
nostalgia, and we feel it very strongly in all the poetry of 
transience. This is one of the greatest themes of poetry. The world is 
floating away. Nothing can be possessed. We are all dissolving 
smoke. Poets keep on about this, and so do preachers, but in 
different ways. The preacher says, "Vanity of vanities, all is vanity." 
But in the next moment he will burst into poetry. That chapter in 
Ecclesiastes, where everything is described as passing away-how 
exquisite it is. The same magic is evoked in Shakespeare: 


Our revels now are ended. These our actors, 
As I foretold you, were all spirits and 

Are melted into air; into thin air: 

And, like the baseless fabric of this vision, 

The cloud-capp'd towers, the gorgeous palaces, 
The solemn temples, the great globe itself, 
Yea, all which it inherit shall dissolve 

And, like this insubstantial pageant faded, 


Leave not a rack behind. We are such stuff 
As dreams are made on, and our little life 
Is rounded with a sleep. 


What is going on here? From one point of view, the poet seems to 
be putting everything down, to be saying that all is a vision, all is 
an illusion. And yet at the same time the poet borrows from this 
vision. He borrows the beautiful imagery of cloud-capped towers, 
gorgeous palaces, and solemn temples. And from the illusion itself 
he weaves his spell. 


Fitzgeralds Omar Khayyam seems a bit corny to us now, to ears 
trained by modern poetry, but to the Victorian ear it had the same 
magic. "The earthly hope men set their hearts upon turns ashes, or 
it prospers, and anon like a snow upon the desert's dusty face, 
lighting a little hour or two, is gone." 


Oriental poetry-haiku, every kind of Buddhist sutra-is full of the 
theme of the disappearing world, the floating world that vanishes. 


Now one kind of person would say, "Uh-uh-uh, no, don't you look at 
those beautiful girls, because in a few years they're going to be ugly 
old ladies. Don't take delight in this delicious food, because in a few 
years you are going to have chronic stomach ulcers and bad 
digestion. Don't dissipate yourself with singing and dancing, 
because not long from now you will have rheumatism or arthritis, 
and a sore throat, and you won't be able to enjoy it anymore." 


But another kind of person would say, "Yup, it all dissolves. It all 
goes away. The beautiful girls will become old ladies, the handsome 
young men will become crones, and eventually they will all become 
bare skulls. And isn't that great?" 


What is wrong with skeletons? When you pick up a seashell on the 
beach, you say, "No one home anymore. All the flesh in this bone is 
dissolved." And you say, "Wow, look at that. Isn't that great?" 


A skull is just as beautiful as a seashell. It is a bone that a brain 
once lived in; a bone from which jeweled eyes once shown. But still, 
look at that 'white skull-it is really a marvelous thing. We have been 
taught wrong associations. We have been taught that the going- 


away Of life is against life, but as a matter of fact, life is entirely 
something that always goes away. Going away-dissolving-is the 
same thing as living. But if we are taught that dying is against life, 
then we can't live. Dying is the same thing as living. Everything 
becomes bones; everything turns back into the soil, becomes 
fertilizer. That is life. A loved one must be allowed to dissolve and 
not be clung to. So this is why the seam of transience and 
dissolution is really one of the mainstays of poetic beauty. And the 
poet is a genius, and a compassionate Bodhisattva to us all, when he 
takes the thing that we dread-that is to dissolve-and shows us that 
such dissolution is the heart of beauty and the heart of life. That 
beauty is what the mood of aware in haiku and painting and poetry 
seeks to evoke. 


Now, I have gotten a rather long way away from the other three 
gentlemen I started to talk about, so lets move on to Sengi. Sengi 
was a Zen master who made the greatest thing out of marvelously 
bad paintings. In a way, you might say of Sengi that he couldn't 
paint. Nor could he write. His writing is like a childs, and his 
paintings are caricatures. And yet they are not. There is something 
about him that is extremely humorous. He enjoyed, always, a joke 
on himself-about how badly he wrote, how badly he painted, and 
the fact that he got away with it. In fact, he became so famous in 
the seventeenth century that people started to copy him, thinking it 
was a cinch to do what he did-that anybody could paint like Sengi. 
In the same way, some people look at a modern abstract painting 
and say, "Well, my child could do better than that." 


There was one painter in Kyoto who was making quite a lot of 
money forging Sengi paintings and selling them. And one day Sengi 
came to visit him, and he said to this man, "I have brought you my 
seals. Your forgeries of my paintings are so good that if you would 
actually put my own seals on them, they would be perfect. 


"But," he said, "excuse me if I borrow them occasionally, because I 
might need them myself." 


Now, what is Sengi doing? He is a man who has been greatly 
collected hut who painted for the joy of painting, not to be shown. 
That is to say, he had no ambitions to be hung in a gallery ora 
museum. He just liked to draw. So he is trying to say that in order 


to be a painter, you don't have to be shown in a gallery. And that if 
you paint to be shown in a gallery, you are not going to bea 
genuine painter. 


Has it ever occurred to you that people who want to be shown in 
museums, who have that as their supreme ambition in painting, are 
doing a very odd thing? A museum is a kind of morgue. Real artists 
paint to have their paintings lived with or put in a house; they paint 
a screen that is actually going to be used as a piece of furniture in a 
room. Painting, in other words, is something as useful in its own 
way as plumbing. It makes a gorgeous house. It isn't made just to be 
shown, to be a fad, to be talked about, to have art historians going 
cluck, cluck, cluck. The moment it becomes that, it becomes the 
same kind of thing as poetry that cannot be understood unless you 
know the allusions. It becomes academic painting. 


So Sengi restores painting to seventeenth-century art as something 
to be done not to be a fake little gallery artist but to thoroughly 
enjoy yourself with a brush. 


So it is with Zen. Zen, too, can become too clerical. And so it does, 
with professional Zen. I was discussing this with a good Western 
Zen student once, and she said, "Do you know, if you stay around a 
teacher too long, he starts to get worried about you. That is to say, 
if you are not going to be a teacher yourself, if you are not going to 
be a priest, if you're just a lay student of Zen, and if you go back to 
this guy year after year after year, he starts to get troubled and says 
that you're addicted, that its becoming a bad habit. That somehow 
you have to get rid of Zen. Wherever these things become 
professional, people lose their spirit." 


And so there emerged these two other men in the seventeenth 
century who in quite different ways helped make it possible for Zen 
understanding to spread beyond a sort of clerical circle. Hakuin did 
it by one method, and Banke by another. And very interesting 
results arose from this. Hakuin was an extraordinarily clever 
teacher. He systematized the koan system in such a way that it 
could be very conveniently handled, and he had eighty students 
who became accomplished Zen masters. That was considered 
absolutely extraordinary because, before Hakuin, it had been felt 
that one Zen master would have only one or two really good 


students, who would become his spiritual descendants. It was felt 
that in this present age of the Kali yuga-when everything is falling 
apart-you could not possibly expect more than that. So Hakuin, by 
his very ingenious but rigorous discipline, was a martinet. He really 
was. But he encouraged many young Japanese to go through the 
mill of his technique. And somehow, by pepping them up and 
challenging them with vigorous discipline, he allowed eighty 
students to succeed him. 


Now Banke did exactly the opposite. He taught Zen mainly to 
farmers. He was the roshi at a temple in Kyoto for many years, and 
he taught to the simplest people. He said that to understand Zen, 
you didn't really have to do anything; that if you try to attain satori, 
its like trying to wash blood off with blood. What you have to 
understand is your unborn mind. This idea is hard to put into 
English. You have to understand the nonmanifest, which hasn't yet 
arisen into the world of appearances. He said, "Because of your 
unborn mind, when you hear a crow squawk or when you hear a 
bell ring, you know instantly, without any premeditation or without 
having to stop to think, what has happened." 


One day there was a Nishirin priest heckling Banke out in the back 
of the audience, saying, "I don't understand - what you're talking 
about." Nishirin shu is a very belligerent form of Buddhism-it is like 
jehovah's Witnesses in Buddhism. So Banke said, "I would be happy 
to explain, please come closer." And the Nishirin priest came closer, 
and Banke said, "Come closer still." And the Nishirin priest kept on 
coming. When he was right up there with Banke, Banke said, "How 
well you understand me." 


So Banke would say, "Zen consists in faith in your innate quality of 
intelligence, in your organic pattern. Trust it. After all, your eyes 
are beautifully blue or brown, your hair is wonderfully brunette or 
blond. Your breathing is fantastic. Your heart is working 
beautifully. That is your Zen. Go ahead." And all those farmers, and 
the other people who came around, understood Banke. But Banke 
didn't leave any disciples. He had no spiritual successors. And for 
this reason he is considered, in a certain way, an enormous success, 
because he was like a bird going through the sky without leaving 
any traces. As the poem says, "Entering the water, he does not make 


a ripple. I Entering the forest, he does not disturb a blade of grass." 


Banke is largely forgotten today because of this. Those who are 
remembered, you see, are those who left spiritual descendants who 
could show a certificate and say, "See, I was trained by such and 
such a master, who was trained by such a master, who was trained 
by such a master." In all such genealogies, however, there is a 
temptation toward formalism and a certain kind of pride. So, ina 
sense, by leaving no specific descendants, he at the same time left 
many nameless descendants, people who were totally unimportant 
historically, who were farmers and peasants, but who really got the 
point of what he said. They decided, then and there, that because 
they understood, there was no need to become professional Zen 
Buddhists. They understood that there was no need to label 
themselves as Banke followers or Zen followers or Buddhists, 
because whoever really gets this thing and understands it knows 
that he hasn't attained anything. 


In the Diamond Sutra Buddha said, "When I attained complete 
perfect and unexcelled awakening, I attained nothing at all." And 
you see that nothing at all is the same nothing into which all trees 
and plants and bodies and butterflies and birds are disappearing in 
the course of endless transformations. Everything disappears into 
nothing at all, but out of that same nothing at all come all the new 
things, forever and ever. 


CHAPTER SIX 


Return to the Forest 


4 
During the past few months I have been studying an 
extraordinarily interesting paper written by joseph Campbell, whose 


name will be familiar to many of you as the author of a book on 
mythology called The Hero with a Thousand Faces. Joseph 
Campbell is also the editor of the posthumous works of Heinrich 
Zimmer, which have been published by the Bollingen Foundation. 
As a matter of fact, many of those works are his own original 
writings, since they were compiled from Henrich Zimmers notes. 
But the paper I am referring to was presented I think in 195 7, in 
August, at the Eranos Conference in Switzerland, at a meeting of 
scholars and philosophers and psychologists and scientists who 
gather every year under the auspices of a woman who has for a 
long time been interested in the work of C. G. Jung. The particular 
paper that joseph Campbell presented at this conference is called 
The Symbol Without Meaning and is an exploration of an 
extraordinary phenomenon in the history of religions-which you 
might call the development and the dissolution of cosmologies, of 
great views of the world, under religio-philosophical auspices-which 
is the language about the universe that has been devised by various 
cultures. Now, Campbell distinguishes two great phases in mans 
religious history. He equates them with two styles of culture, which 
predate our own technological style of culture. These are the 
hunting cultures and the agrarian cultures. He points out that the 
kind of religion characteristic of a hunting culture is what generally 
goes by the name of shamanism, although that particular word is 
distinctive of Mongolian styles of so-called primitive religion. 


Nevertheless, the phenomenon known as shamanism is found 
distributed all over the planet. Shamanism is characteristically a 
very individualistic type of religiousness. That is to say, the 
religious experience of the shaman is not something that he gets 
from an authoritative priesthood. It is not something handed down 
from generation to generation, which he goes to a human teacher to 
learn. The shaman is a solitary medicine man, a man of power, who 
invariably has to find his experience for himself. Usually it is by 
going alone into the dangerous forest and undergoing some kind of 
ordeal, not necessarily on the physical level but always in the 
psychic world, the world of spirits. 


When he comes through the ordeal, he comes out an initiate of 
power. The reason one must attach so much importance to the 
individual character of this experience is that it goes along with the 
general style of a hunting culture, in which every individual man 
contains the whole culture. That is to say, it is not the kind of 
culture in which there is a division of labor. The hunter spends 
much of his time on his own. He has to learn to take care of himself 
in the forests, without any other human aid. And although hunting 
cultures have societies and social groups, they are composed of men 
with their women and children, men. who are equals because of the 
type of life that they follow. 


Now, an entirely different state of affairs arises within a settled 
agrarian culture. Here, because the style of life is more complex, a 
division of labor is required. You begin to see not only a separation 
of human beings into various castes and various functions but also 
the necessity of devising far more complex language and 
institutions to provide communication between them. And this 
always involves a very, very powerful socialization of the 
individual. Spending his time more and more in a settled place, he 
therefore has greater intercourse with other people. He has to learn 
to think in accordance with common patterns, whether these 
patterns be based on language, on the type of work, or on the 
geographical features of the area that he inhabits. Each individual 
has to subordinate himself to a socially implanted view of life, 
because only under these conditions is communication between 
individuals possible. And so it comes about that the style of 
religiousness that one associates with an agrarian, as distinct from a 


hunting, culture is a traditional and authoritative style of religion in 
which the individual derives his experience from a tradition usually 
embodied in a priesthood. And Campbell goes on to point out that 
the first historical instances of the appearance of the familiar circle 
symbol, which is called in Sanskrit the mandala, are associated with 
the agrarian cultures. No example of this kind of symbol is found 
archaeologically prior to the development of an agrarian 
community. 


Now, I might say something about the mandala as a mythological, 
world-symbol, although anybody who has studied the works of C. 
G. Jung is already very familiar with it. A mandala is essentially a 
circle, usually divided into four quarters, or into multiples of four, 
and embodies, as it were, the general theme of the integration of a 
community. It is not unlike, for example, a stockaded village or city, 
with a ring of defense around a center. Campbell shows that the 
symbol represents the kind of society in which functions are divided 
among specialists. We find that in many of these ancient societies 
the functions are divided precisely into four groups, just as they are 
in medieval European society. We have the spiritual power, the 
priesthood; the temporal power, the nobility; the commoners; and 
the serfs. In ancient Indian society we have the Brahman caste, the 
priest-hood; the Kshatriya caste, the rulers and soldiers; the Vaisya 
caste, the commons or merchants; and the Sudra caste, the laborers. 
These four castes, represented by the four divisions of the mandala, 
together form the common, integrated, encircled community. And 
the important point that Campbell makes about its religiousness is 
that it was carried down by tradition, by an authoritative priestly 
caste, and was experienced altogether by the community. The 
whole style of life in a community of this kind depended upon 
communication, and we can, communicate with one another not 
only by virtue of a shared, common language but also, and more 
important, by virtue of a shared, common view of the world. Of 
course, this is why those who have the private type of sensuous 
experiences we call hallucinations and illusions do not fit easily into 
a community. But Campbell's paper goes on to show that every so 
often social cosmologies and other views of the world held in 
common by societies tend to break up. He actually begins his paper 
with a reference to the fifteenth century, when because of the 
expansion of the Western world through the exploration of the 


surface of the globe, as well as a greater knowledge of astronomy, 
the geocentric view of the Ptolomeic universe-the view of the world 
under which Christianity itself had come to birth-began to break up. 
And this he looks upon as a breaking up of the mandala, the 
communal, agreed-upon, stable picture of the world, by means of 
which people were able to communicate with one another. It was a 
breaking up, therefore, that involved a disruption of all means of 
communication, and the throwing of culture into a fundamental 
confusion. 


It is perhaps just because of this breaking up of a unified world 
view, and a subsequent entry into the confused, relativistic world of 
modem thought, that Western peoples have become interested in 
other, earlier attempts to deal with) life as it must be lived during 
times when the mandala, as it were, was breaking up. For after all, 
the idea of going beyond a communal view of the world, and 
somehow managing to get along without that world, is not a new 
thing. It is very interesting that in ancient Indian society-and to 
some extent even still, in modem Indian society-when a man has 
done his work in society and is able to hand over his caste duties to 
his son, or sons, he abandons the world, as it were, and gives up 
caste, becoming what is ordinarily called a sunyasan. We think that 
that word usually means "holy man" or "hermit" or "spiritual 
devotee." But what is of particular interest, in connection with our 
current discussion, is that the abandonment of caste is also thought 
of as entering into the state of vanaprastha. Now, vanaprastha 
means a "forest dweller." The man who gives up caste goes to the 
style of life that predates the agrarian culture. He goes back, as it 
were, to shamanism. 


And this is true not only in the Indian culture but also in the 
Chinese. The Confucian way of life represents the community of 
convention, which is what the mandala also corresponds to: the 
nice, enclosed, tight little world in which we can feel we 
understand one another and our environment. It is the Taoist 
philosophy, by contrast, that corresponds to the Indian search for 
liberation, or moksha, that is to say, to liberation from the socially 
conditioned view of the world. 


There is evidence to show that the solitary, Taoist sage has some 


sort of ancestral connection with the shaman. And it is also possible 
that the words shamana in Sanskrit and shaman in Chinese both 
have their origin in the term shaman. The shamana is the man who 
has given up social life in the world. Likewise, the shaman in 
Chinese is the lonely sage in quest of immortality who has gone by 
himself into the mountains and the forests. 


Of course, we should not suppose that the entry into the stage of 
vanaprastha, or the Taoist sage's return to the forest, is in the strict 
sense of the word, a regression. Its no more a regression than is the 
wise man's becoming again as a child a regression. We don't mean 
that he has literally become childish, that he has forgotten how to 
think and speak and behave in human society. Neither does the 
person who enters into the stage of vanaprastha become a wolf man 
or a wild savage who runs around in the jungle naked and eats his 
food off the ground with his teeth. He does not do anything of the 
kind. But there is some sort of analogy between vanaprastha and 
going back to the shaman's religion, or to the life of the hunter. At 
the same time, it also refers to going beyond the place we find 
ourselves in society, where the worldview is a conditioned social 
pattern. Now, in what sense, in just what way, is vanaprastha a 
going beyond society? And how does it apply 'to our own situation? 
We are not, as it were, voluntarily going beyond our own nice, 
clear, authoritative, comfortable view of the world. We are rather 
being forced beyond it by the pressure of events, the uncertainty of 
our times, and the confusion and instability of modern thought, 
which separate us from a secure and humanly comfortable picture 
of the universe. 


Well, first of all, it must be obvious that one of the things 
principally involved by a social system of communication is that it 
is a form of what Korjipsky has called "time binding." The whole 
possibility of thought and language involves a codification of 
experience. It involves a form of thinking about life that is, after all, 
basically description. Now, description is a way of coding, of 
putting into symbols the events that go by us. And as we begin to 
be able to put events into symbols, we develop most peculiar 
powers of memory It becomes much easier to recollect and to 
formalize what has happened to us. And along with this, naturally, 
comes the ability to project our recollection into thoughts about the 


future. And this, apparently, is something that very primitive types 
of human beings do not do to any great extent. But for our ability to 
describe and to prefigure what is going to happen, we pay a very 
alarming price. By being able to think about all sorts of future 
possibilities we are able to experience the emotions appropriate to 
those possibilities as if they were present happenings. In other 
words, civilized man tends to be in a state of chronic worry and fear 
and anxiety, because he is always confronted not with the simple 
actuality of what is happening before him but with the innumerable 
possibilities of what might happen. And since, because of this, his 
emotional existence tends to be in a chronic state of anxiety and 
tension, he increasingly loses the ability to relate to the concrete 
world as it manifests itself to him in the actual present in which he 
lives. He becomes so tied up inside that, as it. were, the channels of 
his sensibility become blocked. He gets a kind of neurological 
sclerosis, a kind of inability to give himself permission to be 
spontaneous, to be alive with full joyous abandonment. Thus the 
more civilized we become, the more stuffy we get. And, therefore, 
the need arises for various ways of liberating ourselves from 
society, for entering what the Indians call vanaprastha, the life of a 
forest dweller. Because when a person reaches a certain point in life 
when he says, "I have had enough of all this. 1am simply tired of 
making life not worth living, by constantly living through the 
horrors of what might happen, for the sake of efficiency and 
membership in the community. Let me just get away from it all for 
a while and find out what the score is for me, myself. lam tired of 
being told what I ought to believe. I am tired of being told how I 
ought to see, how I ought to behave, how I ought to feel. Let me 
find out for myself who I really am." And so, these institutions that 
allow one to go back, as it were, to the shaman state of religion, to 
get away from the community interpretation of how one ought to 
think and feel, have arisen in a great many cultures. And they are 
arising again today. 


It is impossible and misleading to pretend to have what I would call 
an authoritative attitude about this phase of man's spiritual 
exploration. Sometimes, for example, when a person wants to find 
out who he really is, and he goes to a psychiatrist, he will 
occasionally find the kind who does not have an authoritative view 
of what human health is and who simply helps the individual to 


find his own way. Other times, unfortunately, he will. find a 
doctrinaire psychotherapist who thinks he knows what an 
integrated, healthy, normal human being is; who has rigid, 
theoretic beliefs about what the actual facts of human nature are, 
the actual design of the psyche; and who attempts, consciously or 
subconsciously, to wangle the patient into accepting his views. 


Similarly, we may get from the Orient, from books or authorities, 
information about ways of liberation, which have hardened into an 
orthodoxy and which present these ways of liberation just exactly 
as if they were the kinds of spiritual experiences that it is the 
function of that social officer, the priest, to impart. And thus, when 
we get swamis representing an orthodox interpretation of Indian 
moksha, or liberation, or even when we get Zen masters 
representing an orthodox Buddhist experience, we should be 
suspicious because these are the kind of experiences that cannot be 
transmitted and that, because of their very nature, are things that 
one must find out for oneself. And if they could be explained, if 
they could be transmitted, they would therefore fail to be the very 
things they are intended to be, because they are discoveries of 
something authentic, of something genuine and firsthand between 
oneself and ones universe. And, thus, it is in the nature of things 
that they cannot be codified; they cannot be made a factor in social 
communication. 


And so, it is in a way fortunate that we in the Western world do not 
have too many authoritative masters and teachers to whom we feel 
we can now go for enlightenment. More and more of us, I think, 
tend to feel that we are all alone together, whistling in the dark, 
that we haven't a savior. There is no statesman clever enough to 
understand the frightful tangle of international affairs or to really 
do anything much about them. There is no psychologist or 
physician or philosopher who really impresses us as having the last 
word on everything. More and more, each one of us is thrown on 
our own resources. And this seems to me to be a perfectly excellent 
state of affairs. We have, in a symbolic sense, come back to the 
forest, like the hunter of old, who had nobody around him to tell 
him how he ought to feel and how he ought to use his senses, who 
was required, therefore, to make his own exploration of the world 
and to discover it for himself. 


But as you learn when you study the records of these self- 
discoveries, the fascinating thing about them is that there is so 
much agreement among all those who do discover the world for 
themselves. 


And yet, you do not achieve this agreement by seeking it. It is not 
achieved by looking out of the corner of your eye to see if 
everybody else is getting the same results as you or by trying to find 
out what others have already discovered. It is achieved by going 
down into one's own inner, secret place and asking there for a 
direct encounter with the world, independent of convention. 


It is in this way that a person becomes, in the truest sense of the 
word, a self-an original, authoritative source of life- as distinct from 
being simply a person in the original sense of persona: a mask, a 
role to be played in society. 


ZEN IN THE ARTS 
With Alan Watts 


Three fascinating talks on awareness 
and the origins of creative spontaneity. 


LANDSCAPE, SOUNDSCAPE IN 
PAINTING, MUSIC AND 
MYSTICAL VISION 


ZEN BUDDHISM AND 
THE ART OF THE CONTROLLED ACCIDENT 
PaRTS I & II 


Three sixty-minute audiocassettes 
for $30.00 


includes priority shipping and our tape catalog 


ELECTRONIC UNIVERSITY 
Post Office Box 2309 


San Anselmo, CA 94979 
1-800-969-2887 


Philosophy/Zen Buddhism 


Wwe Jack Karouac wrote about Zen in Dharma Bums he was 
echoing the sentiments of the Beat generation, who found in 
Zen credence for a way of life unencumbered by the limits of 
“square” society. And it was Alan Watts who first wrote and spoke 
about Zen and Eastern culture in terms accessible to mainstream 
Western audiences. 


Through his popular radio series Way Beyond the West Alan Watts 
brought listeners a delightful and practical side of Zen, which he 
prescribed as “a cure for education and culture.” By the early sixties 
his radio programs were renowned for their synthesis of Eastern 
wisdom and everyday life. Several of these radio talks have been 
selected and edited by Mark Watts, Alan’s oldest son, to introduce a 
new generation to Zen and the Beat Way. Through this collection 
we see influences of D. T. Suzuki, C. G, Jung, Gary Snyder and 
others. Specific chapters discuss Zen influences on traditional 
Japanese and Chinese arts and explore the celebrated concept of the 
“controlled accident” within the rich tradition of Zen aesthetics. 
Also included is “Return to the Forest,” an essay that explores the 
works of Joseph Campbell on the carliest Beat traditions. 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 

Alan Watts (1915-1973) is a best-selling author of over twenty 
major works on the philosophy and psychology of religion and 
is considered to be one of the most original and “unrutted” 
philosophers of the 20th century. He is also the author of the 
Philosophies of Asia and Myth and Religion, both in the Love of 
Wisdom library published by Tuttle Publishing 


Alan Watts at Big Sur, 1952 
Photo by Jerradine Lamb © 1997 


ISBN 978-1-4629-0466-2 


TUTTLE PUBLISHING iii 
Boston * Rutland, Vermont * Tokyo | 
www.tuttlepublishing.com 97381 US $12.95 


Printed in Singapore 


