$1.95/V-923 


394-71923-9 


The Artof Gadmanshio 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


Also by Alan Watts 


THE SPIRIT OF ZEN 

THE LEGACY OF ASIA AND WESTERN MAN 
THE MEANING OF HAPPINESS 

THE THEOLOGICA MYSTICA OF ST. DIONYSIUS 
BEHOLD THE SPIRIT 

ZEN 

EASTER—ITS STORY AND MEANING 

THE SUPREME IDENTITY 

THE WISDOM OF INSECURITY 

MYTH AND RITUAL IN CHRISTIANITY 

THE WAY OF LIBERATION IN ZEN BUDDHISM 
THE WAY OF ZEN 

NATURE, MAN, AND WOMAN 

THIS IS IT 

PSYCHOTHERAPY EAST AND WEST 

THE JOYOUS COSMOLOGY 

THE TWO HANDS OF GOD 


ALAN WATTS 


BEYOND 
THEOLOGY 


The Art of Godmanship 


VINTAGE BOOKS 


A Division of Random House 
New York 


The author wishes to thank the following authors and 
publishers for permission to include copvright material: 
James Nisbet and Company, Ltd. and Harper & Row, 
Publishers, for excerpt from Worship by Evelyn Under- 
hill. Faber & Faber, Ltd. and Harcourt, Brace & World, 
Inc., for excerpt from “Five-Finger Exercises” from 
Collected Poems 1909-1962 by T. S. Eliot and for ex- 
cerpt from “East Coker, III” from Four Quartets by 
T. S. Eliot. Sheed & Ward Inc. for excerpts from The 
Spiritual Letters of Dom John Chapman by Dom John 
Chapman. Published by Sheed & Ward Inc., 1946. John 
Murray (Publishers) Ltd., London, and Houghton 
Miffin Company, Boston, for excerpts from “An 18th 
Century Calvinist Hymn” and “Before the Anaesthetic” 
now appearing in John Betjeman’s Collected Poems. 
S. P. C. K., London, and The Macmillan Company, New 
York, for. excerpt from Hebrew Religion by W. O. E. 
Oesterley and Theodore H. Robinson. Miss D. E. Col- 
lins and J. M. Dent & Sons Ltd. for “The Mirror of 
Madmen” from The Wild Knight and Other Poems by 
G. K. Chesterton. This selection also appears in The 
Collected Poems of G. K. Chesterton published by 
Dodd, Mead & Company. Cover illustration reprinted 
from Psychology Today Magazine, January 1973, © 
Communications/Research/Machines, Inc. 


VINTAGE BOOKS EDITION, August 1973 
Copyright © 1964 by Alan Watts 


All rights reserved under International and Pan-Ameri- 

can Copyright Conventions. Published in the United 

States by Random House, Inc., New York, and simul- 

taneously in Canada by Random House of Canada Lim- 

ited, Toronto. Originally published by Pantheon Books, 
a division of Random House, Inc., in 1964. 


Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Watts, Alan Wilson, 1915- 
Beyond theology. 


Bibliography: p. 

1. Christianity and other religions. I. Title 
[BR127.W28 1973] 261.2 73-4542 
ISBN 0-394-71923-9 


Manufactured in the United States of America 


TO MY FATHER, 
Laurence Wilson Watts 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE 


The Chinese Box 

Is It Serious? 

Who Is Responsible? 

How Must We Have Faith? 
Who Is Who? 

This Is My Body 

The Sacred Taboo 

Is It True? 


REFERENCES 


INDEX 


PREFACE 


Perhaps I can best indicate the spirit and approach of 
this book by asking you to imagine that you are at- 
tending a solemn service in a great cathedral, com- 
plete with candles, incense, chanting monks, and 
priests in vestments of white, scarlet and shimmering 
gold. Suddenly someone pulls you by the sleeve and 
says, “Psst! Come out back. I’ve got something to 
show you.” You follow him out by the west door, and 
then go around the building to the extreme east end 
where there is a small door leading into the sacristy 
or vestry. This is the ecclesiastical equivalent of the 
green room in the theater, and you are about to enter 
by what, in a worldly setting, would be called the 
stage door. However, just outside you notice a couple 
of clerics—in their vestments—lighting up ciga- 
rettes. Now transpose this scene to Heaven, so that 
the church service will be nothing less than the wor- 
ship of the saints and angels around the throne of 


[ ix ] 


PREFACE 


the Lord God of Hosts. I pull your sleeve and say, 
“Psst!” 

I am afraid that there are those who will feel not 
only that this is not very reverent, but also that such 
an approach is absolutely blasphemous, and that no 
one could possibly be saying, “Psst!” in front of the 
throne of God except, perhaps, the Devil himself. 
However, the reader must be assured that it is far 
from my intention to debunk, to give offense, or to 
hold sacred things up to ridicule. For your author is 
acting, not in the role of the Devil, but in the capac- 
ity of the Court Jester, and I am sure that there must 
be such an office even (or especially) in Heaven. 

If you know anything about the lore and the his- 
tory of the Fool at Court, you will know that his 
function was not merely to be funny. I am not about 
to build you a convenient slide into religion, greased 
with wit. The function of the Fool was to keep his 
monarch human and, with luck, even humane, by a 
judicious unstuffing of his pomposity and by keeping 
alive his sense of humor—the essence of which is 
laughter at oneself. Undoubtedly the Lord God is not 
in need of these services. Nevertheless, omnipotent 
and self-sufficient as he is held to be, he is alleged to 
have an immense entourage of ministering angels, 
doing things which he could very well take care of 
himself, and without the least exertion. Theologians 
call this unbusiness-like arrangement the “divine 
economy,” because the economics of Heaven are 
based, not on saving and scraping, but on the utmost 
extravagance and exuberance—as witness the pro- 
verbial prodigality of nature. In Heaven (and also, 
if we could see it aright, on Earth) everything is 


[x] 


Preface 


gloriously unnecessary, and this would include the 
office and work of the totally unnecessary Fool. 

This book might, then, have been entitled Inside 
Theology or even Inside Heaven, were it not that 
these Inside titles have been pre-empted by Mr. John 
Gunther. Because it does not presume to be a schol- 
arly book, I am not using such technical hellenisms as 
Metatheology or Paratheology,! though Beyond The- 
ology is an approximate translation of the former 
used in somewhat the same sense as “metalanguage” 
—that is, a languagee designed to discuss a language; 
from a higher level of abstraction or from a larger 
frame of reference. It is intended that in “The Art of 
Godmanship” there shall be the echo, not only of 
Stephen Potter, but also of the “Godmanhood” of 
Solovyev and Berdyaev. 

I have previously published three other theological 
books: Behold the Spirit (1947), The Supreme Iden- 
tity (1950), and Myth and Ritual in Christianity 
(1953). In varying ways these books attempted a 
synthesis between traditional Christianity and the 
unitive mysticism of Hinduism and Buddhism, and 
in this respect The Supreme Identity was probably 
the most successful. It represented a point of view 
which is associated with the work of Ananda Coo- 
maraswamy, René Guénon, Frithjof Schuon, Marco 
Pallis, and Alain Daniélou—the so-called “tradition- 
alist school” which regards every orthodox spiritual 
tradition as a more-or-less deliberate adaptation of 
the philosophia perennis to the needs of different cul- 


*My next-door neighbor, the Greek painter Varda, has sug- 
gested also catatheology, anatheology, prostheology, epithe- 
ology, apotheology, peritheology, hypertheology, hypotheol- 
ogy, and atheology. 


[ xi ] 


PREFACE 


tures. They incline to see the purest form of this per- 
ennial wisdom in the non-dualist (advaita) Vedanta, 
which is the central viewpoint (darshan) of Hindu- 
ism. 

Upon reflection, this did not satisfy me. There is 
not a scrap of evidence that the Christian hierarchy 
was ever aware of itself as one among several lines 
of transmission for a universal tradition. Christians, 
whether of the right wing of the Catholics or the left 
wing of the Protestants, do not take at all kindly to 
ideas that even begin to question the unique and 
supreme position of the historical Jesus. Any attempt 
to marry the Vedanta to Christianity must take full 
account of the fact that Christianity is a contentious 
faith which requires an all-or-nothing commitment to 
Jesus as the one and only incarnation of the Son of 
God. Even very liberal “modernist” Christians with 
doubts about the actual Godhead of Jesus will never- 
theless maintain that he was “divine” in the sense of 
being far-and-away the best and greatest of men. 

My previous discussions did not take proper ac- 
count of that whole aspect of Christianity which is 
uncompromising, ornery, militant, rigorous, imperi- 
ous, and invincibly self-righteous. They did not give 
sufficient weight to the Church’s disagreeable insist- 
ence on the reality of the totally malignant spirit of 
cosmic evil, on everlasting damnation, and on the 
absolute distinction between the Creator and the 
creature. These thorny and objectionable facets of 
Christianity cannot be shrugged off as temporary 
distortions or errors. They play an essential part in 
the Christian way of life, though in a manner that 
must necessarily be surprising and unexpected—as I 


[ xii ] 


Preface 


shall try to show. Only such a uniquely “impossible” 
religion could be the catalyst for the remarkable de- 
velopments of human consciousness and self-know]- 
edge which distinguish Western culture since 1500. 
These developments are now swelling into a crisis on 
every level of human life—a crisis that cannot be 
handled unless we know, among other things, the 
role that Christianity has played in bringing it about. 


Because this is a theme which need not require an 
academic approach, I have reduced bibliographical 
apparatus and supportive quotation from authorities 
to a minimum. Translations from the scriptures and 
liturgical texts are my own unless identified as fol- 
lows: AV, the Authorized (or King James) Version; 
NEB, The New English Bible; BCP, The Book of 
Common Prayer. Loving thanks are due to my wife, 
Mary Jane, for expert editorial help in preparing the 
manuscript. I am also most grateful to Mr. Laurance 
Rockefeller and Harvard University, and to the Bol- 
lingen Foundation, for their generous support of a 
project which included work on this book. 


ALAN Watts 
Sausalito, California 
Spring, 1964 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


The Chinese Box 


Whoever knows that he knows must be amazed. This 
is both to wonder and to be lost in a maze: to wonder 
because knowing and being is downright weird, and 
to be lost in a maze because knowing that one knows 
generates a confusion of echoes in which the original 
sound is lost. For when I know that I know, which 
one is IP The first which knows, the second which 
knows that I know, or the third which knows that I 
know that I know? 

On the one hand, to know about knowing is to 
think: to have in mind a formula of words or symbols 
which stands for the act of knowing. On the other 
hand, it is to turn the senses back upon themselves, 
to try to become physically aware of the very organs 


[3] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


of being aware. Infants do this from the beginning: 
they probe, suck, and manipulate the accessible parts 
of their own bodies; they poke their fingers into their 
ears; they try touching their eyeballs; they whirl 
themselves around so as to feel dizzy. The only trou- 
ble is that the body is not completely accessible to 
itself and the senses are not fully transparent to them- 
selves. True, I can explore someone else’s body much 
more fully than my own, but that wasn’t quite what 
I wanted to do: I wanted to feel it all from the inside 
rather than the outside. 

Because, then, the senses are not fully transparent 
to themselves, the act of knowing (and isn’t this 
really what I call I?) seems to be without any tan- 
gible foundation. It springs from the void. It stands 
alone: a light illumining the world, but not illumin- 
ing the wires that connect it with the world, since 
they lie immediately behind it. I am therefore to 
myself a stranger in the earth, facing and meeting 
the world, but not really belonging. 

Herein, quite simply, is the origin of man’s poig- 
nant sense of individuality—of being uniquely alone, 
and of having an existence which is mysteriously lost 
and problematic. He is kicked out of Paradise, be- 
cause Paradise is having a connection—roots in the 
garden, stem from the branch, current to the light. 
To be unaware of the connection is to have one’s 
heart in the wrong place—far out in the fruit instead 
of within, in the tree. It is to feel that one’s basic self 
is isolated within the body’s envelope of skin, for- 
getting that the self is the whole circulating current 
from which embodiments come and go season after 
season, endless variations upon one theme. 


[4] 


The Chinese Box 


A hundred gourds 
from the mind 
of one vinel 


Nevertheless, the sensation of being lost and alone 
is not actually something against nature. It is a dare, 
an adventure, a new game of getting lost, as children 
sometimes like to be shut up in the dark. To play 
at being individual, alone, and afraid to die is a 
strangely fruitful game. Hence all wonders and 
myths, religion and philosophy, science and technics. 
Hence the whole splendid and terrible fantasy of hu- 
man civilization. Hence, also, the marvelous bitter- 
sweetness of loving another person. Your “I” inside 
your skin, and my “I” inside mine, pockets of the 
same current, but not knowing it save in the obscure 
form of loving you without being able to say just why 
. . . I never die at all: I only get lost every time I 
am born, because I then come to feel that I am rolling 
around out there, all unconnected. And when I feel 
out there, I am as unconscious of my connection, of 
my being in fact the whole current, as I am uncon- 
scious of the brain formations which underlie con- 
sciousness. 

The question to be explored is how far out can I 
get? How lost without being utterly lost? It is thus 
that when we are children, we test the limits of real- 
ity, we try to find out how much we can get away 
with, how far we can provoke authority without call- 
ing down wrath, and how deeply we can get involved 
in all sorts of games of skill without losing track. The 
question for the human being is how personal can I 
become without losing track? How unique? How sen- 
sitive and sympathetic? How respectful of human 


[5] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


life, or, for that matter, of animal life? How far does 
my very claim to humanity depend upon protecting 
my own rights as against those of the collective? 
Even more important: is being a person in the direc- 
tion of losing track? Or may it be that when the 
connection is lost, it can be regained only by going 
forward, and becoming personal to the extreme limit? 

The importance of these questions lies in the fact 
that Western cultures have bred a type of human 
being who feels strongly alienated from everything 
which is not his own consciousness. He is a stranger 
both to the external world and to his own body, and 
in this sense he has lost his connection with the sur- 
rounding universe. He does not know that the “ulti- 
mate inside” of himself is the same as the “ultimate 
inside” of the cosmos, or that, in other words, his 
sensation of being “I” is a glimmering intimation of 
what the universe itself feels like on the inside. He 
has been taught to regard everything outside human 
skins as so much witless mechanism which has noth- 
ing whatsoever in common with human feelings and 
values. This style of man must therefore see himself 
as the ghastly and tragic accident of sensitive and 
intelligent tissue caught up in the cosmic toils like a 
mouse in a cotton gin. 

Yet this isolated experience of identity is far out in 
the double sense of being very lost and very coura- 
geous: it is a heroic identity. But, alas, one of the 
most troublesome kinds of people is the hero without 
humor, who is, in this case, the style of individual 
who is unconscious even of the ghost of a connection. 
He is acting Hamlet so seriously that the player of 
Polonius is actually murdered on the stage. On the 


[6] 


The Chinese Box 


level of “real life,” as well as on the level of dramatic 
performance, there must always remain some hint or 
clue (Ariadne’s thread) so connecting the players 
with reality that they can afford to get lost in their 
roles. Mastery in the drama consists in so concealing 
the clue that it almost appears to be gone. So superb 
is the acting that the audience very nearly forgets 
that there is a proscenium arch, marking off the stage 
from actual life. Likewise, mastery in nature consists 
in evolving an individual organism so unique and so 
autonomous that it almost appears to be a separate 
universe. Such is human personality at its best... . 
Actually, however well concealed, the clue is always 
there, for if the connection were in fact to dissolve, 
the illusion of the separate individual would likewise 
vanish. 

Westerners are not the only people who feel that 
they are disconnected individuals, out there on their 
own. But they are the only people who brag about it, 
and this is because the isolated style of individuality 
has a highly positive value in their religious and phil- 
osophical traditions. Hebrew and Greek attitudes 
have combined through Christianity to nurture and 
exaggerate this particular sensation of personal iden- 
tity, and to this day both Catholic and Protestant or- 
thodoxies stand powerfully opposed to any view- 
point that seems to compromise the “integrity” of the 
individual soul. Any suggestion that there is some 
inner level at which, as in Hinduism, God and man 
are identical, at which “thou art That,” is dubbed 
pantheism—as if this anathema simply ended the 
matter then and there. To some extent this is, indeed, 
just as it should be, because a strongly dogmatic and 


[7] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


authoritarian abasement of the creature—“Don’t you 
dare to presume that you are God!”—is exactly what 
has made the Western style of individual so frisky 
and bumptious. He has had to exert himself mightily 
to achieve every kind of original, novel, and pecul- 
iarly personal success in order to justify himself be- 
fore the Boss. For the Boss notices; he loves and 
judges every single creature separately, and his de- 
mands are stern. As Martin Buber once observed, in 
the day of judgment the Lord will not ask, “Why 
were you not like Moses or Elijah?” but “Why were 
you not like Martin Buber?” In this way the individ- 
ual is ever reminded that whereas, on the one hand, 
he is unique and immeasurably precious in the eyes 
of God, on the other he has been conjured into being 
out of nothingness, and down to the utmost core of 
his existence is no more than a dependent creature. 
No arrangement could be more perfectly calculated 
to produce that particular quality of anxiety which, 
in the West, we believe to be the essential incentive 
to social and moral endeavor. 

Yet today the intelligent Westerner finds himself in 
an odd situation which requires the deepest reconsid- 
eration of who, or what, a man is. On the one hand, 
it is less than a hundred years since it has seriously 
dawned upon Europeans and Americans that they are 
a minority on this planet, and that Western civiliza- 
tion is surrounded with peoples who are also civi- 
lized, but along rather different lines. Hindus and 
Buddhists, in particular, do not idealize the separate- 
ness of the individual, and have never felt that reality 
is severely divided into the spiritual and the material, 
the infinite and the finite, the Creator and the cre- 


[8] 


The Chinese Box 


ated. Man has not, in these other cultures, styled him- 
self as an adopted orphan in relation to the divine. 

On the other hand, man as he is described in the 
modem sciences has little in common with man as he 
feels himself subjectively. Subjectively, he remains 
the isolated consciousness, or soul, inhabiting a physi- 
cal body. But to the biological, physical, and psycho- 
logical sciences, man is a pattern of behavior in a field 
—like a whirlpool in water—and this behavior is as- 
cribable equally to the bodily organism and to its 
environment. This ecological view of man as an or- 
ganism/environment is as foreign to the Christian 
view of the embodied soul as it is to the popular ma- 
terialistic view of man as an intelligent biological 
fluke in a mindless and mechanical world. Ecology 
must take the view that where the organism is intel- 
ligent, the environment also is intelligent, because the 
two evolve in complexity together and make up a 
single unified field of behavior. 

However, the way in which men feel their exist- 
ence subjectively is still very largely determined by 
theological and mythological images. Greek, Hebrew, 
and Christian images of man lie at the root of our 
social institutions—in our laws and the methods of 
enforcing them, our family structures and the raisiig 
of children, our status games, our educational and 
academic procedures, and, perhaps most important of 
all, in the very grammar of our languages. The some- 
one, the unique and specific ego, who knows and 
feels, who responsibly causes actions, who dwells in 
the body but is not quite of the body, who confronts 
its experiences as something other, who is the inward 
controller of thinking and willing—this is assumed in 


[9] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


every phase of our culture and in all the practical 
matters of everyday life. 

It matters not whether any given individual be a 
Christian or a Jew, a fundamentalist or an atheist: his 
sense of identity is nonetheless based upon a theo- 
logical image. Theological images remain immensely 
powerful even when churches are unattended and 
Bibles unread. For the sensation of one’s identity is 
not something biological, like the response of the eyes 
to color. It is a result of social conditioning and is 
itself a social institution. The child comes to feel who 
he is in response to the words, attitudes, and gestures 
of others toward him; he is defined by his social en- 
vironment in the process of learning the rules of the 
game which his particular society is playing.’ In turn, 
the rules of the social game are based historically 
upon traditional ideas of cosmology, and of the inner 
meaning of birth and death, fortune and misfortune. 
For this reason, then, a serious study of theology is 
still of immense importance in Western culture—but 
not in the spirit of theological seminaries, and still 
less in the spirit of mere historical curiosity. 

What we need is a new kind of theological critique 
—not a polemic, not a debunking, not even a “restate- 
ment in contemporary terms.” We need a natural his- 
tory of theology, wherein the development of reli- 
gious ideas and practices is studied, not as something 
good for life or bad for it, but as a form of life itself, 
like a particular species of flower or bird. At first 
sight it may seem that no approach could be more 
insulting than this to the true believer. For he de- 


* This has been discussed quite fully in Ch. II of my Psycho- 
therapy East and West. Pantheon Books. New York, 1961. 


[ 10 ] 


The Chinese Box 


mands above all to be taken seriously, to know 
whether we are with him or against him. To such a 
person it is subtly but devastatingly irritating to have 
the discussion moved to an altogether different level, 
as, for example, to go into the problem of why he 
personally wants a firm agreement or disagreement 
with his point of view. This is likewise the familiar 
psychoanalytic gambit of “bugging” someone who 
wants to argue the pros and cons of two football 
teams, by diverting the discussion to the reason for 
his interest in balls. An archbishop of Dublin is re- 
ported to have said of the Church, “You may per- 
secute us; we are quite used to that. You may argue 
with us and attack us; we know very well how to 
handle ourselves. But the one thing we will not tol- 
erate is that you should explain us.” 

However, I have no intention to insult. On the con- 
trary, in the perspective I am taking, the Christian 
tradition has appeared to me as something far, far 
more remarkable than I have hitherto suspected. 
More remarkable than it can be seen when taken, 
believingly, from the standpoint of orthodoxy. 

The approach I am trying to follow is so simple 
that I am astonished that it has not been used before. 
And, as often happens, an unfamiliar approach is dif- 
ficult to define. 

As already intimated, we are going to look at Chris- 
tianity simply as a phenomenon of life—like a rose 
bush—without asking, for the moment, whether it be 
true or false. Thus far the work is one of observation 
rather than critique or clarification. But a rose bush 
grows in a field or garden, and what the rose bush is 
doing can be described fully and adequately only if 


[11] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


we see it in relation to what other plants are doing, 
as well as the birds, snails, greenfly, squirrels, and 
people. Obviously, then, the critique of theology that 
we need—perhaps we might call it a metatheology— 
must include the resources of “comparative religion.” 
Since the close of the past century, Christian intelli- 
gentsia have woken up to find themselves in a new 
world—no longer the narrow domain of cultures sur- 
rounding the Mediterranean Sea, but a world in 
which Africa, Asia, Australasia, and the Americas are 
unavoidable neighbors.? As the context of a word 
may change its meaning without altering its form, so 
also may the context of a culture or a religion. Chris- 
tianity is one thing in the context of Mediterranean 
and European culture, of Judaism and Islam. But in 
the context of Taoism and Confucianism, Hinduism 
and Buddhism, it may be quite another. 

There is, of course, no satisfactory way of arguing 
the merits of any one of the great world religions 
against the others. In all such debates the judge and 
the advocate are the same person, for a man judges 
his own religion the best simply because the standard 
he uses is that of his own religious upbringing. Al- 
most all apologies for the superiority of one religion 
over others come down to this tediously circular ar- 
gument. I have been trying, therefore, to find a more 
fruitful way of making these comparisons—some- 
thing that also goes much further than the mere ob- 
servation that Christians do it this way, whereas Mus- 
lims do it that. The whole point of making these com- 


*I am speaking, of course, of the indigenous populations of 
these continents, since an effective knowledge of their cultures 
did not become available until long after their colonization. 


[ 12] 


The Chinese Box 


parisons, whether of religions or of cultures, is that 
the differing traditions should throw light on each 
other. A Christian should study Buddhism so as to 
get a deeper comprehension of Christianity. 

“Comparative religion” or “comparative theology” 
has hitherto been a strictly academic pursuit, and the 
better authorities on the subject have been competent 
scholars and subtle philosophers. To date they have 
done such an excellent job that no one can make 
crass or odious comparisons between religions with- 
out making it very clear that he is an ignoramus. To 
say, for example, that whereas Christians believe the 
Ultimate Reality to be a loving, personal deity, Bud- 
dhists maintain that it is only an empty void, is to 
show that one understands neither Christianity nor 
Buddhism. For as we go into the depths of these 
matters, making full allowance for cultural variations, 
for differences of language and metaphor, and for all 
the semantic confusions which they engender, it ap- 
pears that men’s experiences of “the ultimate” are 
peculiarly alike. When they get down to negative or 
apophatic theology—the approach to God by the 
sculptural method of cutting away concepts—St. Dio- 
nysius and St. Thomas are speaking the same lan- 
guage as Nagarjuna and Shankara. At such levels the 
differences between sophisticated Christian theolo- 
gians and Hindu or Buddhist pandits are mere tech- 
nicalities. . . . But there are other levels. 

The difficulty with philosophical theology is that it 
becomes so subtle and so abstract that it neglects the 
mythic aspect of religion. I am, of course, using the 
word “myth” in a special and technical sense, quite 
different from the vulgar usage wherein myth is false- 


[ 13 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


hood, superstition, or baseless fantasy. The mythic 
aspect of religion is that which involves imagery or 
narrative, and, secondarily, participation in rituals 
and sacraments. Can one deny that this is by far the 
most effective aspect of religion so far as the vast ma- 
jority of people are concerned? For images are far 
more moving than abstract concepts, though it is im- 
portant to remember that even the most attenuated 
concept is still basically an image. 


It is arguable [wrote Evelyn Underhill] that 
every approach of the conditional mind to the Ab- 
solute God must take place by symbolic means; 
though these may not be of a material kind, and 
may even be unrecognized by those who use them. 
With the growth of spirituality these mediating 
symbols tend to become more abstract; but this does 
not mean that they are left behind. The “empti- 
ness,” the “darkness,” the “nothing,” the “Cloud of 
Unknowing” of the mystic, though they be negative 
statements, are still symbols drawn from his sensible 
experience, in and through which he seeks to ac- 
tualize his obscure experience of God. (1) 


The one respect in which Christianity differs quite 
essentially from other religions is in the mythic as- 
pect, since a Christian is one who commits himself to 
the idea (though he will say the fact) that Jesus 
Christ was the historical incarnation of God, and that 
his miraculous birth, his crucifixion and resurrection, 
were real events which radically changed the rela- 
tionship of the universe to its Creator. To say that 
these events are mythic is not to deny that they may 
also be historical, for no orthodox Christian would 
want to assert that they are merely historical, like the 


[ 14] 


The Chinese Box 


Battle of Hastings or Mr. Lincoln’s speaking at 
Gettysburg. 

An approach to comparative theology which is mu- 
tually enriching in the fullest way must therefore deal 
with religions on the mythic level as well as the meta- 
physical and philosophical. But this does not mean 
simply the academician’s comparative mythology, 
with its stress on the anthropological, archaeological, 
and literary investigation of myths. The constructive 
and creative “metatheologian” must be something 
much more than a museum curator or accomplished 
academic drudge. He must be a poet, not just a versi- 
fier, but a master of images—a parabolist, allegorist, 
analogist, and imaginator. He must be the poet in the 
primordial sense of the word poiesis, poiein—to 
make-do, to create. Only with this kind of imaginative 
handling will the myths fructify one another. 

But things do not fructify one another by mere jux- 
taposition; they have to be woven together in some 
kind of active relationship, and for this purpose I 
have found the contextual, or Chinese box, method 
extraordinarily effective. For example, the holy scrip- 
tures of the Hebrews are included in those of the 
Christians, and, in this context, given an interpreta- 
tion which the Hebrews find impossible to swallow. 
Nevertheless, there is nothing positively asserted in 
the Hebrew religion—as a matter of belief about the 
universe and man—which cannot be included in 
Christianity. Contrariwise, however, the positive as- 
sertions of Christianity cannot be encompassed by 
Judaism. It is simply not acceptable to the Jew that 
Jesus was the Lord God in the flesh. Yet Christians 


{ 15 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


have no qualms about reading the Old Testament, as 
they call it, as a collection of inspired writings which 
forebode the coming of Christ. 

The fact that the Christian scriptures can include 
the Hebrew, but not the Hebrew the Christian, does 
not imply that Christianity is a better or truer religion 
than Judaism. From the standpoint of an unpreju- 
diced observer, it implies only that if you put the 
Hebrew revelation within the context of the Christian 
revelation, the former undergoes a most interesting 
transformation. Whether or not this transformation 
will be something more than interesting, that is, 
deeply moving and convincing, will depend upon the 
reaction of each individual. 

Now, some of the great Catholic missionaries to 
India, such as the Jesuit Robert de Nobili, have sug- 
gested that the Hindu scriptures—notably the Upani- 
shads and the Bhagavad-Gita—should be regarded 
as a supplementary Old Testament. The notion is 
laudable, but will it work? Does Hinduism assert any- 
thing positively that cannot be included within Chris- 
tianity? Alas, there is in Hinduism the crucial doc- 
trine of tat tuam asi (“That art thou”), which asserts 
the ultimate identity of oneself and the Godhead. At 
the level of philosophical theology we can probably 
iron this difference out. We can doubtless argue that 
the “self” referred to here is not the ego, not the 
personal soul (the Hebrew nefesh), but the spirit, 
the ruach Adonai or breath of the Lord which gave 
life to the clay image of Adam when it was breathed 
into its nostrils. We might say that the ground of 
man’s being is the immanent presence of God, which 
at every moment supports and energizes both soul 


[ 16 ] 


The Chinese Box 


and body—a “beyond” which is “within.” As one of 
the Christian mystics put it, “He is thy being, but 
thou art not his.” 

But this is a subtlety which takes the whole ex- 
citement out of the issue. At the mythic level, Hindu- 
ism asserts that all experience whatsoever is God’s, 
and that God is the one and only knower and seer. 
All multiplicity, all sensations of limited and separate 
individuality, of the duality of here and there, I and 
thou, are God’s dream or maya—a word that signifies 
not only illusion but also art and miraculous power. 
The universe is therefore conceived as God’s game 
(lila) of hide-and-seek with himself, such that all be- 
ings are simply the masks of the one divine Self 
(atman) 3 

This is an essentially dramatic view of the cosmos, 
contrasting sharply with the Hebrew and Christian 
view of the world as an artifact. In the former, the 
creature is the role or disguise of the Creator, but in 
the latter the creature is as distinct from the Creator 
as the table from the carpenter. But from the Chris- 
tian standpoint the former view is quite inadmissible, 
quite shockingly blasphemous. (The Jews felt the 
same about the divine claims of Jesus.) For one of 
the major values of Christianity, as of all strictly the- 
istic religions, is the eternal importance of differences. 
Christianity therefore insists vehemently on an abso- 
lutely essential difference between the Creator and 
the creature, between good and evil, and between 


*Some Hindu pandits, especially of the extreme advaita, or 
non-dualist, school, may accuse me of using very loose lan- 
guage here, but I must repeat that I am speaking mythically, 
not metaphysically, that is, of the saguna and not the nirguna 
Brahman. 


[17 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


one creature and another. It has often struck me that 
Christian preachers and apologists like to assume a 
nubbly or prickly attitude when discussing these mat- 
ters, coming out in the clipped and crusty tone of 
their voices. 


How unpleasant to meet Mr. Eliot! 
With his features of clerical cut, 
And his brow so grim 

And his mouth so prim 

And his conversation, so nicely 
Restricted to What Precisely 

And If and Perhaps and But. (2) 


And, of course, What Precisely is very, very impor- 
tant. One really needs to know whether the trans- 
parent stuff in the bottle is gin or muriatic acid. 

Christianity even brings the principle of differen- 
tiation into the Godhead itself with the doctrine of 
the Trinity, insisting, vehemently as ever, that the 
Father is not the Son, and the Son is not the Holy 
Spirit, but that nonetheless all three are one and the 
same God. It objects to what it calls the “monism” of 
the Hindus because, without differentiation, there is 
no place for the supreme values of love and relation- 
ship. However, this argument cuts both ways because 
what the Christian says about the “Three in One and 
One in Three” relationship of the Trinity is almost 
exactly what the Hindu says about the “Many in One 
and One in Many” arrangement of the universe. If 
the latter makes love between the members unreal, 
so does the former. 

If, then, the Christian system cannot contain the 
Hindu, can the Hindu contain the Christian? Hindus 
are, of course, notoriously tolerant, and it is well 


[ 18 ] 


The Chinese Box 


known that Sri Ramakrishna lived for some time as a 
Christian in order to complete his understanding of 
the many aspects of divine revelation. But wouldn’t 
the Christian say that Sri Ramakrishna could not 
really have become a Christian without committing 
himself to the sole and exclusive role of Jesus Christ 
as the savior of the world? And wouldn’t he also have 
had to renounce the proud blasphemy of “I am 
That?” 

To understand this we must go rather more deeply 
into what was presumably Sri Ramakrishna’s attitude, 
so as to understand the special kind of respect which 
a Hindu might have for the Christian viewpoint. 
When the Hindu says that the universe is God’s maya 
or dream, the word maya is not necessarily used in a 
bad sense, as if it were a mere dream. I have said that 
maya also means art and miraculous power, the crea- 
tion of an illusion so fabulous that it takes in its Cre- 
ator. God himself is literally a-mazed at and in his 
own work. Were it otherwise, it would certainly be 
no fun to be God. But a-mazement means, among 
other things, getting deliberately lost, and this would 
naturally involve God’s finding himself in a position 
where he seems not to be God at all, but merely a 
creature. Getting still further lost, he might well find 
himself in the most critical of all possible situations: 
confronted with the ultimate gamble—the necessity 
of making an immediate choice between everlasting 
bliss and everlasting torment, without being quite 
sure how to choose. Will you take what is in the right 
hand, or the left? Choose the right onel 

Without any disrespect it must be said that Chris- 
tianity is preeminently the gambler’s religion. In no 


[ 19 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


other religion are the stakes so high and the choice so 
momentous. Nowhere else is the good so gracious and 
the evil so blackly malignant. From the Hindu’s point 
of view, then, the Christian’s predicament is the ex- 
treme adventure of God into his own maya. The 
Hindu must gape at it as we look at trapeze artists 
and tightrope walkers in the circus, and what can he 
do but applaud? The ultimate act: the juggler, scared 
out of his own wits, keeping six bottles of nitro- 
glycerin whirling from hand to hand. But in this case 
the bottles are the stars and galaxies. 

The first and quite natural reaction of an orthodox 
Christian to this point of view is that it deprives the 
differences between God and man, good and evil, of 
ultimate reality. If they are no more than a temporary 
maya, they are not truly important at all. But that is 
a most improper thing for a Christian to say, for it is 
to assert the essential unimportance of whatever is 
temporal and finite, including, among other things, 
history. For it is the very center of Christian faith 
that the world has been redeemed by a temporal and 
historical event, the crucifixion of Jesus Christ under 
Pontius Pilate, somewhere around 30 a.p. This event 
began and ended in time, and, according to the story, 
culminated in a resurrection from death which must 
have been as shockingly splendid as any other awak- 
ening from a hideous nightmare. This event is past, 
gone, vanished, as surely as if it had been a film of 
smoke in the air. But will any Christian say that it 
was for this reason unimportant and unreal? 

According to the Hindu myth, the supreme Self is 
always going in and out of time, so that the maya is 
at once temporal and ever-returning. For a kalpa or 


[ 20 ] 


The Chinese Box 


“day of Brahma” lasting 4,320,000 years, the world of 
maya is manifested, and then for another kalpa comes 
the night, the pralaya in which the illusion is with- 
drawn, and in which the Godhead recollects its own 
nature, free from space, time, and finitude. But there- 
after the illusion begins again, and the days and 
nights of Brahma continue forever and ever. From 
the most deeply metaphysical and esoteric point of 
view, these days and nights must be regarded as 
simultaneous, as aspects of an eternal present which 
is “nowever.” Rightly understood, a single instant is 
as long as a century of kalpas, and all time is in just 
one pulse of come/go. 

We are saying, then, that differences are no less 
important for being relative or temporal differences. 
When one comes to think of it, a permanent or eter- 
nal difference would be something as monstrous as 
an infinitely tall man. Do those Christians who affirm 
the eternal distinction of Creator and creature, and 
the everlasting persistence of heaven and hell without 
rhythm or relief, actually pause to consider what they 
are saying? Any scholar of the Bible should realize 
that its language is.often poetic and metaphorical, 
and to say that the blessed shall rejoice and the 
damned shall be tormented “forever” refers not to 
chronological measure but to the degree of intensity 
of an experience. When people said, “O king, live 
forever!” they did not intend it literally, but when 
the interpretation of the Bible got into the hands of 
(Roman) lawyers instead of poets, this kind of 
thoughtless literalism became dogma. If, however, 
the Christian imagery is set within the context of the 
Hindu, the razor-edge path between salvation and 


[ 21 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


damnation, with all the magnificent and appalling 
consequences that this illusion has had for manki :d, 
becomes one of the greatest dramatic situations of all 
time. 

But once this is said, once the show has been given 
away, hasn’t all the magic of Christianity been dis- 
pelled? Instead of being a context for the Christian 
view, wouldn’t the Hindu viewpoint simply swallow 
it up? The answer to that problem must unfold itself 
through the course of this book. But in the meantime, 
there is simply this consideration: is anyone abso- 
lutely sure that the world is maya, that he himself is 
—deep down—the dreaming Godhead, that death is 
a change of scene, and that the choice between end- 
less glory and endless horror is just a device for mak- 
ing things thrilling? Isn’t it just possible that such 
ideas as these may be the most insidious hallucina- 
tions, the most persuasive and corrupting temptations 
of that arch-fiend and enemy of creation, the Devil? 
No one—not even, I think, the Godhead—is abso- 
lutely sure. For to be is courage, and to know is nerve. 
The answer is always “Yes/No,” because existence 
itself is a vibratory or wavelike affair, a “now-you- 
see-it-now-you-don't,” a back/front, up/down, here/ 
there situation like a mountain or wave with its up 
side and its down side, clearly different from each 
other and yet inseparable. 

To be quite sure, to be set, fixed, and firm is to miss 
the point of life. For living and being is a perpetual 
abandonment of the known and fixed situation. The 
only true peace is the always slightly uncertain appre- 
hension that No will imply Yes, just as much as Yes 


[ 22 ] 


The Chinese Box 


implies No. Hence the following is my favorite quota- 
tion from Shankara, the St. Thomas of the Hindus: 


Now a distinct and definite knowledge is possible 
in respect of everything capable of becoming an ob- 
ject of knowledge: but it is not possible in the case 
of That which cannot become such an object. That 
is Brahman, for It is the Knower, and the Knower 
can know other things, but cannot make Itself the 
object of Its own knowledge, in the same way that 
fire can burn other things but cannot burn itself. 
Neither can it be said that Brahman is able to be- 
come an object of knowledge for anything other 
than Itself, since outside Itself there is nothing 


which can possess knowledge. (3) 


In other words, the root and ground, the “firm founda- 
tion,” of the universe has nothing to stand upon, not 
even itself. It has no knowledge of the “how” of its 
own inner workings. This is no defect for the simple 
reason that this knowledge is not necessary. Light has 
no need to shine upon itself. But when we, who are 
used to leaning upon something, first get into touch 
with this inmost dimension of ourselves, it feels as if 
nothing is there, as if, in Ruysbroeck’s words, our 
whole life is “grounded upon an abyss.” 

There is, then, a fascinating contrast between the 
popular and mythic conception of the Hindu and of 
the Christian God. The latter is associated with the 
potter and the carpenter. He is the supreme techni- 
cian who knows just how everything is done, who can 
explain everything, and who comprehends, through 
and through, the mystery of his own being. He knows 
all the answers. When I was a child and was asking 
my mother impossible questions about the why and 


[ 23 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


wherefore of life and death, she would often say that 
there are some things we are just not meant to know 
—at any rate for the time being. However, after we 
had died and gone to heaven, God would make 
everything clear. So I used to think that on wet after- 
noons in heaven everyone would gather around the 
Throne of Grace and ask Omniscience “Why did you 
do this?” and “How did you do that?” and that the 
Lord would patiently and kindly give completely 
satisfactory answers. 

“Father, why are the leaves green?” 

“Because of the chlorophyll.” 

“Oh.” 

The Hindu God is shown, not as a technician, but 
as a being with many arms and many faces, a cosmic 
centipede of fantastic dexterity moving innumerable 
limbs without, however, having to think about it, to 
know how it is done. In just the same way, we move 
our own arms and legs, beat our hearts, shape our 
bones, constellate our nervous systems, and grow our 
hair with astounding efficiency and yet without need- 
ing to explain it. Indeed, thinking about these proc- 
esses often interferes with them, just as the actor or 
dancer falters when he is too conscious of himself. 

Therefore if anyone brought up in a Christian cul- 
ture says, “I am God,” we conclude at once that he is 
insane, but humor him by asking technical questions. 
“How did you create the world in six days?” “Why 
did you allow the Devil to get into the Garden of 
Eden?” “What were you doing before you created 
the universe?” But, in India, when someone suddenly 
declares, “I am God,” they say, “Congratulations! At 
last you found out.” For them, the claim to be God 


[ 24 ] 


The Chinese Box 


does not involve the claim to encyclopedic omnisci- 
ence and completely arbitrary omnipotence. The rea- 
son is that they know very well what a completely 
omniscient and omnipotent being would do. Imagine 
a world in which all the ambitions of technology have 
been fulfilled, where everyone has a panel of push- 
buttons which, at the lightest touch, will satisfy every 
desire more swiftly than the djinn of Aladdin’s lamp. 
Less than five minutes after this ambition has been 
attained, it will be essential to include upon the panel 
a button marked SURPRISE! For Hindus, the world- 
as-it-is is the result of having pushed that button; it is 
terrifyingly magical—at once far, far out of control 
yet at the same time one’s own inmost will. 

What we mean, in the Western world, by knowing 
how things are done is that we can describe the proc- 
ess in words, or some other form of symbolism. It is 
thus that our education consists almost entirely of 
learning skill with symbols—reading, writing, and 
arithmetic—relegating skill in kinesthetic, social, and 
esthetic matters to extracurricular activities. But the 
conduct and regulation of the whole human organ- 
ism, not to mention the whole universe, is manifestly 
an affair so swift and so complex that no lumbering 
string of words can account for it. The omniscience 
of God is precisely that he does not have to think 
before he acts. He knows how to produce the uni- 
verse just as I know how to breathe. 

In sum, then, I would say that a “metatheology” 
should have at least three basic operating principles. 
The first is that we look at a religion, not as some- 
thing about life, but as a form of life, a way of life, 
as genuine and authentic as a rose bush or a rhi- 


[ 25 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


noceros. For a living religion is not a commentary on 
existence: it is a kind of existing, an involvement, a 
participation. 

The second is the Chinese box or contextual prin- 
ciple, whereby we illumine one theological system 
(in this case the Christian) by looking at it and see- 
ing what happens to it in the context of another. 
This is the same sort of procedure as studying Chi- 
nese culture to get a better understanding of the 
basic institutions of our own culture; for a culture 
emerged in China that was very highly sophisticated 
and yet, in several respects, as unlike our own as any- 
thing on earth. It therefore offers the most admirable 
opportunity for instructive comparisons. Christians 
are characteristically leery of such procedures, but 
should take comfort from the fact that Hinduism 
is not a competitive or proselytizing organization 
like the Roman Catholic or United Presbyterian 
Churches. There is no head office to write to, and 
therefore no society out to “get” you and score you 
as a member. 

The third—a rather radical departure from the 
methods of scholarly theologians—is to deal with the 
subject almost naively, at its mythic, imagistic, or 
anthropomorphic level. I have found that this has 
many advantages, the most important of which is that 
it avoids the danger of idolatry. No educated person 
can take the anthropomorphic image of God quite 
seriously, and therefore, when he uses it, he knows he 
is using an image and does not mistake it for the 
reality. On the other hand, a highly refined abstrac- 
tion looks as if it isn’t an image, and is thus much 
more easily confused with a direct description of “the 


[ 26 ] 


The Chinese Box 


Truth.” We should never forget that all our ideas of 
the universe, whether theological, metaphysical, or 
scientific, are anthropomorphic—being translations of 
the way things are into the terminology of the human 
brain. Thus to think of God as Necessary Being or 
as the organic Pattern of the Universe can be much 
closer to idolatry than thinking of him as the Old 
Gentleman upon the golden throne, or as the many- 
armed and many-faced Dancer who is playing as the 
world. Another advantage of this imagery is that it 
enables us to discuss theological problems in a lively 
and dramatic way that is intelligible to people at 
many different levels of intelligence, and of many dif- 
ferent kinds of intelligence. . 

Hitherto, Christian theologians have, on the whole, 
been rather ashamed of their imagery. Since Clement 
and Origen first tried to make Christianity look re- 
spectable in the eyes of Greek intellectuals, theolo- 
gians have bent over backwards to assure us that 
heaven is not literally up in the sky, that angels don’t 
really go around in white nighties, and that God the 
Holy Ghost is not actually a dove.* By now they have 
made their point, and thus we can safely return to 
rich and colorful imageries, and to churches and tem- 
ples radiant with figures of gods, saints, and angels. 
‘Martin Luther twitted the Archbishop of Mainz as having, 


among his collection of holy relics, two feathers and an egg 
from the Holy Ghost as a dove. 


[ 27 ] 


II 


Is It Serious? 


The most profound metaphysical questions are ex- 
pressed in the most common phrases of everyday life. 
Who do you think you are? Who started this? Are 
we going to make it? Where are we going to put it? 
Who’s going to clean up? Where the hell d’you think 
you're going? Where do I come in? What’s the time? 
Where am I? What’s up? Which is which? Who's 
who? Do you mean it? Where do we get off? Are you 
there? But there seems to be one that must be asked 
right at the beginning. Is it serious? 

The most remarkable superficial difference be- 
tween Christianity and Hinduism is that the former 
replies “Yes” and the latter “No.” The King of kings 
and the Lord of lords very definitely expects to be 


[ 28 ] 


Is It Serious? 


taken seriously. Thunders and lightnings proceed 
from his throne, and, quite aside from any of the very 
serious demands that are made for moral behavior 
between man and man, the Ruler of Heaven requires 
above all that he be worshiped, and his faithful con- 
gregation responds with the words of the psalm, “O 
come let us worship and fall down, and kneel before 
the Lord our maker!” 

When I was a schoolboy, we were dragooned into 
attending the services at Canterbury Cathedral, the 
Mecca of the Anglican Church. As we knelt, bowed, 
or stood in the courtly and austere ceremonies of this 
ancient fane, we had to take the utmost care never 
to laugh or smile—an offense punishable with ruth- 
less floggings, and very difficult to avoid because of 
the astonishing idiosyncrasies of the venerable clergy, 
with their propensities for bleating, whining, or bum- 
bulating the prayers in sundry varieties of holy- 
sounding voices. There were rumbling Pooh-bahs, 
and wizened little ascetics preaching with fervent 
shrieks, and between stands in pulpit or lecturn they 
would process hither and yon, attired so as to look 
like rows of well-ordered penguins. . . . And yet 
neither the deadly seriousness of our postures nor the 
pathetic comedy of the clerics could quite conceal 
the atmosphere of luminous glory. High and echoing 
spaces of pale gray stone, enchanted with light that 
fell through the most intricate stained glass, predomi- 
nantly blue; stone smelling faintly and pleasantly 
musty, like a wine cellar, and the whole building 
seeming to float above the congregation with the dig- 
nity and independence of a gull in the sky. Floating 
above the then grubby little city of Canterbury, so 


[ 29 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


that its arches and spires belonged elsewhere, per- 
haps upon some high and inaccessible cliffs to the far 
West, overlooking the Atlantic, where angels still 
kept guard over the Holy Grail. 

I revive these memories to suggest that the sense of 
divine royalty is not altogether demanding and im- 
perious, and that therefore the worship of the King 
of kings, dwelling in inaccessible light, is not neces- 
sarily a cringing obedience or a stern duty. It may 
also have the sense of immense celebration, a strong- 
swinging, statelily lilting dance of total joy. The 
Gloria in excelsis sung at Easter, with the bells ring- 
ing wild. The golden splendor of the Greek or Rus- 
sian liturgy, where people do not kneel, but stand or 
wander freely in a domed temple that is deliberately 
made to suggest the glory of heaven. More and more 
one gets the impression that the object of this worship 
is no pompous prince, but something like living light, 
which is all at once as sympathetic as the fire on your 
hearth and as blasting as the explosion of a star. And 
as full of delight as a diamond in the sun. As the 
Catholic poet Coventry Patmore put it: “If we may 
credit certain hints contained in the lives of the saints, 
love raises the spirit above the sphere of reverence 
and worship into one of laughter and dalliance: a 
sphere in which the soul says: 

Shall I, a gnat which dances in Thy ray, 
Dare to be reverent?” 

Yet it must be admitted that in the Christian cli- 
mate of the English-speaking world, such penetra- 
tions of the facade are rare. The insides of most 
Protestant churches resemble courthouses or town 
halls, and the focal point of their services is a serious 


[ 30 ] 


Is It Serious? 


exhortation from a man in a black gown. No golden 
light, no bells, incense, and candles. No mystery upon 
an altar or behind an iconostasis. But people brought 
up in this atmosphere seem to love it. It feels warm 
and folksy, and leads, on the one hand, to hospitals, 
prison reform, and votes for all, and, on the other, to 
sheer genius for drabness, plain cooking ungraced 
with wine, and constipation of the bright emotions— 
all of which are considered virtues. If I try to set 
aside the innate prejudices which I feel against this 
religion, I begin to marvel at the depth of its com- 
mitment to eamestness and ugliness. For there is a 
point at which certain types of ugliness become fas- 
cinating, where one feels drawn to going over them 
again and again, much as the tongue keeps fondling 
a hole in a tooth. I begin to realize that those in- 
credibly plain people, with their almost unique lack 
of color, may after all be one of the most astonishing 
reaches of the divine maya—the Dancer of the world 
as far out from himself as he can get, dancing not- 
dancing. 

For them, as for many other Christians and Jews 
of all shades of belief, the Lord is an archetypal 
grandfather, who, because it is necessary to conceive 
him in the human image, has a fault which, in a hu- 
man being, is insufferable: he has never done any- 
thing wrong, or, if he has, he absolutely refuses to 
admit it. The same is true of the usual conception of 
Jesus. The minister’s son who won’t go behind the 
fence with the other boys for a peeing contest. So 
they throw him in the pond, but instead of fighting 
back he takes on a nobly injured attitude to make 
them feel guilty. But then, the most tough and an- 


[ 31] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


cient theological problem is the “mystery of iniquity” 
—not how the universe came into being, but how the 
snake got into the garden, how evil arose in a crea- 
tion ruled omnipotently by one who is so perfectly 
good. 

The big question is whether there is actually a 
twinkle in the Father’s eye; whether, before the crea- 
tion began and there was no one around as a witness, 
there was not a special arrangement between the 
Lord and the Devil, a conspiracy such that the whole 
drama of the cosmos depends upon its being kept 
(almost) secret. For if the Lord is absolutely serious, 
things are very bad. Not only does he confront his 
creatures with severe moral demands; he also fits 
them out with lusty, hungry, and highly sensitive 
bodies liable to cancer, bubonic plague, arthritis, de- 
cayed teeth, and stomach ulcers; he flings them into a 
world containing mosquitoes, sharks, tapeworms, pi- 
ranha fish, staphylococci, and other people; he puts 
them into a situation in which it has, on the whole, 
required considerable effort not to get involved in 
tortures and burnings, whether judicial or accidental, 
in wars, murders, and robberies, and in the weird 
emotional tangles that come from having a brain 
which finds it a necessary advantage to predict a 
(mostly) dreaded future. On top of this, he is alleged 
to threaten those who disobey his commandments 
with the most exquisitely painful tortures ever de- 
vised, to endure for always and always without rest. 

Of course there are temporary compensations, but 
the contemplation of this frightful panorama of pos- 
sibilities and certainties is what is called “facing re- 
ality.” It is at once very irreverent and yet absolutely 


[ 32 ] 


Is It Serious? 


necessary to call this fagade in question. Is God quite 
serious? To put it in another way: is this a universe 
in which there is the possibility of a total and irre- 
mediable disaster, of everlasting damnation or some 
equivalent thereof? Or is it a universe in which to be 
or not to be is not the question, since the one end- 
lessly implies the other? 

In the imagery of Hinduism the hard reality of the 
world confronting us is, as we have seen, lila (play) 
and maya (magical illusion). Shiva dances the uni- 
verse, surrounded with flames and flashing terrors, 
but one of his many hands is held upright with palm 
open to the spectator. The meaning is “Fear not.” 
This performance is a big act. The solidity of the 
rocks is an electrical mirage. The body is a whirlpool, 
constant only in appearance, but actually a stream of 
changes. And pain, the very touchstone of reality, 
since we pinch ourselves to be sure that we are not 
dreaming, is a hypnotic state which can be switched 
on or off at will. 

There is obviously no objective test that can be 
applied here. I can find out whether the world is 
serious or not only by personal experiment, that is, if 
the answer can be found at all. I may take the Lord 
God at his word, stop asking impertinent questions, 
and prostrate myself at the foot of the Throne. Or I 
may gently call his bluff and wait—poker-faced, 
trembling, or eagerly confident. It may well be that 
the Lord will play with me to the final microsecond 
of the last moment—perhaps with a long and terrible 
silence, perhaps with all the plagues and pains of the 
flesh, perhaps with visitations from subtly convincing 
prophets and preachers, and doubtless, at the very 


[ 33 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


end with the kindly priest and his Last Rites. On the 
surface, it will seem that I am just resisting divine 
authority, that I am refusing to let Love into my 
heart, that I am proudly repressing that inner voice 
of the terrified conscience, urging me to melt and run 
weeping and screaming to Heaven in sorrow for my 
sins. But if there is a man of such spiritual courage 
as to call the Lord’s bluff, what he is actually refus- 
ing to believe, what he will not take seriously, is not 
the Lord but his maya. He will not admit that agony 
and tragedy, that death and hell, fear and nothing- 
ness, are ultimate realities. Above all, he is not ad- 
mitting the final reality of separateness, of the seem- 
ing distinction between man and cosmos, creature 
and Creator. 

To the orthodox this courage will seem blasphe- 
mous, and to the skeptical and secular-minded it will 
seem to be wishful, since such persons have a view 
of reality that is grimmer by far than even Jonathan 
Edwards’ conception of the Angry God. For the secu- 
larist imagines the universe beyond and outside man 
to be essentially dead, mechanical, and stupid. With 
him it is high dogma that nature cares nothing for 
human values, but is a system of confusion which 
produced us by mere chance, and therefore must be 
beaten down and made to submit to man’s will. Now, 
there is something in this view of the universe which 
is akin to states of consciousness found in psychosis. 
The vision of the world as a Malicious System which 
eggs you on with hopes, just to keep you alive, and 
then grinds you horribly to bits. In this state there is 
no luminosity in things. Faces, flowers, waters, and 
hills all look as though they were made of plastic or 


[ 34 ] 


Is It Serious? 


enameled tin—the whole scene a tick-tock toy shop, 
a nightmare of metal and patent leather, garish under 
reflected light alone. Other people aren't really alive; 
they’re mocked-up mannequins, automatic respond- 
ers pretending to be alive. Even oneself is a self-frus- 
trating mechanism in which every gain in awareness 
is balanced by new knowledge of one’s ridiculous and 
humiliating limitations. 

Those who, outside mental hospitals, like to see 
things this way persuade themselves and others that 
this attitude is somehow not only realistic but heroic. 
In philosophical arguments they can always one-up 
the religious or metaphysically inclined by a show 
of being down-to-earth and hard-boiled. Perhaps it 
is just a matter of temperament that some people 
simply cannot take that view of things; for me it has 
always seemed peculiarly odd that there is anything 
at all. It would have been so much easier and so 
much less effort for there not to have been any uni- 
verse, that I find it impossible to think that the game 
is not worth the candle. A cosmos that was not basi- 
cally an expression of joy and bliss would surely have 
found some way of committing suicide almost at 
the beginning, for there is not the least point in sur- 
viving compulsively. 

One should not be ashamed of wishful thinking, 
for this is just what all inventive and creative people 
do. They are dreamers, and they find ways of realiz- 
ing their dreams because they wish and dream effec- 
tively. That is to say, their wishful thinking is not 
vague; their desires are imagined so precisely and 
specifically that they can very often be carried out. 
The trouble with many religions, accused of wishful 


[ 35 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


thinking, is that they are not wishful enough. They 
show a deplorable lack of imagination and of adven- 
ture in trying to find out what it is that one really 
wants. I cannot conceive any better way of trying to 
understand myself, or human nature in general, than 
a thorough exploration of my desires, making them as 
specific as possible, and then asking myself whether 
that is actually what I want. 

What, then, if I were to construct a religion as a 
pure work of art, creating a picture of the universe 
as wishful as it could possibly be? On the one hand, 
such a construction would be the purest play and 
fantasy, wholly lacking in seriousness. But on the 
other hand, fantasies are sometimes unexpectedly 
productive. The strictly playful and speculative con- 
structions of mathematicians often turn out to be use- 
ful formulae for understanding the physical world. 
For the pure mathematician is much more of an artist 
than a scientist. He does not simply measure the 
world. He invents complex and playful patterns with- 
out the least regard for their practical applicability. 
He might almost be on a permanent vacation—as if 
he were sitting on the terrace of a seaside hotel, do- 
ing crossword puzzles and playing chess or poker 
with his cronies. But he works in a university, which 
makes it respectable, and his games and puzzles are 
marvels of intricacy. When Riemann had invented 
equations, not merely for 4-dimensional spaces, but 
for 5, 6, 7, and n-dimensional spaces, it was found 
that these equations could be applied to problems in 
price fluctuation! 

The historian, too, is basically an artist, selecting 
from the infinitude of past events those that will fit 


[ 36 ]. 


Is It Serious? 


into some significant and intelligible pattern, for his 
art is to make sense of human doings. Likewise the 
Copernican theory of the solar system is preferable 
to the Ptolemaic mainly because it is simpler. The 
planets do not have to backtrack in their courses, but 
proceed smoothly upon their orbits. The picture is 
cleaner and tidier, and thus more satisfactory from 
an esthetic point of view. 

Why not ask, therefore, what might be the most 
esthetically satisfying explanation for one’s own ex- 
istence in our particular universe? It must be an 
explanation that will completely satisfy me for the 
most appalling agonies that can be suffered in this 
world. Upon what terms would I be actually willing 
to endure them? 

We will often suffer willingly to help those we 
love, and it is along these lines that Christian theol- 
ogy has generally tried to justify suffering. Pain is 
transformed by offering it to God as an act of adora- 
tion. There is no greater love than to lay down one’s 
life for a friend, and this is finally what God himself 
is always doing. This is the sacrifice of God the Son, 
offered because “God so loved the world.” To Chris- 
tians, the meaning of suffering is therefore that it 
evokes love and gives reality to love. The love which 
God bears toward the world is real because, in some 
way, it is costing—even to God. As the hymn says: 

There was no other good enough 
To pay the price of sin; 

He only could unlock the gates 
Of heaven, and let us in. 

Yet though I may be willing to suffer for those I 
love, I am not willing that they should suffer. Indeed, 


[ 37] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


I will my suffering for them just because I do not will 
theirs. A universe in which my friends have to suffer 
is thoroughly objectionable if their only compensa- 
tion is that it evokes my love for them, or even if it 
evokes God’s love. From our standpoint of wishful 
thinking, a universe in which suffering happens by 
mistake is just badly made, and a universe in which 
suffering comes upon us through the malice of some- 
one else is a diabolical trap. Ideally, I would want to 
be solely responsible for my own suffering, including 
my own painful feelings about the suffering of others. 
I would wish the same privilege for everyone else. 
But obviously this must mean something much more 
than responsibility in its ordinary sense, for it has to 
include the case of the baby born with syphilis. 

Popular Hinduism and Buddhism explain such 
tragedies as the individual’s karma, his own doing, 
inherited from a former life. The syphilitic baby is 
therefore paying a price for some evil that he has 
done in a previous incarnation. But this is not so 
much an explanation as an indefinite postponement 
of explanation. Why and how does the reincarnating 
individual first go wrong? Responsibility for one’s 
own suffering cannot be attributed to the individual 
as we know and see him superficially, for, at this 
level, the individual—whether adult or infant—seems 
far more the victim than the agent of his agony. 

We must therefore imagine a new kind of individ- 
uality in which there are two spheres with a common 
center. The outer sphere is the finite consciousness, 
the ego, the superficial individual, which believes it- 
self to be the willing agent and knower, or the pas- 
sive sufferer, of deeds and experience. But the inner 


[ 38 ] 


Is It Serious? 


sphere is the real self, unknown to the conscious ego. 
For the latter is the temporary disguise or dream of 
the former, and the real Self would not only be un- 
afraid of entering into dreams of intense suffering; 
it would all the time be experiencing the process as 
delight and bliss, as an eternal game of hide-and-seek. 

This fantasy religion would then require the final 
condition that at some time the two spheres would 
merge, that my inmost Self would awaken from its 
dream to transform my superficial ego with a shock 
of recognition. Perhaps this is why we sometimes 
have a strangely pleasant sensation of having forgot- 
ten something extremely important from long, long 
ago. Occasionally, this shadow of a memory comes 
with hints of a forgotten paradise, some luminous 
landscape of hills and waters which is utterly fa- 
miliar and yet completely unidentifiable. Every now 
and then the “real” world reminds us of it, and we 
think, “This is what I have always been looking for. 
This place feels like home.” At other times, the mem- 
ory has a much deeper dimension—a sensation of be- 
ing immeasurably ancient and knowing, as somehow 
prior to time and space. But there is nothing at all 
specific about it, for though the sensation is vivid, it 
is tantalizingly ephemeral. These are, then, intima- 
tions of something to be remembered which is, as it 
were, a vast dimension of one’s being which has been 
kept hidden—perhaps from the moment of birth. For 
consciousness, or conscious attention, is the trick of 
noticing the figure and ignoring the background, and 
in the same way I seem to notice my ego and forget 
my background, the larger Self which underlies my 
ego. 

[ 39 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


Let us suppose, then, that my overt life as an in- 
dividual is being imagined by a hidden Self that is 
actually much more the central me than my ego, and 
that at some unspecified time (if only the moment of 
death) I shall wake up and recollect the infinite joy 
which is expressing itself in this endless game of 
dancing in and out of the light. Merely to define the 
state of the inmost Self as “infinite joy” is to dodge the 
real task of inventing an ideal religion. If my fantasy 
is to approach being a work of art, I must try to de- 
fine quite clearly what I want in this transcendental 
joy. 

Thus it should be noted, in passing, that Christian 
imagery is very vague about the glories of heaven and 
amazingly specific about the agonies of hell. Pictures 
of people in heaven are invariably demure and dull, 
whereas hell is a writhing orgy (4). Hints of heaven 
come in the stained glass of Sainte-Chapelle and the 
illuminated manuscripts of Lindisfarne, in the glow- 
ing rites of the Eastern Liturgy, and in the chanting 
of the Solesmes Benedictines. But these are no more 
than strains, heard through a door held briefly ajar. 
It is time to venture more boldly into the dynamics 
of delight to discover what we really want from 
heaven. 


*I am rem nded of the story of a dinner-table conversation in 
an English country house, where the guests were discuss ng 
the r ideas of what would happen to them after death. Among 
those present was an elderly and somewhat stuffy gentleman, 
who happened to be a prominent layman in the Church. He 
had been silent throughout the conversation, and at last the 
hostess tuned to hm and said, “Well, Sir Roder ck, what do 
you think will happen to you after death?” “I am perfectly 
certa n,” he replied, “that I shall go to heaven and enjoy ever- 
lasting bliss, but I wish you worldn't discuss such a depressing 
subject.” 


[ 40 ] 


Is It Serious? 


Our fantasy religion will take it for granted that 
the inmost Self is eternal and indestructible, simply 
because it is what there is and all that there is. The 
totality of space will be the field of its consciousness, 
and this will fit in very well with current astronomical 
ideas of space as a four-dimensional continuum curv- 
ing in upon itself but having no outside. Perhaps the 
exploration of space is really the exploration and ex- 
tension of our own consciousness, a rediscovery of the 
ignored background of each individual ego. But 
what, specifically, will the preoccupations of this 
consciousness be? 

If work is what must be done in order to go on liv- 
ing, the proper activity of That-which-Is will obvi- 
ously be play. Reality is what exists without effort, 
Blake’s energy which is eternal delight. I have sug- 
gested that hide-and-seek, or lost-and-found, is the 
fundamental form of play because, at root, being is 
vibration. It is a state of yes/no, solid/space, here/ 
there, positive/negative, come/go, inside/outside, 
symbolized in the fundamental up/down motion of 
the wave. Rhythm lies at the heart of play, and thus 
various rhythmic actions are the primordial forms of 
delight—birdsong, the chirping of crickets, the beat- 
ing of hearts, the pulsation of laughter, the ecstatic 
loss of self in drumming and dancing, the sonorous 
vibrations of voices and strings and bells. Absorption 
in rhythm can go on and on until energy fails, for 
when we survey the various cultures of mankind it 
appears there is nothing men would rather do than 
be lost all night in rhythm. This is why the Christian 
angels sing “Alleluia, alleluial!” forever before the 


[ 41 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


Vision of God, and why their Buddhist counterparts 
are alleged to chant 

Tutte, tutte, 

Vutte, vutte, 


Patte, patte, 
Katte, kattel (5) 


I am quite sure, therefore, that an essential com- 
ponent of my heaven and preoccupation of the inmost 
Self would be absorption in rhythm; and as I look at 
light and water and listen to the pulses in my own 
body, I can hardly doubt that this is the truth. There 
is supreme delight in flowing with an unobstructed 
rhythm. But it is from the obstruction of rhythmic 
activity that we get our sensations of matter, sub- 
stance, weight, and rigidity; activity becomes un- 
pleasant when overwhelmed by these sensations. 
Death seems to be the dissolution of activity into 
mere matter. Nevertheless, without some degree of 
obstruction, rhythm does not happen at all. There is 
no beat without the skin of the drum. Rhythm is bliss- 
ful so long as the obstruction is subordinate to the 
action, so long as matter is repeatedly overcome by 
energy. To realize rhythm, the infinite consciousness 
will therefore have to obstruct itself in some degree, 
just as space must contain solids in order to be recog- 
nized as space. 

A further obstacle to the delight of rhythm is mo- 
notony, which play avoids by variety and complexity. 
But there must be some monotony or regularity for 
there to be any rhythm or pattern at all. Otherwise 
we should have only a succession of random intervals. 
The main problem in the art of rhythm is not to 
abolish monotony, but always to be in the process of 


[ 42 ] 


Is It Serious? 


overcoming it anew Thus there is variety not only in 
the beat of rhythms but in the medium—drum, 
string, tube, bell, and then on to rhythm in bodily 
motion, in form and visual pattern, in transformations 
of color, in songs and poetry, and in the complexities 
of pure ideas. And beyond this, the dramas and 
plots of human history, the fortunes of war, the strata- 
gems of love, the gambling financiers, and the endless 
pursuit of the illusion of political power—all these 
are variations and complications of delight in rhythm. 
Once more, delight consists in the total absorption of 
the mind in these patterns. The delight requires that 
there must always be some resistance to the play of 
patterned energy, and this may be monotony, the 
sluggishness which turns energy into effort, or just 
too great a degree of complexity, so that the pattern 
falls into chaos. 

To maintain the state of bliss, the infinite conscious- 
ness must have the most ingenious ways of both hav- 
ing monotony and overcoming it, of so combining 
order with randomness that the principle of order 
does not issue in dead uniformity, nor the principle 
of randomness in chaos. The play of rhythm must be 
controlled, and yet not so controlled as to be com- 
pletely predictable. It must be marvelously compli- 
cated, but without the tedium of having to keep track 
of all the ins and outs. In short, omnipotence must at 
all costs avoid the stultifying situation of being in 
total control of itself, and the equally fruitless situa- 
tion of losing control altogether. 

The solution is similar to the trick whereby an 
organism relegates certain functions to “the uncon- 
scious,” so that they continue without having to be 


[ 43 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


directed consciously, as for example the deliberate 
selection of words in speaking, or the use of the 
breath in swimming. This has a double advantage. 
On the one hand, it allows the complexity of patterns 
to develop without becoming burdensome to the orig- 
inal center of control. On the other, it introduces an 
element of surprise, for the inmost Self is thus en- 
abled to let some of the patterns of its behavior go 
off on their own and to forget that it has done so. In 
some such way, the delight of our hypothetical God- 
head would be maintained by introducing the expe- 
rience of otherness. For these relegated, or delegated, 
rhythms would issue forth in the guise of other beings 
to the amazement of their progenitor. 

Yet these “others” still remain the behavior of the 
inmost Self. In them, the Self therefore forgets itself. 
On the one hand, this is an adventure, a temporary 
surrender of control which prevents the over-all sys- 
tem of control from becoming rigid and dead. On the 
other hand, this forgetting is a refreshment, like sleep, 
since it creates standpoints from which everything 
can be seen anew. With every baby born, the inmost 
Self would look forth upon its world and be as aston- 
ished as if it had never before beheld it! In this way 
the unthinkably ancient universe would be renewed 
forever and ever, and the dance never pall. 

But the sensation of otherness must not become ex- 
cessive. When it becomes so, when the feeling that 
things are out of control reaches a certain point, sur- 
prise becomes frustration or fear and panic. At such 
crises, my inmost Self would have to have the power 
of recollecting that the whole play is its own, that 
otherness is maya. And then, in still another way, it 


[ 44 ] 


Is It Serious? 


would wake up in astonishment, but this time at its 
own cosmic and eternal dimensions. Yet sometimes, 
like a boy on a dare, it might let things go very far out 
of control, even to the extent of letting itself forget 
that it had the power to awaken. When we are asleep, 
or dreaming, we do not know that we can wake up. 
But we could not happily commit ourselves to sleep 
in the first place unless we knew that we could. It is 
in the same spirit that a sailor, confident in his skill 
and in his ship, commits himself to the storms. For 
playing is also gambling—inventing the sense of risk, 
and seeing how far out one can get. 

This is more or less what I would do if I had the 
power to dream every night of anything I wanted. 
For some months, I would probably fulfill all the 
more obvious wishes. There might be palaces and 
banquets, players and dancing girls, fabulous bouts 
of love, and sunlit gardens beside lakes, with moun- 
tains beyond. There would next be long conversations 
with sages, contemplation of supreme works of art, 
hearing and playing music, voyages to foreign lands, 
flying out into space to see the galaxies, and delving 
into the atom to watch the wiggling wavicles. But 
the night would come when I might want to add a 
little spice of adventure—perhaps a dream of dan- 
gerous mountain-climbing, of rescuing a princess 
from a dragon, or, better, an unpredictable dream in 
which I do not know what will happen. Once this had 
started, I might get still more daring. I would wish 
to dream whole lifetimes, packing seventy years into 
a single night. I would dream that I am not dreaming 
at all, that I will never wake up, that I have com- 
pletely lost myself somewhere down the tangled cor- 


[ 45 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


ridors of the mind, and, finally, that I am in such 
excruciating agony that when I wake up, it will be 
better than all possible dreams. 

By now it will be obvious that my hidden Self 
could very well be imagining just this particular sit- 
uation and personality in which I now find myself. 
The same would be true for every other individual, 
for in our hypothesis the inmost Self of each person 
is central to all persons. All othemess, all duality, all 
multiplicity is part of the play. Thus the lesson of this 
fantasy is that by a consistent thinking through of my 
fondest dreams for an explanation of this universe, 
and through an attempt to imagine as clearly as I 
can the nature of eternal bliss, I come right back to 
willing the place where I am! There is simply the 
proviso that all resentment for past and present 
suffering can be wiped out and tumed into joy by 
waking up and finding that I,-as the inmost Self, had 
deliberately dreamed it, and that it was an integral 
part of the delight which that Self enjoys through all 
eternity. 

But, so long as I am just wishing and spinning a 
fantasy, I must consider this crucial question: do I 
want it arranged so that when I awaken to my true 
Self, the old ego is simply to evaporate? If I could 
awaken at some point before my death, the two 
identities would naturally run together. On the sur- 
face, I would remember my name, address, and tele- 
phone number, and recollect quite clearly that for 
“all practical purposes,” that is, for carrying on a 
particular social game, I am still a limited individual- 
ity called Alan Watts. But concentric with this out- 
ward persona, this mask, I would be vividly aware 


[ 46 ] 


Is It Serious? 


that my basic identity—apprehended rather than 
comprehended—was the eternal Self of all selves. 

And after death? Am I quite sure that I could be 
reconciled to the ultimate disappearance of this pre- 
cious Alan Watts game in which I have invested so 
much time and energy? This is always a hard ques- 
tion for a young person, for he is not at that point in 
the rhythm of mortal time where he is ready to give 
up. He is set to continue as a matter of biological 
necessity, for the action of living requires “follow 
through” like the blow of the hand upon a drum: it 
aims beyond the skin. Willingness to vanish is in- 
compatible with that spirit of “follow through,” ex- 
cept in an individual who has vividly realized the 
eternal identity beneath the temporal. Furthermore, 
even an old man whose mind remains alert is always 
possessed by curiosity to know what will happen in 
the future, what new discoveries and creations the 
genius of man will bring forth, what course history 
will take, and what we shall find out about the inner 
secrets of the world. 

Yet it seems to me that after several hundred years 
of this sort of thing, I might have altogether too much 
of that haven’t-we-been-here-before feeling. Surely, 
those who insist on the supreme value of individual 
personality continuing forever have not fully thought 
through their desire. Such a wish is comparable to the 
increasing confusion of Manhattan—a city trying to 
grow by making its individual buildings higher and 
higher. But this reaches a point of diminishing re- 
turns, for, after a certain height, the gain in living 
space ceases, because more and more of the lower 
floor areas have to be taken up by elevators. In other 


[ 47 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


words, the indefinite prolongation of the individual 
is bad design—architecturally, biologically, and psy- 
chologically. The entity that is supposed to be pro- 
longed is not the individual but some greater organ- 
ism in which he belongs, as our cells belong in our 
bodies. The tragedy of mortality lies in not being 
aware of this belonging, and, above all, in not having 
found one’s true identity in the inmost Self. And if 
that is found, then the disappearance of the ego-mask 
beyond death is not, as it is sometimes called, absorp- 
tion of the soul into the Godhead. Nothing is ab- 
sorbed; there is simply clear recollection of That 
which one always is. 

It is also obvious that the wish-fulfilling religion 
that I have invented is substantially identical with 
the central theme of Hindu mythology—the theme of 
Brahman, the supreme Self, manifesting itself cycli- 
cally as all these worlds. Furthermore, in the Hindu 
myth the stages through which the maya is devel- 
oped correspond to the sort of progression that would 
be followed by the person who could dream what- 
ever he wished. The cycle of time during which the 
worlds are manifested is, as we saw, the kalpa, lasting 
4,320,000 years. The kalpa is divided into four yugas, 
named after the throws in the Indian game of dice: 
krita (the perfect throw of 4), treta (the throw of 3), 
dvapara (the throw of 2), and kali (the worst throw, 
of 1). The first epoch is thus the krita yuga, lasting 
1,728,000 years, during which the maya-dream is a 
paradise of shadowless glory. The second epoch is the 
treta yuga, lasting 1,296,000 years, when, although 
the paradise remains, there emerge certain uncon- 
trolled factors, surprises that are thus far pleasant, 


[ 48 ] 


Is It SeriousP 


but contain the apprehension of something unwanted. 
The third epoch is the dvapara yuga, lasting 864,000 
years, during which the negative principle of disorder 
attains equality with the principle of order. And in 
the fourth epoch, kali yuga, lasting 432,000 years, the 
principle of disorder is triumphant. At the end of this 
epoch the forces of destruction grow and grow in 
fury, until, at the very end, the universes are dis- 
solved in fire. Whereupon the Brahman awakens from 
the maya-dream, and remains in luminous peace 
through another 4,320,000 years before beginning the 
cycle again. 

Note, however, that the principle of disorder can 
claim only 1,296,000 years of the whole kalpa: a third 
of the treta yuga, a half of the dvapara yuga, and the 
whole of the kali yuga, amounting in all to one third 
of the kalpa. This is a chronological symbolism for 
the principle that the continuance of the game de- 
pends upon the subordination of disorder to order, so 
that the former may always be in the situation of be- 
ing overcome by the latter, despite the dramatic mo- 
ment in which it appears to have the victory, at the 
end of the kali yuga? 

The vivid experiences of the mystics may be our 
only means of testing the truth of religious and meta- 
physical hypotheses, but that is not an exploration to 
be carried out in a book. There is, perhaps, a signifi- 
cant bias in mystical writings toward the general 
view of the universe that I have suggested, and this 
would include such Christian mystics as John Scotus 
? According to Heinrich Zimmer (6) the kali yuga began on 
Friday, February 18, 3102 B.c., which means that there are 


426,935 more years of it to come! But be consoled—for as the 
yugas draw to their close, time passes faster and faster. 


[ 49 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


Erigena, St. Simeon Neothéologos, Eckhart, Nicolas 
Cusanus, Boehme, and perhaps even Teilhard de 
Chardin. But it is not the purpose of this essay to in- 
dulge in a metaphysical argument. I have nothing so 
earnest in mind as to insist that my point of view is 
the truth. The truth will out by its own self-evidence. 
My purpose is only to develop certain mythological 
constructions, such as the one I have just described, 
and then see what happens at the end. If, at that 
point, there is the conviction of some new insight into 
the universe and man, so much the better. Specifi- 
cally, we are going to see what happens to a tradi- 
tional and orthodox version of Christianity, to Cathol- 
icism,® if it is seen within the context of the scheme- 
of-things that I have been describing. 

Whatever may be the rule in practice, is Christian- 
ity theoretically and dogmatically opposed to the idea 
that the creative activity of God is playful? Fortu- 
nately we can call at once to our aid the massive au- 
thority of St. Thomas Aquinas, writing about the 
Wisdom of God: 


The contemplation of wisdom is rightly compared 
with games for two things to be found in games. 
The first is that games give pleasure and the con- 
templation of wisdom gives the very greatest pleas- 
ure, according to what Wisdom says of itself in 
Ecclesiasticus, “My spirit is sweet above honey.” The 
second is that the movements in games are not con- 


*It is only fair to reveal my own prejudices, whereby the term 
“Catholicism” includes the Roman Catholic Church, the East- 
ern Orthodox Churches, and the Anglican Churches, because 
these are the principal Churches that center their worship 
around the altar as distinct from the pulpit. That is to say, 
they are still essentially “mystery religions,” and not just so- 
cieties for listening to lectures and promoting good works. 


[ 50 ] 


Is It Serious? 


trived to serve another end, but are pursued for 
their own sake. It is the same with the delights of 
wisdom. . . . Hence divine Wisdom compares its 
delight to games, “I was with him forming all things 
and was delighted every day, playing before him at 
all times: playing in the world.” (7) 


The personified Wisdom of God who speaks in the 
books of Ecclesiasticus and Proverbs (whence St. 
Thomas’ second quotation) is understood by the 
Church to be God the Son, the divine Logos “by 
whom all things were made.” 

Now, it is notorious that popular ideas of God’s 
character are of a far lower moral standard than that 
by which we discern saintliness in men. The saint for- 
gives “until seventy times seven” if anyone sins 
against him, but by many accounts the Lord does not 
forgive at all unless the offender grovels before him 
in an act of sincere contrition. The saint is above all 
urged not to take himself seriously, and, indeed, there 
is about all really holy people a kind of guileless hu- 
mor, a sense of one’s own absurdity which is not so 
much self-condemnation as pulling one’s own leg. 
“The soul which is inwardly united to God,” wrote 
St. Mark Podvizhnik, “becomes, in the greatness of 
its joy, like a good-natured simple-hearted child, and 
now condemns no one, Greek, heathen, Jew, nor sin- 
ner, but looks at them all alike with sight that has 
been cleansed, [and] finds joy in the whole world.” 
(8) If, as Chesterton suggested, even the angels fly 
because they take themselves lightly, how much more 
must the Lord of the angels, the fountain of all vir- 
tues, be endowed with this particular virtue? 

The ascription of a playful spirit to God may be 


[51] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


disconcerting to the devout’ because of the double 
meaning contained in the ideas of playing and not 
being serious. For on the one hand, this is a spirit of 
gaiety and exuberance, light-heartedness and joy. But 
on the other, the sense that something is only in play 
implies a certain shallowness, pretense, and even de- 
ceit. Similarly, not being serious may mean not being 
solemn, grave, pompous, or grim, but may also mean 
insincerity. Still another complication: deception is 
sometimes beneficent. The Sanskrit word upaya 
means cunning or deceit when used in a political con- 
text. But in the context of Hindu or Buddhist dis- 
cipline it designates the “skillful means” which a 
teacher employs to help his students outwit their own 
egocentricity. In the same way, the biographies of the 
Christian saints abound in stories of overcoming the 
Devil by what St. Francis Xavier called “holy cun- 
ning.” For in this case the Devil is one’s own guile, 
one’s own infinite capacity for looking at oneself look- 
ing at oneself looking at oneself, ‘as when one is proud 
of being humble, proud of recognizing that one is 
proud of it, and proud of being subtle enough to see 
that the whole thing is an infinite regression. 
Self-conscious tangles of this kind are, in all proba- 
bility, mechanical defects in the nervous system, sim- 
ilar to the oscillations which occur in an electronic 
system when it tries to record itself in the act of re- 
cording. Thus when a television camera photographs 
its own receiver, the picture becomes a succession of 
“stuttering” waves, and the psychological or neuro- 
logical equivalent would be the trembling, jittery 
state of anxiety, which is fearing fear or worrying 
about worry. This is the besetting problem of any re- 


[ 52 ] 


Is It Serious? 


flexive or feed-back system—above all, of man’s con- 
sciousness of himself—and the heart of the problem 
is that the process of self-consciousness cannot dis- 
entangle itself by itself. It has to be “tricked” out of 
its predicament. Private anxieties are instantly forgot- 
ten when a tornado strikes the neighborhood, but you 
cannot deliberately arrange a tornado, or its equiva- 
lent, to jolt yourself out of worries or pettinesses 
whenever they occur. You cannot surprise yourself on 
purpose, say, to get rid of hiccups. Someone or some- 
thing beyond conscious control must overthrow the 
Devil at the right moment, for, being an archangel, 
he can read thoughts and is always aware of the in- 
tention that precedes the act. He can be defeated 
only by an act without prior intent. “Let not your left 
hand know what your right hand doeth.” 

Now in Christian terminology this “someone or 
something beyond conscious control” is called the 
grace of God, and grace is held to be the only means 
of overcoming the machinations of the Devil, that is, 
of the vicious circles into which self-consciousness 
can lead us. God as the giver of grace has therefore 
the same function as the guru, or spiritual guide, in 
Hinduism, and thus “the means of grace” would be 
the correct equivalent of upaya. But it does not seem 
to have occurred to most Christians that the means 
of grace might include trickery—that in his cure of 
souls the Lord might use placebos, jokes, shocks, de- 
ceptions, and all kinds of indirect and surprising 
methods of outwitting men’s wonderfully defended 
egocentricity. (I am speaking now in purely Christian 
terms, on a level where we know nothing as yet of 
tat tvam asi.) 


[ 53 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


But, alas, the Lord is supposed to be totally devoid 
of wit or humor. His official utterances, the holy scrip- 
tures, are understood as if they were strictly Solemn 
Pronouncements—not, perhaps, to be taken quite lit- 
erally, but certainly as bereft of any lightness of 
touch, innuendo, irony, exaggeration, self-caricature, 
leg-pulling, drollery, or merriment. Yet what if this 
show of solemnity is actually a sort of dead-pan ex- 
pression? If the Lord is said to veil his glory, lest it 
be too bright for mortal eyes, might he not also veil 
his mirth—perhaps as something much, much too 
funny for men to stand? 


“Al Padre, al Figlio, allo Spirito Santo” 
comincio “Gloria” tutto il Paradiso, 
si che m’inebbriava il dolce canto. 

Cio ch’ io vedeva mi sembiava un riso 
dell universo; per che mia ebbrezza 
entrava per V'udire e per lo viso.4 


If, then, as Dante suggests, the angels’ hymn of praise 
to the Holy Trinity sounds like the laughter of the 
universe, what is the joke? 


*“To Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,” all Paradise began its 
song, “be glory!”—so that I was drunken with its sweetness. 
ia what I saw before my eyes seemed a laughter of the uni- 
verse; whereby my drunkenness found entrance through both 
sound and sight. Paradiso, xxvii, 1-6. 


[ 54 ] 


III 


Who Is Responsible? 


One day, when I was a very small boy, I was playing 
with sounds and discovered the delicious word 
“Blast.” It was such a good word to linger over and to 
roll around the tongue. “Bull-lahst!” Then I went and 
played it to my mother. She went quite white, and 
I'll never forget the scary look in her eyes. “Don’t 
ever say that!” she said. “It’s against God.” That was 
when I first discovered that words can be more pow- 
erful than deeds and more real than things. 

“In the beginning was the Word.” “And God said, 
Let there be light.” “By the word of the Lord were 
the heavens made, and all the hosts of them by the 
breath of his mouth.” “The grass withereth, the flower 
fadeth; but the word of our God shall stand for ever.” 


[ 55 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


For Logos, the Word, is God the Son, the Second Per- 
son of the Trinity, the archetypal design and pattern 
of the universe, the Law of the Lord, the creative 
Agent “by whom all things were made.” 

It is thus that, in the whole tradition of Hebrew 
and Christian ideas, the supernatural world is related 
to the natural in somewhat the same way that words 
are related to things and events. Ordinarily, one 
would suppose that things and events came first, and 
that words were later invented to describe them, to 
stand for them—like money for wealth. But in the 
philosophy of the Bible, it is just the reverse. The 
word comes first, for it is the name of the thing, 
which, when uttered by God, brings the thing into 
being. It is an outcome of this tradition that, in the 
West, we have-long thought of natural events as ex- 
pressions of law, that, putting it rather naively, noth- 
ing happens except in obedience to a commandment, 
and that therefore the laws of nature are laid down 
in advance of all happenings, to be the foundation of 
the world, or the tracks upon which events should 
run. 

This is not, of course, the thinking of the most mod- 
em West, of scientists in the twentieth century. For 
today we speak of the laws of nature quite figura- 
tively—not as ordinances which events obey, but as 
human ways of describing and measuring regularities 
in the behavior of the physical world. We find it re- 
dundant to attribute this regularity to anything be- 
yond the events concerned; nothing makes them reg- 
ular; they simply are regular, in the same way that 
quadrupeds regularly have four legs, or otherwise 
would not be called quadrupeds. To discern regular- 


[ 56 ] 


Who Is Responsible? 


ities in the physical world is the easiest way to make 
sense of it, and to know where you are. If you count 
a hundred paces between your home and the river, 
and assume that the two will stay put, you can find 
your home in the dark. But the paces came after the 
house, the river, and the land between. 

Yet, because measurements and descriptions of the 
physical world give one apparent control of the 
world, it is natural to suppose that their power may 
be greater than the powers of nature, and that nature 
is an expression of the word-power of a Supreme In- 
telligence which is, in itself, a kind of verbal organ- 
ism. Ordinarily, one would say that the meaning of a 
word is something nonverbal, some physical thing or 
event. But, from another point of view, it is precisely 
words that give meaning to the world. Language in 
its broadest sense, including words, numbers, signs, 
and symbols of all kinds, is what peculiarly distin- 
guishes men from animals, and enables us to know 
that we know. Language is the symbolic echo of 
direct experience, lending to it a resonance that en- 
hances it—as a great cathedral, with its subtle rever- 
berations, lends an other-worldly magnificence to the 
voice of a choir. 

From the standpoint of the Christian West, sym- 
bols are the supremely civilizing agency: I may love 
you with all my heart, but my love is as dumb as a 
brute’s until words give it expression. Thus, a person 
is cultured to the extent that he looks at people and 
buildings and landscapes with the words of poets and 
philosophers in the back of his mind. For they enable 
him to see the world in a new and particular way, 
just as painters, with their visual symbolisms, have 


[ 57 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


taught us to see that certain natural scenes look “just 
like a picture!” Nature is, according to this view, be- 
loved to the extent that she reminds us of the works 
of artists. I am that much poorer if, when I look at 
the stars, there is not somewhere echoing in the back 
of my brain: 


O look at all the fire-folk, sitting in the air! 
The bright boroughs, the circle-citadels there] 


In the Western world, all that is spiritual is asso- 
ciated with symbols—with words, ideas, concepts, 
designs and abstractions. The physical universe is an 
incamation of the Word, a gross replica of ideas in 
the mind of God—a process of bright, pure, and lucid 
form trying to express itself in the medium of intrac- 
table sludge and rubble. The supernatural domain 
is a sphere of transparent clarity and intelligibility, 
of pure ideation, an articulation of light and form so 
exquisite that the music of Bach and the intellectual 
architecture of St. Thomas are, as the latter said, by 
comparison straw. Furthermore this supernatural 
sphere has an infinitely higher degree of reality and 
permanence than the physical sphere. To earth- 
bound senses it may seem to be diaphanous and 
vague, but beside it the stars themselves are no more 
than falling sparks. 

This will explain the peculiar fact that the religious 
exercises of Jews dnd Christians are so largely verbal. 
Hindus and Buddhists will chant a little, and then 
enter into silent meditation so as to change the level 
and quality of consciousness. But Jewish and Chris- 
tian services are almost entirely streams of utterance 
—-praying, singing, reading, and preaching. Should 


[ 58 ] 


Who Is Responsible? 


silence occur, except in a Quaker meeting, it usually 
denotes some hitch in the arrangements, and the or- 
ganist keeps things alive by “inkling,” that is, by an 
unostentatious improvisation on the theme of a chant 
or hymn. Even private prayers are, for the most part, 
spoken formulae. But because, at least in traditional 
forms of worship, the prayers are based upon the 
words of the holy scriptures, the Christian philosophy 
of prayer is that it is the Holy Spirit which speaks 
through the mouth of the worshiper. For worship is 
the process of man’s being gathered up into the eter- 
nal dialogue of love between the Persons of the 
Trinity. 

The supremacy of the Word is especially evident in 
the differing modes of transmission for temporal 
power and for spiritual power. The king transmits his 
power to his son, through right of birth, but, as is 
well known, the good qualities of the father do not 
necessarily pass by heredity to the son. The biological 
process cannot, it is felt, be trusted, and therefore 
wisdom and law must be passed on and maintained 
by some more reliable form of succession. Thus tem- 
poral power is overshadowed by spiritual power, 
where the succession is determined, not by birth, but 
by study and examinations culminating in ordination. 
Furthermore, it is often the rule that the priest iden- 
tifies himself completely with his role, taking the side 
of the Word instead of the flesh so thoroughly that he 
becomes a celibate, and has no natural issue. 

The ideal of this philosophy of the Word is the 
transfiguration of the body and of the whole physical 
universe. It is to make the material world more and 
more conformable to the supernatural world—that is 


[ 59 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


to say, obedient to the Word of God. It is to put rea- 
son over instinct, intellect over passion, and grace 
over nature—not so that instinct, passion, and nature 
are annihilated, but so that they become servants of 
the Word, like well-trained horses. Western technol- 
ogy is, in its basic motivation, the direct outcome of 
this philosophy. It is first of all the aim of science to 
translate (transfigure?) all natural processes into 
words or mathematical formulae, thereby making the 
whole world intelligible. Once this has been done, the 
irregularities and rough edges of the world can be 
conformed to an ideal pattern of how things should 
be. This is the work of technology, a wonder-working 
in the direct line of descent from the miracles of 
Jesus and the saints. Christianity is, after all, the only 
religion that takes its miracles seriously. 

The philosophy of the Word also lies behind tech- 
nology in the sense that it looks at the universe in 
terms of models taken from the arts and crafts. For 
God is seen as the architect, the potter, the carpenter, 
and the smith. The Bible abounds in such images. 
“Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! ... 
Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What 
makest thou?” “Behold, the Lord stood upon a wall 
made by a plumbline, with a plumbline in his hand.” 
“When he prepared the heavens, I was there: when 
he set a compass upon the face of the depth.” 


Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? 
declare, if thou hast understanding. 

Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? 
or who hath stretched the line upon it? 

Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? 
or who laid the corner stone thereof? (Job 38: 4-6. AV.) 


[ 60 ] 


Who Is ResponsibleP 


“For he is like a refiner’s fire, . . . and he shall sit as 
a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the 
sons of Levi.” 


My substance was not hid from thee, when I was 
made in secret, and curiously wrought in the low- 
est parts of the earth. 

Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being un- 
perfect; and in thy book all my members were 
written. (Psalm 139: 15-16. AV.) 


Accordingly, the design, the Logos, was there in the 
mind of the Maker, even before the work was begun, 
and the material creation is therefore a construct, 
manufactured according to plan. Deus faber. 

This entire cosmology seems to represent a partic- 
ular development of human consciousness that must 
have taken place during two or three thousand years, 
or more. It represents the transition from living by 
instinct and impulse to the attempt to live by thought 
and reflection. It represents man’s growing realization 
of the power of language and symbols, and, in partic- 
ular, the stage of this growth where the power of the 
word is utterly fascinating. It represents the emer- 
gence of a strong sense of the individual ego, and of 
its capacity to change and control external events and 
internal passions by efforts of will. It represents, 
above all, the birth of that special type of human con- 
sciousness which we associate with Western civiliza- 
tion—a consciousness that is, on the one hand, ana- 
lytical and sharply focused, and, on the other, very 
much turned back upon itself: a consciousness that is 
embarrassingly self-conscious. 

There are two principal ways in which the power 
of the Word assists this type of consciousness. The 


[ 61 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


first is that words provide a notation for a style of 
consciousness based on noticing. The foundation of 
analytical thinking is attention; to attend, to notice, 
is to focus consciousness sharply upon some restricted 
area. It is to use the mind like a spotlight, illuminat- 
ing the world bit by bit—keeping the bits organized 
and classified by the system of tags or pigeonholes 
which words provide. The second is that words give 
us a model or symbol of the world which is much 
easier to understand than the world itself. It is much 
less wiggly and capricious. It reduces experience to a 
comprehensible form in somewhat the same way that 
carving meat with a knife makes it more edible. 
Despite Korzybski’s insistence that Fido; must be 
clearly distinguished from Fido2, how necessary it is 
to be able to classify Fido as Dog. The verbal de- 
scription of the world is a simplified, albeit over- 
simplified, model of the world. But it provides us 
with a platform apart from the world itself, upon 
which we can stand and take a new look at the world. 
Words representing things make it possible to have 
thoughts about experiences, to deal with life in terms 
of symbols as we deal with wealth in terms of money. 

The initial advantages of this mode of conscious- 
ness are sensational, for it is the foundation of all 
craft and culture. It enables us to make order out of 
the confused spray of the stars, and to predict the 
seasons and the changes of weather. Words and sym- 
bols are magical savers of time and effort otherwise 
spent in pointing at things, drawing them, or drag- 
ging them around in the intellectual equivalent of 
barter. It is no wonder at all that words have been 
felt to be supernatural, and, because of their astonish- 


[ 62 ] 


Who Is Responsible? 


ing power, to have greater reality and antiquity than 
the material universe. But this, possibly superstitious, 
conception has had quite remarkable consequences 
for the further development of consciousness. It has 
laid the foundations for anxiety and guilt. It has made 
it possible for man to compare himself as he is with 
himself as he should be, and to realize that the world 
of events falls far, far short of the rationality, sim- 
plicity, orderliness and intelligibility of the world of 
words. 

Thousands of years ago, the demonstrable eff- 
ciency of rational thought and of the rule of law in 
social conduct must have cast doubt upon the im- 
pulses and intuitions of man’s organic and non-reflec- 
tive being. On the one hand, there arose the anxiety 
of choosing between hunch and the reasoned course. 
The choice would have been relatively simple were 
hunch always a natural self-interest, and the reasoned 
course always the interest of society. But, on the other 
hand, there was always the nagging suspicion that 
the reasoned course might not be reasoned enough, 
that important factors might have been left out of 
consideration, or that there might have been a false 
step in calculation. Add to this the intimation that 
hunch deals with some situations much better than 
reason, especially the situations which are so com- 
plicated and fast-moving that words cannot keep 
track of them. In the moment that man doubts his 
immediate impulse, there is no end to complexities. 
For what else will he trust? Intelligence? But by what 
does one test one’s intelligence? Information? But 
how does one know that one has enough information? 
Inspiration? But how does one know whether it is of 


[ 63 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


God or of the Devil? Worse still, from that first mo- 
ment of doubt there is no going back. Innocence is 
then and there lost, and all possibility of return is 
prevented by the angel with the flaming sword. Be- 
yond this point, the only strength is to be able to con- 
tain and endure anxiety. 

And then there is guilt. The unavoidable drip, drip, 
drip of the certainty that something quite undefined 
has gone wrong, and that you did it. Somewhere, far 
off in a half-remembered past that may be only a 
fantasy, was the time when the immediate impulse 
was inspired wisdom. Even if it led to instant death, 
that death was splendid. The radiant defeat of vege- 
tation at autumn. Glory of fire that destroys the moth. 
Succeeding or failing by the merely chronological 
and quantitative criterion of survival was of no im- 
port at all. For the man living by pure impulse was 
perfect in every motion—like the foam patterns of 
breaking waves, the markings upon shells, and the 
walk of cats. But he didn’t know it. 

To know, and to know that you know, means pay- 
ing attention; it means concentrating on the motions 
of life one step, one wiggle, one pulse at a time so as 
to figure them out. But just as soon as this narrowed 
and bright attention has figured out how it is that we 
live and move, think and speak, the process no longer 
happens of itself. From then on, we are responsible. 
We must make it happen, and decide through the 
pain of thought what course it shall take. From then 
on we move with constant anxiety, because we never 
know for sure what is right, and with constant guilt, 
because we are nonetheless responsible, and because 


[ 64 ] 


Who Is Responsible? 


in the instant that we become responsible something 
goes deeply and strangely wrong. 

We began to play God—that is, to control our lives 
instead of letting them happen. And God said, “Very 
well, then, take over. You’re on your own.” But we 
were like the Sorcerer’s Apprentice, and didn’t really 
know what to do. Thereupon pain ceased to be ec- 
stasy and became punishment. At the same time, we 
began to feel responsible for dying. Death was no 
longer the transformation and renewal of life, the 
shuffling of the pack for a new deal. Death became 
the mark of failure, the wages of sin, and the result 
of our incompetence in playing God. 

Yet the secret behind the scenes, which the flaming 
sword of guilt prevents us from finding out, is that 
this is actually God playing man. The narrowing of 
attention was omniscience (in the Hindu sense) con- 
tracting into ego, there to become fascinated—as the 
hypnotist fascinates by holding the mind to one point 
—spellbound, enchanted, and paralyzed. God en- 
tranced himself and forgot the way back, so that now 
he feels himself to be man, playing—guiltily—at be- 
ing God. For to attend is also to ignore and to forget: 
it is to notice the figure, and to ignore its inseparable 
background; to see the inside so clearly that one for- 
gets its outside; to feel oneself in the body alone, and 
no longer in the cosmos that goes with it. My better 
half appears to be a universe into which I have been 
cast as a stranger. I no longer understand it intui- 
tively, and am compelled to make sense of it bit by 
bit. In this predicament, the Word is my salvation. 
Having forgotten how to live, I need to know the 


[ 65 } 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


rules. Having forgotten how to dance, I need a dia- 
gram of the steps. I don’t even know how to make 
love any more, and my parents are embarrassed when 
telling me. 

It is thus that man’s wisdom is not handed down 
from generation to generation by heredity, but by the 
recorded word, which reposes in a supernatural do- 
main outside the spontaneous impulses of the body. 
Such is the facility of words that this wisdom is, in 
one highly specialized direction, far more complex 
and effective than the hereditary skills of animals. It 
enables man to change his environment and his own 
behavior on a scale without precedent in nature. But 
once he has started, he is compelled to go on. It is 
not only that man can change the world; the problem 
is that he must, and that he does not really know how 
to do it. For the Word is deceptive. It tells what, but 
not how. And the Law, the book of rules, is even 
worse. It tells you that you must deliberately do cer- 
tain things, such as loving, which are only satisfac- 
tory when they happen spontaneously. Therefore you 
must see to it that they happen spontaneously. “Thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God”—not just ritually, but 
“with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with 
all thy might.” 

The predicament is admirably described in St. 
Paul’s Epistle to the Romans, from which the follow- 
ing crucial passage is freely translated from the saint’s 
abominable Greek: 


What, then, shall we say? Is the Law sin? Indeed, 
no! But I would never have known sin except 
through the Law; for I would not have recognized 
lust unless the Law had said, “You shall not lust.” 


[ 66 ] 


Who Is Responsible? 


But sin made this precept an occasion to bring out 

in me every kind of lust, for without the Law sin 

was dead [i.e., unconscious]. Once [in my inno- 

cence] I was alive without the Law; but with the 
coming of the precept sin revived, and I died, and 
discovered that the precept of life brought death. 

For sin, by means of the precept, deceived and slew 

me. Yet for this very reason the Law is holy, and 

the precept is holy, and just and good. 

Was, then, this good thing [the cause of] my dy- 
ing? Indeed, nol But sin worked death in me 
through the good [precept] that it might be shown 
to be sin; that sin, by means of the precept, might 
become [known to be] exceedingly sinful. For we 
know that the Law is spiritual—but I am of the 
flesh, sold out to sin. For I do not intend the things 
that I do. What I will, I do not, but what I hate, 

I do. If, then, I do not do what I will [to do], I am 

[at least] recognizing the excellence of the Law; 

and then it is no longer I that act, but sin dwelling 

in me. For I know that nothing good dwells in me 

—that is, in my flesh. I can readily will, but I can- 

not produce goodness. The good that I would, I do 

not; but the evil that I would not, I do. So, if I do 
what I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin 
dwelling in me. 

Therefore I discover the principle that in my 
willing to do the good, the evil is with me. For I 
delight in the Law of God in my inmost being; but 
I see another law in my members, warring against 
the law of my mind, and making me the captive of 
that sinful law in my members. Wretched man that 
I am! Who will rescue me from this body of death? 
(Romans 7: 7-24.) 

Now, if this predicament is not simply an insane 
vicious circle, what is it? It is obviously an adventure 
in the growth of consciousness, and, above all, of self- 
knowledge. The Lord becomes entranced in his own 


[ 67 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


maya, but, because he is the Lord, he can never be 
captured ultimately. For in the most expert and 
subtle way he makes his bondage and the means of 
release one and the same. He projects his own God- 
head outwardly, to be something wholly above and 
beyond himself. In this way he undergoes the ad- 
venture of being lost, flung far out from his own cen- 
ter, and involved in the toils of the most fascinating 
of all insoluble puzzles: to control life, to will love, to 
know how. At the same time, the God that he pro- 
jects into the supernatural world above acts as his 
guru and Savior. But the supreme method, the royal 
road of all gurus and spiritual masters, is to make the 
fool become wise by persisting most consistently in 
his folly, until it reaches a complete reductio ad ab- 
surdum. This projected God, who is the Lord of the 
Bible and the supreme object of Christian and Jewish 
worship, is also the skillful guru and master of “holy 
cunning.” 

All this is quite clear in the marvelous tale of the 
creation, and of the fall of Adam. Note that, at this 
point, the Lord is not working according to a precon- 
ceived plan. The creation is perfectly spontaneous. 
Every stage of it surprises him. Only when it is done 
does he see that it is good. “And God created great 
whales (oops! ), and every living creature that mov- 
eth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after 
their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: and 
God saw that it was good.” When the Lord has his 
whole maya arranged before him, including the clay 
figurine of Adam, made in his own image, he comes 
and breathes himself into Adam’s nostrils, for the 
“breath of life” is the ruach Adonai, the same Spirit 


[ 68 ] 


Who Is Responsible? 


of God which, in the beginning, moved upon the face 
of the waters. Thereupon the Lord looks out of the 
eyes of the figurine; but he has forgotten who he is, 
and therefore sees himself walking in the garden just 
as if he were someone else. The Lord is now en- 
tranced, and his alter ego, the bearded Old Gentle- 
man in the long robe, initiates the long, long process 
of his awakening, which is, at the same time, his 
bondage. 

There really was no need to mention the Tree of 
Knowledge. It would have been a safe risk that Adam 
would never have noticed it if the Lord hadn't 
brought the subject up. But when the Lord not only 
called attention to it, but also issued terrifying warn- 
ings about the consequences of eating its fruit, it be- 
came perfectly certain that Adam would try it. 

Something of this kind happens over and over 
again in fairy tales. The hero invariably transgresses 
the Terrible Prohibition—not to look behind, not to 
open the golden box, not to take the short cut through 
the wood—for otherwise there would be no story. 
The Lord, in his wisdom, knew quite enough about 
human nature to know exactly what he was doing, 
and that all perfectly unreasonable prohibitions are 
invitations to adventure. It would have been quite a 
different matter if he had commanded Adam not to 
pull Eve’s hair, or not to eat their own children. 

Instead, the Lord fixed upon a particular tree 
which, after all, he himself had planted, and forbade 
Adam to eat its fruit lest he attain the knowledge of 
good and evil, and with it the curse of death. Now, 
the words for “good” and “evil” in the original He- 
brew have a special connection with craftsmanship 


[ 69 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


and skill; they denote what is advantageous or dis- 
advantageous, skillful or clumsy, cunning or crude, 
from a technical point of view. Those who ate the 
fruit would become “as gods,” for they would know 
how to control events and how to make things hap- 
pen. This is why Adam’s fall and expulsion from the 
garden involves the curse of work, for once you start 
controlling things according to your deliberations, 
you can no longer rely upon impulse. You must stop 
playing, and be serious. You must think of the future, 
and plan for it, and thus become aware of death in 
an altogether new way—as a dragon lying at the end 
of the passage, as the final humiliation of all that you, 
by your skill, have achieved and controlled. Life be- 
comes the putting-off of death; and so begins the 
reign of anxiety. 

How clear this becomes when Jesus advocates a 
way of life which is the precise opposite, though his 
startling doctrine loses much of its force in the fa- 
miliar translation. More literally, if less sonorously, 
he says: 


This is why I’m telling you: don’t worry about 
your life, what you're going to eat or what you're 
going to drink, or about your body, what you're go- 
ing to wear. Isn’t life more than food, and the body 
than clothes? 

Look at the wild birds: they don’t sow, they don’t 
reap, they don’t harvest in barns, and yet your Fa- 
ther in heaven feeds them. Aren’t you much more 
important than they? Which of you, by worrying, 
can add one span to his lifetime? 

And why do you worry about clothes? Learn from 
the meadow lilies, how they flourish: they don’t 
work, they don’t spin, and yet I’m telling you that 
even Solomon in all his splendor wasn’t robed like 


[ 70 ] 


Who Is Responsible? 


any one of them. Now if this is how God clothes the 

wild grass, which lives today and is thrown into the 

oven tomorrow, how much better [will he look 
after] you, faithless ones? 

So don’t worry, saying “What are we going to 
eat?” or “What are we going to drink?” or “What 
are we going to wear?” for these are all the things 
that the crowd goes for, though your Father in 
heaven knows that you need them. First seek for 
the kingdom and for his justice, and you will get all 
those things anyhow. And don’t worry about to- 
morrow, for tomorrow will take care of itself; let 
trouble wait for its own day. (Matthew 6: 25-34.) 

That is quite one of the most subversive passages in 
the Bible, and no “sensible” person would dream of 
following it, for it stands in complete opposition to 
the life of work, control, plans, provisions, and sav- 
ings. But the real challenge of this passage is that 
when the gospel of the nonserious life is put in the 
form of a commandment, we are forced to discover 
exactly why it is that we cannot obey, and at just 
what point we put up the blocks against letting go. 
Once the fruit has been eaten, and once the life. of 
impulse has been called in question, there is no going 
back. There is only going on, by the way of fuller 
and fuller consciousness. 

But the way of consciousness is the way of effort, 
and, as is all too well known, men will seldom, if ever, 
make a supreme effort for some positive good; they 
will make it only to avoid some desperate evil. Taxes 
for guns are far more easily levied than taxes for 
cakes and ale all round. It is therefore essential that 
there be an Enemy, charged with fulfilling a most 
complex role, a role of many-aspected ambivalence, 
which is at once suggested in the fact that the name 


[ 71 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


of our enemy, the Devil, is Lucifer, the Bringer of 
Light. (In Greek, Phosphorus, which also means the 
Morning Star. ) 

Before we go any further, it must be clearly under- 
stood that from the standpoint of official Christianity 
no good word can be said for the Devil. Officially, 
the Devil has no necessary part to play in the ful- 
fillment of God’s purposes; the Devil bears full re- 
sponsibility for bringing evil into the universe, and 
although God permitted this to happen, in no sense 
whatever did he start it or condone it; the Devil was 
originally a bright angel who fell from heaven be- 
cause of pride and maliciousness cooked up entirely 
by his own will and out of his own mind. This is 
exactly what the official position should be, because 
it is the position of taking the drama seriously. For 
when we forget the proscenium arch, or at least put 
it far into the backs of our minds, we feel that the 
actor playing the villain is truly villainous. This illu- 
sion is the whole point of the play. 

Yet, since we are pursuing a metatheology, we 
must go off stage into the green room and see what 
happens before the play begins, and after it ends. 
I have suggested that the fundamental dynamics of 
the universe is the game of hide-and-seek, lost-and- 
found, or peek-a-boo, the play of yes-and-no, positive- 
and-negative, up-and-down, which goes on and on 
because the light side overcomes the dark side again 
and again, and is light only so long as it does so. 
Explicitly (that is, on stage), the light and the dark 
are enemies, but implicitly (off stage), they are not 
only friends, not only twins, not only co-conspirators, 
but constitute a unity which cannot be described, 


[ 72 ] 


Who Is Responsible? 


since every word, every label, designates what is in 
some class. There is no word that designates the in- 
side and the outside of a class simultaneously, in such 
a way as to describe the complete inseparability of 
the two. But, if I may be so bold as to say so, the final 
metaphysical secret is that the boundary between all 
insides and all outsides is held in common by both— 
that insides are not found without outsides, nor out- 
sides without insides. This invariable inseparability 
of things quite different from each other seems to im- 
ply some sort of hidden conspiracy, some agreement, 
some unity of essence behind the scenes. 


Tweedledum and Tweedledee agreed to have a 
battle. 


On the other hand, the game of hide-and-seek—the 
art of drama—consists in making believe, either that 
the light side can obliterate the dark (and they lived 
happily ever after), or that there is a real danger of 
the dark side obliterating the light (but deliver us 
from evil). Therefore, when the Lord God and the 
Devil come out officially—that is, in their ceremonial 
or dramatic roles—they are implacable foes; but may 
we not, as a hintergedanke (as a suspicion far, far in 
the backs of our minds), suppose that in the green 
room of heaven, before the show of creation began, 
there was an Original Agreement? 

There was God the Father, with God the Son sit- 
ting at his right hand. No one ever mentions who sits 
at his left hand; but of course it was Lucifer, Satan, 
Samma-el, who, in the older books of the Bible, is 
simply the agent of the Lord’s wrath, his left, sinister, 
and inauspicious hand that does all the necessary 


[ 73 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


dirty work. So we may suppose, then, that God the 
Father instructed both of them in their roles, explain- 
ing how he himself would have to appear to take the 
side of his Son—for this is, of course, what ensures 
that light will continually outshine darkness, even 
though it cannot shine without darkness. He told 
them that, on this particular round of the Creation, 
they were to stir up a drama that would have the 
audience screaming in its seats (and we know, don't 
we, who is the audience? ), so that when at last the 
curtain fell all would swear that this was the best 
show they had ever seen. 

Would not, therefore, the Lord arrange that the 
Left Hand Man appear in an unusually loathsome 
guise, first of all in the form of a serpent, and later 
as a black, bat-winged goat-man? In the beginning 
he is to appear as the implacable Enemy of the Lord 
and of his Creation—the Tempter, the Author of Evil, 
and the Father of Lies. Later, he is to appear also as 
the Chief Executioner and Torturer of all the demons 
and souls he has beguiled. He is to think up the most 
repulsive and obscene punishments, under which his 
followers will supposedly shriek in unimaginable 
agony forever. So, the Director would allow the Vil- 
lain (as Prince of this World) to steal the show, put- 
ting the audience in peril of everlasting damnation, 
and to play so convincingly that the proscenium arch 
would be clean forgotten. 

If, then, we keep the idea of the Original Agree- 
ment in the backs of our minds, the various stories 
about the origin of evil become curiously suggestive 
—principally because of their odd vagueness as to 
what the original evil actually was. Most theologians 


[ 74] 


Who Is Responsible? 


agree that Lucifer’s sin was pride, and, specifically, 
pride in its most noxious form—spiritual pride. By 
some accounts, the actual occasion of his fall was his 
objection to the “contamination” of spirit with flesh 
in the creation of mankind. It is said that he rebelled 
against an act of God which seemed to him an indig- 
nity to spirit. He was therefore expelled from heaven, 
and became the arch-enemy of the human race. An 
Islamic version has it that Lucifer loved God more 
than did all the other angels together, and, for this 
reason, could not bear the prospect that the divine 
spirit should dwell in the hairy, animal bodies of men. 
He was therefore cast into hell, and the only thing 
that sustains him in torment is his memory of the 
expression of God’s eye and the sound of God’s voice 
as he uttered the dread sentence, “Begone!” 
Spiritual pride and disobedience are likewise held 
to be the occasion of Adam’s fall—spiritual pride in 
that he aspired to become as a god “knowing both 
good and evil,” and disobedience in that he was 
warned not to eat from the Tree. Theologians seldom 
favor the popular notion that original sin was the 
awakening of sexual desire: that the serpent was the 
phallus, the fruit sexual pleasure, and shame in na- 
kedness the subsequent sense of guilt. The Bible says 
that Adam “knew” his wife, Eve, only after expulsion 
from the garden, but this popular interpretation of 
the story has much to be said for it. The real trouble 
with all these theories is that they make the primal 
sin impossibly tame. Lucifer was perhaps, like Shiva 
in some of the Puranic tales, the arch-ascetic who 
could not go along with the Lord’s love for his maya, 
with the sensuality of a marriage between Heaven 


[ 75 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


(the male) and Earth (the female), for, as we have 
been told, “God so loved the world.” Lucifer would 
then be the force against creation, the agent of death 
to all that is not pure spirit. 

But the more subtle theologians warn us that the 
Devil is, after all, an angel of the highest degree, one 
who has looked into the very heart of the Divine Be- 
ing, and is therefore versed in mysteries of which we 
know nothing. Just, then, as the glory of God is be- 
yond all description and comprehension, so, con- 
versely, there is a “mystery of iniquity” which is com- 
parably ineffable and beyond human imagination. 
Terms like “spiritual pride” and “malice” refer, when 
applied to the Devil, to atrocities and depravities so 
abysmally evil that we would neither recognize them 
if we saw them, nor understand them if they were 
explained. The nearest we can ever get to this order 
of things is perhaps in certain psychotic states where 
everything appears to be indescribably strange— 
shapes, emotions, attitudes, rhythms and gestures so 
downright odd that they bear not the least resem- 
blance to the familiar world of sane consciousness. 
Think of a peculiar taste—not sweet, not sour, not 
bitter, not stinky like limburger, but just horribly un- 
classifiable—a taste that clings and cloys and won't 
be done away with. This, say the very subtle theo- 
logians, is the sort of menace we are dealing with in 
the person of the Devil, and the more we cease to pry 
into it, and instead cling firmly to the grace of God, 
the better. 

The grimoires and arcane books of demonology 
suggest that the true preoccupation of diabolism is 
not just destroying, but insulting and humiliating the 


[ 76 ] 


Who Is ResponsibleP 


created order of things by upsetting the laws of na- 
ture. Thus the Witches’ Sabbath was supposed to be 
an orgy in which the initiates of an infernal mystery 
acquired power to transform their bodies into shapes 
that were half dog, half bat, half fish, half worm, or 
half spider, and, in general, to turn human flesh into 
a kind of ooze that responds to every perverse whim 
of the will. But note that the nearer we come to 
describing the supposedly ineffable mysteries of evil, 
all tums into comedy. These “infernal orgies” turn 
out to be no different in principle from a group of 
children laughing themselves silly over the game of 
who can make the most horrible face. 

No, the whole point of the ineffability of the Devil’s 
real intentions and of his primordial sin is that the 
sense of guilt is the most disquieting to an accused 
person when the nature of his crime is unstated. . . . 
“We will not go into the details of the charge against 
you. ... After all, this is a public courtroom, and 
there are just some things that cannot be mentioned, 
because their obscenity and depravity is an outrage, 
not only to the most elementary decency, but to the 
very order of nature. . . . You, the accused, deny it 
as you may, know very well what you have done, and 
the circumstances of your unmentionable crime give 
every evidence of its having been coldly intended and 
deliberately planned—planned, furthermore, in the 
fullest knowledge that what you did was in clear op- 
position to the laws of both God and man. .. .”! 

* Strange to say, there are still states in wh ch a man can be 
sent to prison for a m sdeed no more specifically defined than 
“that nfamous crime against nature, committed by man with 


man.” Presumably this should cover a bad haircut, or partner- 
sh p in a factory that pollutes a r ver. 


[ 77] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


Clearly, the whole force of original, existential 
guilt is that it be an obscure and gnawing sense of 
being profoundly in the wrong, though for no dis- 
cernible reason. Governments maintain this sense in 
a mild form by seeing to it that the laws are so com- 
plex that every citizen is inadvertently guilty of some 
crime, making it possible to convict anyone when 
convenient. Religions do it much more thoroughly, 
often suggesting that one’s very existence is in some 
way an effrontery and an offense against.God. “O 
God, forasmuch as without thee we are unable to 
please thee. . . .” “If we say that we have no sin, we 
deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.” “Enter 
not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in 
thy sight shall no man living be justified.” “Behold, 
I was shapen in wickedness: and in sin hath my 
mother conceived me.” 

It makes no difference that being born in sin was 
the fault, not of God, but of Lucifer or Adam in some 
remote age; the actual effect of the idea of Original 
Sin is to feel that natural existence is in some way 
both a fault and one’s own fault. 

But, of course, the something awful that has gone 
wrong and which must not be mentioned is, in 
reality (that is, in God), the production of the orig- 
inal illusion in which the Creator seems to become 
the creature, the act of hiding in the game of hide- 
and-seek. The same act is, on other levels, the nar- 
rowing of attention to engender the conscious ego, 
and the loss of faith in spontaneous impulse. Yet, 
what is more, the apprehension of this act of hiding 
as a nameless evil for which we feel deeply guilty, is 
in fact a way of ensuring that the game shall not end 


[ 78 ] 


Who Is Responsible? 


too soon. It confirms us in the sense of separate in- 
dividuality and responsibility. It is the flaming sword 
that turns in all directions and guards the way of re- 
turn to Paradise, preventing us from daring to recog- 
nize, upon pain of the utmost blasphemy, that we are 
each the Lord in hiding. Before we can have the 
courage to attain that recognition, we must follow the 
difficult way of consciousness and the discipline of 
the Word to the point where the ego’s pride in itself 
is entirely debunked, not masochistically, but in the 
spirit of cosmic humor. Without this particular de- 
flation of the ego, we might imagine ourselves to be 
one with a God who takes himself seriously. 


[ 79 ] 


IV 


How Must We Have 
Faith? 


Before going further, I have to explain some of the 
rudimentary principles of Christianity—specifically, 
something called the Incarnation, which is offered as 
the solution to man’s “fallen” state. I hope this will 
not be tedious. But, during several years’ experience 
as a university chaplain, I discovered that the edu- 
cated bourgeoisie of the Western world is religiously 
illiterate. This includes many theological students, 
not only when they begin their studies, but also when 
they finish. 

While it is true that some of the basic attitudes of 
Judaism and Christianity have sunk deeply into the 
common sense of most Western people, it cannot be 
assumed that even regular church-goers have so much 


[ 80 ] 


How Must We Have FaithP 


as an elementary grasp of the doctrines they profess. 
The reason is mainly that the language, form and 
style of these ideas have become so foreign to our 
ways of thinking that they are meaningless even to 
very intelligent people. 

To begin at the beginning of the trouble, it is ut- 
terly incomprehensible that one man’s disobedience 
should have involved the entire race in the guilt for 
his sin, and, what is more, made them liable to the 
penalty of everlasting damnation. This seems in flat 
opposition to all our ideas of personal responsibility 
and integrity, the more so when there is no explana- 
tion of the channels whereby the taint of original sin 
passes from generation to generation. It is even more 
impossible to discover any connection between one’s 
personal salvation from hell and the firm belief that 
a certain Jesus of Nazareth was born of a virgin. Two 
things could hardly be more unrelated. I am not try- 
ing to dispute the validity of these doctrines—only to 
say that to most educated moderns they are perfectly 
weird. 

More astonishing still than the transmission of 
original sin is the notion that we are in some way 
saved by the death of Jesus Christ upon the cross. 
How is this rather remote historical event connected 
with our personal problems? How was death a sacri- 
fice and a torment to a person who was supposed 
to be the Son of God and a worker of fabulous mira- 
cles? How is this sacrifice connected with God’s love 
for each one of us personally? In what way does it 
tie in with our taking part in a ceremony where— 
somewhat cannibalistically—we eat his body and 
drink his blood in the form of bread and wine? And 


[ 81 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


why can’t we reap the mysterious benefits of these 
extraordinary events without undergoing the formal- 
ity of having water poured on us with an incantation? 
Is all this just so much highly improbable miraculous 
behavior, which God asks us to believe as a test of 
our faith? If so, why didn’t he make it really improb- 
able, such as having to believe that the far side of the 
moon is covered with an enormous umbrella? 

Note that the difficulties arise in seeing the con- 
nections, the relationships between these ideas. For 
they represent methods of thinking or forms of logic 
based on symbolic correspondences which we no 
longer use in our reasoning. When I used to examine 
candidates for the ministry, I sometimes asked such 
questions as, “What is the relationship between the 
Virgin Birth, the Resurrection, and the Holy Com- 
munion?” I used to get such answers as that the Holy 
Communion service mentioned the other two events! 
Only rarely did theological graduates have some idea 
of the way in which these doctrines are tied together; 
their education gave them no grasp of the basic ra- 
tionale or design of their religion. It was all bits and 
pieces. 

Christianity therefore impresses the modern West- 
erner as the most impossibly complicated amalgama- 
tion of odd ideas, and though it is his spiritual birth- 
right and the faith of his fathers, it is very much 
easier to help him understand Buddhism or Vedanta, 
which I have taught—and, I imagine, Islam or Ju- 
daism. Furthermore, he is apt to find something in- 
definably embarrassing about the emotional atmos- 
phere generated around clergymen and churches. 
How can one quite put a finger on it? Is it moralistic 


[ 82] 


How Must We Have FaithP 


sentimentality—something unctuous, something sanc- 
timonious, something clothesy, undancing, strait- 
laced, and against the loveliness of the human body? 
Whatever it may be, it is the plainly identifiable stink 
of piety. 

Still more important, it is quite obvious to the 
canny observer that most Christians, including clergy 
and devout laity, do not believe in Christianity. If 
they did, they would be screaming in the streets, tak- 
ing daily full-page advertisements in the newspapers, 
and subscribing for the most hair-raising television 
programs every night of the week. Even Jehovah’s 
Witnesses are polite and genteel in their door-to-door 
propaganda. Nobody, save perhaps a few obscure 
fanatics, is really bothered by the idea that every man 
is constantly haunted by an angelic fiend, more im- 
minently dangerous and malicious than the most de- 
praved agents of the Nazis. Most people are sinners 
and unbelievers, and will probably go to hell. So 
what? Let God worry about that onel 

Today the Western world is post-Christian. The 
Churches are huge, prosperous organizations, and, 
aside from expanding their memberships and build- 
ing new plants, their chief concern is the preservation 
of family ties and sexual mores. Their influence on 
major problems of domestic and international politics 
is minimal. Outside Quaker meetings and Catholic 
monasteries, there is hardly the slightest concern for 
the inner life, for the raising of human consciousness 
to union with God—supposedly the main work of re- 
ligion. Their politicking and lobbying is largely pre- 
occupied with the maintenance of idiotic sumptuary 
laws against gambling, drinking, whoring, selling 


[ 83 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


contraceptives, procuring abortions, dancing on Sun- 
days, getting divorced or practicing homosexuality. 
True, there is some interest in Pealism (“get fat 
through faith”) and in the gemiitlich atmosphere of 
hymn-sings and revivals. But all this is irrelevant to 
the peculiar predicament of mankind in this century. 
Or any century. 

If this sounds like a prophetic tirade, it is not meant 
to be. Everyone is at liberty to enjoy being irrele- 
vant, to make sexuality the plum in involved competi- 
tive games, to goose themselves with the fear of the 
dreadful temptations of the flesh, and to wallow in 
being lovingly chastised by our Heavenly Father. My 
point is only that if Christians want to stick to these 
irrelevancies, the Church will shortly become a mu- 
seum, and an exotic game of being the innest in- 
group. Would it be merely sentimental to regret this? 
It is not simply that I do not want Canterbury, Char- 
tres, Vézelay, and San Marco to become museums, 
like Santa Sophia in Constantinople and Sainte-Chap- 
pelle in Paris. My regret is rather that we shall never 
see the rich potentialities of this way of life fulfilled, 
nor realize that the Christian mythos has the possi- 
bility of blossoming into the most joyously exuberant, 
swinging, colorful, and liberated religion there ever 
was. Heaven need not wait for the grave. 

But to reach the point of even seeing such a pos- 
sibility, the basic design of traditional Christianity 
must first become clear; only in terms of this design 
can the particular dogmas, doctrines and symbols be 
related together. I would like, then, to begin by try- 
ing to straighten out the symbolism of the First Adam 
and the Second Adam, of the Fall of Man and its re- 


[ 84 ] 


How Must We Have Faith? 


lation to the central Christian idea of the Incarnation. 
. However one interprets the story of the Fall of 
Man, literally or figuratively, or whether one feels 
that its immediate cause was a deed of willful malice 
or the forgetting of man’s divine nature—the theo- 
logians are almost unanimous in feeling that it flung 
humanity into a vicious circle. Let me repeat the 
essential characteristics of this predicament. 

The Fall was the acquisition of technique and self- 
awareness. It led men to mistrust their immediate im- 
pulses and to try to rely on conscious rationality. But 
they could not fully trust rationality, for they knew 
it was based upon deeper and still unknown reaches 
of the mind. They knew, too, that rationality could 
most easily become rationalization. To mistrust one- 
self leads, in due course, to mistrusting mistrust, and 
thus to being very mixed up indeed. 

It led to the “curse of work.” That is to say, once 
a process of deliberate interference with the natural 
environment has been started, it cannot be stopped. 
Technology leads to the necessity for more and more 
technology, for it is a battle with the Hydra monster: 
for every head chopped off, seven new ones appear. 

It led to the infinite regressions of moral duplicity, 
generated by the oscillating echo phenomena of a 
self-awareness that, being combined with self-mis- 
trust, is too sensitive. This manifests itself variously as 
anxiety and guilt, and as a terrible inability to be 
genuine and innocent, especially in the love of other 
people. The more penetrating one’s self-awareness, 
the more it seems that life is a desperately elaborate 
game of one-upmanship, in which one pursues one’s 
own selfish purposes under the many disguises of 


[ 85 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


duty, love, public-spiritedness, and devotion to ideals. 

Christianity presents itself as the response of God 
to this predicament, which is an “everlasting damna- 
tion” just because it is a vicious circle from which 
man cannot escape by his own efforts. And it pre- 
sents itself in the form of a history—a history of those 
“mighty acts of God” which are recorded in the Bible. 
To summarize this history very briefly—as it is set 
out in the orthodox traditions—it began with a cove- 
nant between the Lord and an elect people, the 
Hebrews. No one really knows why, and perhaps the 
last word on this mystery remains, “How odd of God 
to choose the Jews.” However, it was through this 
people and this culture, endowed, perhaps, with a 
peculiar genius for religion, that the Lord first re- 
vealed himself to the world through the Law and the 
Prophets. 

The Law is set out in the Pentateuch, the first five 
books of the Bible, containing not only the Ten Com- 
mandments but the whole complex fabric of the He- 
brew moral and ritual law. According to St. Paul, the 
Law was given to convict men of sin: to set before 
them the standards and ideals of perfection, so that 
they could see, not only how far short of them they 
were falling, but also that they had no power of their 
own to obey them. (See above, pp. 66-67.) Thus the 
Hebrews were perpetually falling short of the Law 
and consequently, as the Prophets explained, incur- 
ring the anger of God—visited upon them through 
the agency of Philistines, Amalekites, Assyrians, Bab- 
ylonians, Seleucids, and Romans. But the message of 
the Prophets went considerably deeper than exhorta- 
tions to obey the Law for fear of national disasters. 


[ 86 ] 


How Must We Have Faith? 


The Prophets insisted more and more on the idea that 
ritual observance of the Law was not enough, and 
that there could be no true obedience unless the Law 
was “written upon the heart”—that is, unless one de- 
sired genuinely to keep its precepts. Isaiah II went so 
far as to detach obedience from the hope of political 
success and material prosperity, trying to portray the 
ideal of Israel as the Suffering Servant, faithful to the 
ways of the Lord despite all the inevitable sufferings 
of this life, to be an example of pure unselfishness to 
the whole world. 

However, the Prophets did not help anyone to get 
out of the vicious circle. Indeed, they made it much 
worse. For they showed that it was not enough to cor- 
rect one’s outward behavior; what God really de- 
manded was the correction of the inner man, the con- 
version of the heart. And this is exactly. what no one 
can do. It is completely blocked by the taint of Origi- 
nal Sin. As Luther put it: 


This understanding of the law spiritually is far 
more deadly, since it makes the law impossible to 
fulfill and thereby brings man to despair of his own 
strength, and abases him; for no one is without 
anger, no one without lust: such are we from birth. 
But what will a man do, when oppressed by such an 
impossible law? (9) 


It was thus that, through the Law and the Prophets, 
the Lord brought about in perceptive hearts a sense 
of sin amounting almost to despair. This is certainly 
a revelation in the spirit of upaya or “holy cunning,” 
to issue commandments, not expecting them at all to 
be obeyed, but to make men conscious of why they 
could not obey them. 


[ 87 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


According to Christianity, the solution of the prob- 
lem lies in the mystery of the Incarmation and the 
Atonement—the birth, crucifixion, resurrection, and 
ascension of Christ. The Law and the Prophets had 
achieved nothing but despair and a certain degree of 
self-knowledge. The time was therefore ripe for a 
completely different kind of revelation, in the form, 
not of words, but of an event that would effect a rad- 
ical change in human nature. The event was that God 
the Son, the archetypal pattern of the universe, be- 
came man, and the man was the historical Jesus of 
Nazareth. This is the absolute crux of all traditional 
Christianity: the faith that Jesus was infinitely more 
than a prophet, moralist, and exemplar—that he was 
God himself become human. The point was to bring 
into the world a Second Adam. The First Adam had, 
by his Fall, tainted all humanity with sin. The Second 
Adam would, by assuming man’s birth, suffering, 
death, and burial, unite all humanity and all phases 
of human life with the divine nature. As St. Athana- 
sius put it, “God became man that man might become 
God.” 

Theologians have made of this an extremely com- 
plex doctrine—trying to explain how “true God” 
could become “true man,” and by what connections 
and channels the one man, Jesus, could achieve a 
transformation for all men. After all, how can God, 
the omnipotent and omniscient, become truly human 
—that is, capable of suffering, doubt, fear and sorrow 
—without ceasing to be God? As St. Paul put it: 


Let this consciousness be in you that was also in 
Christ Jesus, who [though] existing in the form of 
God, did not consider equality with God as some- 


[ 88 ] 


How Must We Have Faith? 


thing to be grasped; but, emptying himself, took the 
form of a servant, and was born in the likeness of 
men. And finding himself in fashion as a man, he 
humbled himself and became obedient even to 
death—the death of the cross. (Philippians 2: 5-8.) 


God the Son, in other words, became man by “empty- 
ing himself,” by a temporary setting aside or aban- 
donment (kenosis) of the fullness of divine power. 
God is, then, no longer in the position of watching 
over the tribulations of men from a position of lordly 
independence. He comes down and actually partici- 
pates in all the limitations and sufferings of his own 
creatures, including death by torture. Thereupon, the 
extreme point of human humiliation—death—is pe- 
culiarly linked with the Godhead, and the vicious 
circle of man’s bondage is broken for all who will 
accept the gift. 

But how? How does the descent of God the Son 
into one man affect all men? An ancient doctrine is 
that his sacrifice of himself placated the wrath and 
satisfied the justice of God the Father, so that the 
latter consented to forgive all the sins that men had 
committed and would commit. Most modern theolo- 
gians feel that this is a rather primitive and blood- 
thirsty explanation of the Atonement, as indeed it is 
if the wrath of God is fundamentally serious. The pre- 
ferred explanation is more complex, for it employs a 
somewhat archaic method of reasoning derived from 
Greek philosophy. When it is said that, in Jesus, God 
became man, it does not say that he became a man. 
Catholic doctrine insists that Jesus was not a human 
person; he was a divine person, God the Son, but he 
possessed, as well as his divine nature, a complete 


[ 89 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


human nature. For Greek thought distinguished be- 
tween nature and person. The nature, whether human 
or divine, was the substance of Godhead or hu- 
manity; every divine or human person is an “hyposta- 
sis” of this substance, somewhat as ice, water and 
steam are hypostases of one substance. The definition 
of the person or hypostasis never attained any real 
clarity, and in any case the Latin persona (= mask) 
was an absurd translation of the Greek hypostasis. 
But the real point at issue is that in Jesus, God as- 
sumed the humanity, not of one man alone, but of 
all men. Figure out the how as you will, but this is 
definitely the what. 

It follows, then, that the process of Incarnation—of 
uniting God and man—that began in Jesus is to ex- 
tend from him so as to include, ultimately, the whole 
universe. This extending of the Incarnation is called 
the Body of Christ, otherwise known as the Church, 
and every human being can be made “one Body” with 
Christ by becoming baptized and accepting the faith 
that Jesus is God incarnate, with all that it implies. 
It should be mentioned in passing that most people 
confuse the Church with a building, or set of build- 
ings, or with the clergy, whereas it has been well 
defined as “the blessed (i.e., happy) company of all 
faithful people.” It is supposed to be God in the proc- 
ess of transfiguring the whole cosmos. 

Christianity stresses the idea that salvation, or 
union with God, is a gift, and that the Incarnation is 
the sole means of this gift. There is absolutely no way 
of earning, deserving, or manufacturing salvation; it 
comes only as the grace, or favor, of God’s love for 
man and the world. However, once this gift has been 


[ 90 ] 


How Must We Have Faith? 


received, it is said to empower the individual to per- 
form works “pleasing unto the Lord,” and, further, 
that if such works do not emerge, the individual will 
be at fault for not appreciating the gift, and not mak- 
ing use of his divine talent. 

Here we come right to the nub of the scheme. 
What does one do to receive effective grace, that is, 
grace that becomes fully realized in works of love? 
The problem is simply that innumerable people who 
have apparently fulfilled all the requirements—belief, 
prayer, reception of the sacraments, etc.—have found 
no significant change in their moral behavior, except, 
perhaps, a deeper duplicity than ever. St. Paul’s state- 
ment of his dilemma while trying to follow the Law 
is as typical for a Christian as for a Jew: “The good 
that I would, I do not; but the evil that I would not, 
I do.” If the problem for the Jew was to obey the 
Law, the problem for the Christian is to receive grace 
effectively—or to believe truly in Jesus. (It has been 
said that you believe in something when you behave 
as if it were true.) But are not these two problems 
the same? What more has Christianity to offer than 
Judaism if it is as hard to believe truly in Jesus as to 
do the works of the Law? 

This problem arises so long as the test of truth and 
power in a religion is moral success. “By their fruits 
ye shall know them” is usually understood to mean 
that beliefs must be judged by their moral conse- 
quences, that they must issue in observance of the 
Ten Commandments, and in the various works of 
piety and mercy implied in the perfect love of God 
and of one’s neighbor. Is there any way of demon- 
strating that Christians have achieved this goal more 


[ 91 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


successfully than Jews—or than Muslims, Hindus, 
Buddhists, Parsees, Sikhs, and atheists? There is not, 
and it would show a serious lack of Christian humil- 
ity to lay claims to superior righteousness. (Except 
that there is a very wicked morality game called, “I'm 
sorrier for my sins than you are.” ) 

Now, is moral perfection, through divine grace, the 
actual goal of the Christian life? If St. Paul was right 
in supposing that the Lord delivered the Law to 
Moses, not expecting it to be obeyed, but to increase 
self-awareness and the conviction of sin, might not 
the dispensation of grace through the Incarnation 
have a similar purpose—perhaps at some deeper 
level? Theologians have always made a distinction 
between goodness and holiness, holding that the lat- 
ter rather than the former is the Christian objective. 
Holiness, however, is usually taken to include good- 
ness or, at least, a vigorous effort to attain it even if 
quite unsuccessful. Holiness is very hard to describe, 
but quite unmistakable when met with in the flesh: a 
wise innocence, a relaxed intensity, a humorous hu- 
mility, a supernatural naturalness, an unsentimental 
devotion—all wrapped up in an atmosphere which is 
vaguely scary. For the holy man is numinous; he ra- 
diates something of the shekinah, the light of glory, 
the presence of the Most High. 

Obviously, moral perfection through grace must be 
the official ideal of the Church, just as justification 
through obedience to the Law is the official ideal of 
the Synagogue. But the frequent testimony of those 
who follow, or try to follow, this ideal consistently is 
that it functions more as an upaya, as a means of 


[ 92] 


How Must We Have Faith? 


grace, than as a goal. Here is Dom John Chapman, a 
late Abbot of Downside, writing to a nun: 


Do not exhaust yourself by making efforts. You 
seem still to think that you can make yourself goodl 
You can’t. But God can, and will; though slowly, 
perhaps. . . . Try to be simply at His disposition, 
ready to be recollected or distracted as He wills; to 
feel good or to feel wicked (which is nearer to hu- 
mility), to be wretched or consoled. I know the 
darkness is appalling sometimes;—but it is the only 
way of learning that we depend entirely on God, 
that we have nothing from ourselves, that even our 
love and desire of Him tends to be selfish. The 
“royal way of the Holy Cross” is the only way. But 
you will find out that the darkness is God Himself; 
the suffering is His nearness. (10) 


In the presence of holiness, there is always the feel- 
ing that moral rectitude is not only a caricature of 
holiness, but is in some way off the point. It knows 
the words, but doesn’t know the music. “And though 
I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though 
I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, 
it profiteth me nothing.” 

Holiness is close to, but not quite the same as, a 
return to innocence and to the life of spontaneous 
impulse. A. K. Coomaraswamy called it “a perpetual 
uncalculated life in the present.” For holiness is the 
life of spontaneity and self-abandonment with humor, 
which includes the wisdom of serpents as well as the 
gentleness of doves, because humor is nothing other 
than perfect self-awareness. It is the delighted recog- 
nition of one’s own absurdity, and a loving cynicism 
with respect to one’s own pretensions. A person who 


[ 93 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


has learned to be fully self-aware can safely return 
to living by impulse. Humor is the transformation of 
anxiety into laughter: the same trembling, but with 
a different meaning. Holy humor is the discovery of 
the ultimate joke on oneself, and this is why Dante 
heard the song of the angels as the laughter of the 
universe. 

I think of the crypt of the Capuchin Church on the 
Via Veneto in Rome: three chapels entirely decorated 
with the bones of the departed fathers. Altars made 
of piled skulls and shinbones; ceilings adorned with 
floral garlands, vertebrae for the flowers and ribs for 
the stems. Every fixture, every decoration—“dem 
bones.” Hundreds of disassembled skeletons crammed 
into this small crypt with a narrow stairway. What an 
uproar there will be on the Day of Resurrection, 
when all those bones try to reassemble themselves 
and go scurrying upstairs for the Last Judgmentl “Ex- 
cuse me, father, but isn’t that my fifth metatarsal?” 
When I saw the gently wicked glint in the eyes of 
the bearded little friar who was collecting the tour- 
ists’ offerings, I realized that such chapels could have 
been created only by people who had completely 
seen through the terrors of death. Some dread skele- 
tons; others play with them. 

If, then, the actual living out of the Christian way 
seems to show that what lies at its end is something 
far beyond rectitude, that in holiness there is some 
secret gaiety; then it begins to look as if the dispen- 
sation of Grace might be as much an upaya as the 
dispensation of the Law. All is not apparent on the 
surface, for the Christian way embodies a fuller and 
deeper challenge to everything that man has sup- 


[ 94 ] 


How Must We Have Faith? 


posed himself to be and has attempted to achieve 
since eating the forbidden fruit, and finding that he 
could no longer trust his impulses. 

Yet this challenge can quite easily be overlooked, 
especially if the Lord God is taken to be just a sol- 
emn, literal-minded preacher. Taken that way, the 
message of Christianity boils down to something like 
this: After the Fall, no one could get into heaven, no 
matter how good they tried to be, because all their 
goodness was selfishly motivated. Then Jesus came. 
Because he was both God and man, he could act as 
and for man, yet at the same time he could act as 
God, with a motivation of the purest love. Thereupon 
he made a sacrifice of himself upon the cross which 
was tantamount to offering the whole of mankind to 
the Father, in a spirit of absolute unselfishness, and 
this sacrifice assured resurrection from death for all 
and likewise opened the gates of heaven to all. BUT 
—though the admission is now free, no one can find 
the entrance unless he genuinely believes that all this 
has happened, that the admission really is free, and 
then behaves as if it were true. What is more, as 
things now stand, you must believe, you must have 
faith—and the kind of behavior that goes with faith. 
Otherwise, the jaws of hell yawn for you. 

The problem is therefore how to believe. For it is 
not enough to say that I believe, or that I would like 
to believe. “Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, 
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he 
that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven.” 
How to have genuine faith is the same sort of prob- 
lem as how to have genuine love, or how to ask sin- 
cerely for the grace to have them. Yet this is just 


[ 95 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


what the Lord says I must have, for “Thou shalt love 
the Lord thy God.” ... “Darling, you must love 
your mother. But, of course, I want you to do it be- 
cause you want to, and not because I say so.” And 
what if I challenge my wife, and say, “Sweetheart, 
do you really love me?” and she replies, “Well, ’'m 
trying my very best!” Is that the answer I want? You 
must do, quite deliberately, that which can only hap- 
pen by itself. That seems to be the real first and great- 
est commandment. 

Yet as soon as the self-contradictory pattern of the 
first and greatest commandment is seen, there comes 
a curious insight. The very sin of Adam was that he 
aspired to be as God—that is, to bend nature to his 
conscious will, to command spontaneous perform- 
ances from himself and others! All technique—artis- 
tic, mechanical, dramatic, athletic, or medical—is the 
attempt to be skillfully natural or artfully artless, 
seeking to recapture and control, in human terms, the 
faultless grace of birds in flight. With rare excep- 
tions, it succeeds at most in attaining a fair imitation 
of the ideal, concealing the laborious construction- 
work as on the underside of a piece of embroidery. 
But now it appears that the real intent of God’s first 
and greatest commandment is to tell the sons of 
Adam to persist as hard as they can in that primal sin 
of trying to control spontaneity. Thou shalt love. 
Thou shalt be artificially natural. Thou shalt try not 
to try. Thou shalt willfully give up thine own will. 
Thou shalt attempt, for the next five minutes, not to 
think of a green elephant. Presumably, then, the Lord 
believes, with William Blake, that “the fool who per- 
sists in his folly will become wise.” 


[ 96 ] 


How Must We Have Faith? 


If, therefore, this is the intent behind both the Law 
and the Incarnation, the whole history of Christianity 
is seen in a new and startling light. It becomes an 
immense success in persisting in folly! In going, full 
tilt, in a direction that must lead to a final coming to 
our senses. In perfecting the isolation and insularity 
of the human individual to its ultimate absurdity. In 
nurturing the feeling of personal responsibility and 
guilt to the point where it paralyzes action. For Chris- 
tianity is one of the principal ingredients in the as- 
tonishing outburst of historical change which is so 
strangely characteristic of the West, in a cultural im- 
perialism and a scientific sorcery which—in less than 
a hundred years—have won victories over nature 
which put the whole planet in peril. 

This is not the place to elaborate on the lessons of 
ecology, the science of the interrelationships and bal- 
ances of nature (11). The working of our merciful 
miracles of communication, medicine, sanitation, and 
nutrition has poisoned the soil and the atmosphere, 
infected the waters, dangerously disorganized all in- 
sects and micro-organisms, deprived food of taste, 
spread the insanities of nationalism and military tech- 
nology to the ends of the earth, and made people 
their own worst enemy by a multiplication of their 
numbers which is out of all foreseeable control. Are 
not these the fruits of the Hebrew and Christian con- 
viction that death is an evil, because I am all that 
there is of me, because, for all the hopes of heaven, 
death heralds the day of reckoning, the confrontation 
of me with my Maker in the supremely grim moment 
of the Last Judgment? 

The folklore of death in the Christian West is a 


[ 97 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


compound of ghastliness—of the gloom of black 
mourning, of churchyards haunted with shrieking 
skulls, of dark coffins draped in sable, of ghosts with 
rattling bones robed in shrouds, of weird and dismal 
associations of black Bibles, bats and booming bells, 
of horribly avuncular undertakers with low voices, of 
kindly physicians and surgeons believing so strongly 
in “while there is life there is hope” that the pangs 
of death are interminably prolonged, and suicide 
deemed a mortal sin. When the sense of personal 
identity is most intensely developed, even the horrors 
of the Last Judgment and Hell are better than the 
prospect of everlasting nothingness. This is John 
Betjeman’s feeling, lying in hospital before an opera- 
tion, and listening to the Sunday evening bells. 


Swing up! and give me hope of life, 

Swing down! and plunge the surgeon’s knife. 
I, breathing for a moment, see 

Death wing himself away from me 

And think, as on this bed I lie, 

Is it extinction when I die? 

I move my limbs and use my sight; 

Not yet, thank God, not yet the Night. 

Oh better far those echoing hells 
Half-threaten’d in the pealing bells 

Than that this “I” should cease to be— 

Come quickly, Lord, come quick to me. (12) 


Individual life is deemed supremely valuable and 
important, and therefore death, despite all promises 
of eternal beatitude beyond the grave, is to be put 
off by all possible ingenuity. Remember Lazarus. 


Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one 
of them shall not fall to the ground without your 
Father [knowing it]. But the very hairs of your 


[ 98 ] 


How Must We Have Faith? 


head are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are 
of more value than many sparrows. (Matthew 10: 
29-31. AV.) 


The fascinating paradox of Christianity is that this 
marvelously creative vision of the value of the indi- 
vidual can also be the undoing of the individual, and 
of human society as a whole. It is too much of a good 
thing. At the same time, we must not write off the 
Christian sense of personality as a mistake, to be re- 
placed by some merely barbarous concept of the in- 
dividual as “hand,” “worker,” “consumer,” or other 
type of socialized digit. The explosion of Christian 
personality through its own intensity leads to some- 
thing far better. 

Meanwhile, the terrifying dislocations which are 
bearing down upon us as the result of a technology 
unmindful of ecology, compel us to ask some ex- 
tremely radical questions. Is the attempt to master 
nature really worth it, in the long run? Is language 
and communication actually of help in survival? Will 
it soon be necessary to abandon the practice of medi- 
cine? Is government anything at root but an elabo- 
rate system of self-frustration? Are the ego and the 
power of conscious reason nothing but cumbersome 
clowns in comparison with the organic and paracon- 
scious wisdom of the body? Are plagues and diseases 
our friends, keeping population at an optimal bal- 
ance? Is the sense of individuality an illusion, the 
result of some curious disintegration and fixation of 
a racial, or even universal, consciousness? Are those 
in power soon going to be forced to select whole 
groups of people for painless extermination or sterili- 
zation? Should anyone try to control this mounting 


[ 99 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


confusion, or simply relax and let things take their 
course? And then, could any of us really let go, even 
if it seemed the best thing to do? 

Such questions have been asked before, but never 
with the earnestness that events will soon force upon 
us. How can they be answered by the type of man 
who has brought these problems about? Faced with 
this cris, the egocentric style of personality will 
merely turn brutal, and there will be a frightful strug- 
gle for the survival of some elite group. The infinitely 
judicious combination of doing nothing and interfer- 
ing intelligently that will be required, calls for hu- 
man beings with a new sensation of identity. And this 
new sensation of identity could come about within 
the framework of Christianity, if Christians under- 
stood the way in which their religion works—as an 
upaya, as a systematic and formidably consistent ego- 
centricity designed to explode into theocentricity— 
the realization of being one Self with God. Jesus put 
it in the plainest language: 


[I pray] that all may be one, even as you, Father, 
[are] in me and I in you, that they also may be in 
us, [and] that the world may believe that you have 
sent me. And I have given them the glory which 
you gave to me, that they may be one just as we are 
one—I in them and you in me—so that all may be 
completely in unity. (John 17: 21-23.) 


The phrase “just as” or “even as” (xaOés) leaves no 
doubt that he envisaged men becoming one with God 
in just the same way and degree as himself. 

A system of consistent egocentricity? Christianity 
is always assumed to be the exact opposite, since it 
is so firmly opposed, say, to the gratification of sen- 


[ 100 ] 


How Must We Have FaithP 


sual appetites without regard for other people. But 
that is a weak form of egocentricity—even, in ex- 
treme forms, a parody or inversion of a saint’s love 
for God, since the deity here is sex or booze or choc- 
olate cream pies. Strong egocentricity is a product of 
effort and discipline, and tends to make the individ- 
ual feel that he is a separate, independent and respon- 
sible being, exercising an increasing degree of con- 
trol over his environment, his physical organism and 
his own soul. St. Paul, who spoke so much of divine 
grace and of the obsolescence of the Law, could 
nevertheless write, “But I beat down my body, and 
bring it into subjection.” 

By and large, Christianity is the religion of grace 
much more in theory than in practice. It has been 
said, “Pray as if everything depended upon God, but 
work as if everything depended upon you.” In other 
words, believe as if you had been given salvation, but 
behave as if you had to attain it by your own effort. 
Christian institutions—monasteries, convents, schools 
—have almost always been disciplinary mills, having 
long schedules of minute rules concerning speech, de- 
portment, moral behavior, ritual observance, and 
even inward thoughts; and, during hundreds of years, 
the general practice has been to implement the com- 
forting (i.e., energizing) grace of the Holy Spirit with 
the whip. To read through the ancient fathers of the 
Church, the medieval penitentiaries, the great six- 
teenth- and seventeenth-century manuals of ascetic 
theology and spiritual direction, is to see beyond 
doubt how consistently the Christian way has been 
an unceasing and critical watchfulness over the for- 
mation of personal character, to compel oneself by 


[ 101 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


grace or by guts to conform in thought, word and 
deed to the pattern of Christ.1 

Out of this ordinary (i.e., regular) discipline of the 
“purgative way,” a few souls seem to graduate with 
the understanding. that disciplinary success is not 
enough, and may even be the occasion of a frightful 
downfall. I may be able to control my passions and 
appetites, but in what spirit am I controlling them? 
Is it, after all, to admire myself for my moral strength, 
and not for any genuine love of God or of my breth- 
ren? With this insight, I know that somehow the 
spirit in which the discipline is followed must be 
changed. I must do all for the pure love of God, but 
I do not have the power to evoke such love by my 
own will. What am I to do, then? For I see that even 
in praying for the grace to love purely, I am trying 
to work some indirect magic, to find some trick, some 
psychic technique, some spiritual gimmick to compel 
the grace of God. How do I not want to do that? 

This point is really the height of egocentricity: the 
final achievement of controlling my own letting go of 
myself; to be able to say “When!” To become the per- 
fect instrument of the Spirit, and yet to have done it 
myself. To be able to evoke union with God at will 
—and, above all, by the stratagem of willing not to 
will it, for it seems to come just when I say, “O God, 
let it come or not come, as you will.” (See Dom John 
Chapman’s advice, above, p. 93.) 

It is no wonder that, at this stage, I begin to feel 


* There are other records which show the rule in the breach 
instead of the observance. But it would be safe to say that, for 
some 1900 years or more, a goodly majority of professing, 
church-going Christians have, at some time in their lives, at 
least made a stab at this task. 


[ 102 } 


How Must We Have Faith? 


that drunkards, hipsters, bums, pimps and prostitutes 
are better than I, for at least they are straightforward 
and without pretensions. Jesus himself preferred to 
associate with such as these rather than with people 
aspiring to righteousness. (One must remember that 
the Pharisees were the “nice people” of those days, 
the decent and the law-abiding, the ladies and gentle- 
men.) So then—at this stage I feel to myself as if my 
hands were covered with molasses and feathers, and 
I were trying to pick the feathers off. I cannot pos- 
sibly get myself out of my own way, for whatever I 
do or don’t do, it is I that am doing it and it is my 
way. The situation is, in sum, that I must surrender 
myself, but I cannot possibly do so. 

This is the apex of the discipline of self-conscious- 
ness, of the development of the Christian ego. It is 
reflected in the situation of Western civilization as 
a whole, for, on the one hand, we must let the bal- 
ance of nature maintain itself, but, on the other, we 
are so dependent upon our technology that we cannot 
possibly abandon it. 

At this point of crisis, what is the right question to 
ask? “What shall we do?” is clearly the wrong ques- 
tion, because we know we cannot do what must be 
done. The better question is, “What does it mean that 
we are in this crisis? What does our situation tell us 
about the way in which we have been acting, and 
about who or what we have believed ourselves to 


be?” 


[ 103 ] 


Who Js Who? 


In what sense, then, is “Jesus Christ” the answer to 
this problem? Do his precepts and doctrines hold the 
solution? Or is it, as the Church insists, that who he 
was (and is) is still more important than what he 
said? 


For the right Faith is, that we believe and con- 
fess: that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is 
God, and Man; God of the substance of the Father, 
begotten before the worlds: and Man of the sub- 
stance of his Mother, born in the world; Perfect 
God, and perfect Ma: of a reasonable soul, and 
human flesh subsisting; equal to the Father, as 
touching his Godhead: and inferior to the Father, 
as touching his Manhood. Who although he be God 


[ 104 ] 


Who Is Who? 


and Man: yet he is not two, but one Christ; one, not 
by conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but by the 
taking of the Manhood into God; one altogether, 
not by confusion of substance, but by unity of per- 
son. For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man: 
so God and Man is one Christ. (BCP.) 


This, according to the so-called Athanasian Creed, is 
the heart of the matter. But how does it help? If one 
insists that God became man only in the year 753 ab 
Urbe Condita, from the founding of the city of Rome, 
and only within the skin of Jesus of Nazareth, this 
makes Jesus a freak with no effective relationship to 
other people. If Jesus had such a unique advantage 
over other men, it is merely a farce to suggest that 
they follow his example. 

Does it help by guaranteeing that every word he 
said was the solemn, literal, and absolute truth, which 
we are therefore bound to believe? That 1g00-odd 
years ago, he somehow settled a mysterious debt for 
me which I don’t remember incurring? That every- 
thing he did was the perfect and finally authoritative 
example of conduct and morals—which we are ex- 
pected to follow without the aforesaid advantage of 
being God the Son in person? That by some feat of 
ancient Greek logic, the Manhood of Jesus is also my 
Manhood, since Manhood is a universal “substance” 
which we all share in somewhat the same way as all 
pots share the substance of clay? But if this be so, 
Jesus has united me with God as touching my Man- 
hood, my human nature, but not as touching my per- 
son—my particular form (or pot) of this substance. 
We are then back to the old, old problem of how my 


[ 105 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


person, my will, my ego, my individual essence is to 
surrender itself to Christ’s transformation of my sub- 
stance. 

On this point the doctrines are more and more com- 
plex, and less and less helpful. When God the Son 
became man, as Jesus of Nazareth, this effected a 
potential union of his humanity with mine. To clinch 
this union I must, however, be baptized, and then 
confirmed, and then be a regular recipient of the 
sacraments of penance and holy communion. Yet this 
does no more than to advance the union of my hu- 
manity with Christ’s humanity from the potential 
level to the actual, and thus to make grace available 
to my person, my will, in the hope that this may 
enable me to take the essential leap of faith, of per- 
sonal commitment to the gift of salvation vouchsafed 
to my humanity, to my impersonal and collective 
status as a human being. Remember that the sub- 
stance (clay) is one thing and the person (the pot) 
another, and that therefore the gift of salvation to the 
substance is not the same thing as the salvation of the 
person. The former makes the latter possible. But, as 
we have seen, it is as difficult to co-operate personally 
with grace as to obey the precepts of the law with 
sincerity of heart. The gift of grace, of the union of 
my humanity with Christ, makes no difference; we 
are just where we were before. 

The preceding paragraph contained a highly sim- 
plified account of how we are “saved”—or given the 
opportunity to be saved—through the Incarnation of 
God the Son as Jesus of Nazareth. But is it upon such 
quibbles and splittings of hair that the whole force of 
the Gospel must be supported? For all this is a sym- 


[ 106 ] 


Who Is Who? 


bology and a way of thinking quite strange to my life 
as a member of twentieth-century Western culture, 
and stranger still, for example, to university students 
in Ghana or Tokyo. It fails absolutely to make any 
direct connection between the crucified and risen Son 
of God, on the one hand, and the daily life of a fam- 
ily in the suburbs of Los Angeles or London, on the 
other. 

Direct connections are made by the Billy Grahams, 
and other Bible-bangers, who simply bypass the 
problem of how the Crucifixion in a.p. 34 saves me in 
1964, who just assume that it does, and then go on to 
convince me of the divine and noble character of 
Jesus as portrayed in the Bible, clinching the argu- 
ment by saying that this is also the character of the 
God who supports and creates my existence at this 
very moment. They tell me that if I want to know 
what God is like, God who is the foundation of my 
being here and now, I must read about Jesus in the 
Gospels who is “the brightness of [God’s] glory and 
the express image of his person.” I can therefore com- 
municate with the Power that supports me here and 
now on the assumption that it both resembles and, in 
some sense, is the historical Jesus of Nazareth, risen 
from the dead and reigning in heaven. I don’t need to 
worry and ask questions about how Jesus will save 
me; I have only to pray, to communicate with him, 
and, to my utter surprise, I will find that the power to 
surrender myself is immediately forthcoming. 

But if one happens to be blessed (or cursed) with 
a critical intellect, this simply will not do. One is then 
quick to see that the surrender of the will to Jesus is 
all too easily a blind acceptance of patriarchal mores 


[ 107 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


and a retum to the conscience of one’s childhood. 
For Billy Graham’s Jesus is an ideal image of the 
bourgeois Middle West, just as the Catholic Jesus is 
an ideal feudal prince of the thirteenth century, or a 
Boston-Irish male mother with a big worry about sex. 

Christian piety makes a strange image of the object 
of its devotion, “Jesus Christ, and Him crucified.” 
Gim. The bearded moralist with the stern, kind, and 
vaguely hurt look in the eyes. The man with the lan- 
tern, knocking at the heart’s door. “Come along now, 
boys! Enough of this horsing around! It’s time you 
and I had a very serious talk.” Christ Jesus our Lord. 
Jeez-us. Jeez-you. The Zen Buddhists say, “Wash out 
your mouth every time you say “Buddhal’” The new 
life for Christianity begins just as soon as someone 
can get up in church and say, “Wash out your mouth 
every time you say ‘Jesus!’ ” 

For we are spiritually paralyzed by the fetish of 
Jesus. Even to atheists he is the supremely good man, 
the exemplar and moral authority with whom no one 
may disagree. Whatever our opinions, we must per- 
force wangle the words of Jesus to agree with them. 
Poor Jesus! If he had known how great an authority 
was to be projected upon him, he would never have 
said a word. His literary image in the Gospels has, 
through centuries of homage, become far more of an 
idol than anything graven in wood or stone, so that 
today the most genuinely reverent act of worship is 
to destroy that image. In his own words, “It is ex- 
pedient for you that I go away, for if I go not away, 
the Paraclete (the Holy Spirit) cannot come unto 
you.” Or, as the angel said to the disciples who came 
looking for the body of Jesus in the tomb, “Why do 


[ 108 J 


Who ls Who? 


you seek the living among the dead? He is not here. 
He is risen and has gone before you. . . .” But Chris- 
tian piety does not let him go away, and continues to 
seek the living Christ in the dead letter of the his- 
torical record. As he said to the Jews, “You search 
the scriptures, for in them you think you have eter- 
nal life.” 

The Crucifixion gives eternal life because it is the 
giving up of God as an object to be possessed, known, 
and held to for one’s own safety, “for he that would 
save his soul shall lose it.” To cling to Jesus is there- 
fore to worship a Christ uncrucified, an idol instead 


of the living God. 


Rock of ages, cleft for me, 
Let me hide myself in thee. 


The cockroaches run for their cracks in the wall. 


What a friend we have in Jesus, 
All our sins and griefs to bear! 


But the Christ who “walks with me and talks with 
me” is not the Christ within; he is the crutch, not the 
backbone. The continuing Sacrifice of the Altar, the 
daily breaking and consuming of Christ’s Body in the 
Mass, means nothing at all if it does not mean that 
the imagined Jesus and the preconceived God is al- 
ways being surrendered—the shell shattered and the 
seed buried so that the life may be released. As Jesus 
said, “A grain of wheat remains a solitary grain unless 
it falls into the ground and dies; but if it dies, it bears 
a rich harvest.” But the bystanders then, as the pious 
today, objected, “Our Law teaches us that the Mes- 
siah continues forever. What do you mean by saying 


[ 109 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


that the Son of Man must be lifted up [i-e., cruci- 
fied]?” And thus: 


O Word of God incarmate, 
O Wisdom from on high, 

O Truth, unchanged, unchanging, 
O Light of our dark sky; 

We praise thee for the radiance 
That from the hallowed page, 

A lantern to our footsteps, 
Shines on from age to age 


so that we all know exactly where we are. 

Belief in a definite and objective Christ to be 
leaned upon is, however, the antithesis of faith; it is 
an attitude that is rigid rather than trusting and 
yielding. Christian piety is notoriously preoccupied 
with rigid images. 

Christ is made the sure foundation, 
Christ the head and cormer-stone. 


Or, as Samuel Johnson put it: 


In vain the surge’s angry shock, 
In vain the drifting sands: 

Unharmed upon the eternal rock 
The eternal city stands, 


And Luther: 


A mighty fortress is our God, 
A bulwark never failing. 


But what we need in a universe such as ours are not 
rocks and bastions: we need the knowledge of how to 
float and swim. In the end, the pliability, the elastic- 
ity, and the “give” of living tissue is always stronger 
than stone and steel. Perhaps, then, the dolphins were 
wiser than we, since they left the firm earth to romp 


[ 110 ] 


Who Is Who? 


and roll in the oceans. We maintain the illusion of liv- 
ing in a solid world, though in fact a mountain range 
of granite is a diaphanous network of electrical en- 
ergy, and the attitude of the dolphin is as appropriate 
on land as in the water. 

To have faith in “Christ crucified” is therefore “that 
he may be in us, and we in him,” as the bird is in the 
air and the air in the bird. It is not to cling to the 
Cross or to reach out in the dark for the Savior’s 
hand. There is nothing to catch hold of, because “the 
kingdom of heaven is within you.” To be truly “in 
Christ” is to be less and less preoccupied with any 
external image of Jesus derived from the Gospels, as 
if the Christian life were the meticulous following of a 
pattern. Every Easter Sunday should be celebrated 
with a solemn and reverent buming of the Holy 
Scriptures, for the whole meaning of the resurrection 
and ascension of Christ into heaven (“which is within 
you”) is that Godmanhood is to be discovered here 
and now inwardly, not in the letter of the Bible. 

This is why the quest for the historical Jesus is so 
dreary and unproductive. Our attempts to “de- 
mythologize” the Gospel (Bultmann) and get down 
to the authentic, historical facts about Jesus of Naza- 
reth are actually as irrelevant and superstitious as try- 
ing to concoct pseudoscientific proofs that the Virgin 
Birth and the bodily Resurrection were physical 
events. Both are quests for a Jesus out there in the 
past, and “why seek ye the living among the dead?” 
Christ demythologized invariably turns out to be a 
rather boring prophet or messianic fanatic—at best a 
man struggling to express a profound experience of 
“cosmic consciousness” in the terms of Isaiah II’s mes- 


[ 111 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


sianism and of post-Maccabean apocalyptic visions of 
the coming end of the world, a theology strangely 
alien to the mystical sense of union with God.! The 
various versions of the historical Jesus always seem 
to reflect the individual scholar’s preconceptions of 
what Jesus ought to have said and done, and thus 
there is a curious disagreement among the “higher 
critics” as to what parts of the Gospels should be 
considered authentic. The historical Jesus may be an 
academic curiosity; he is hardly the object of a spir- 
itual quest, and scholarly attempts to dig out the hard 
facts from the poetry and mythology of the Gospels 
are somewhat similar to explorations of Mozart’s so- 
natas in terms of the physics of sound. 

Is it really of any great interest to ask whether 
Jesus was literally and historically born of a virgin 
and resurrected physically after his death? This kind 
of emphasis makes him a human freak, like a two- 
headed baby. The marvel of marvelous events is not 
whether they happened but what they mean, and the 
wonder of mythological happenings is that their 
meaning is almost inexhaustible. Like magic mirrors, 
every man can see in them the truth that is right for 
him and for his time. The meaning of the miracle is 
as important for the age which takes miracles for 
granted, as for the age which takes them with skepti- 


*If Jesus had had a very strong form of the common type of 
“cosmic consciousness” in which the individual feels that his 
own in ost Self, behind the superficial ego, is God, this would 
have been al ost i possible to express in terms of Judaic 
theolog without blasphemy. The best he could have done was 
to identif himself, publicly, with the orthodox image of the 
promised Messiah, both as Isaiah II’s Suffering Servant and 
as the apocalyptic Son of Man, co ing to rule the earth ith 
the power of heaven rather than force of arms. 


[ 112 ] 


Who Is Who? 


cism; in either age, the fact .of the miracle is of no 
great consequence. It is only by the transposition of 
the miracle from historical and terrestrial time to 
mythological and celestial time that we can find: 


Christ walking on the water, not of Gennesareth 
but Thames! 


Only if Bethlehem (the “House of Bread”) becomes 
the human body, does it mean anything to sing 


O holy Child of Bethlehem! 
Descend to us we pray; 

Cast out our sin and enter in, 
Be born in us today. 


Only if the Last Supper is set free from being an 
event long passed in Jerusalem is it possible for 
Christ to celebrate Mass with us today. If the Sacri- 
fice “that bought us, once for all, on Calvary’s tree” 
happened only on the fourteenth day of Nisan in a.p. 
34, the answer to “Were you there when they cruci- 
fied my Lord?” is merely, “No.” And it was just non- 
sense for Johann Heermann to write: 


"Twas I, Lord Jesus, I it was denied thee: 
I crucified thee. 


Safely tucked away in ancient history, or off in some 
improbable local heaven, Christ can never be the 
beggar that comes to the door; and it was nothing 
more than a figure of speech when he said, “Inasmuch 
as you have done it unto one of the least of these my 
brethren, you have done it unto me.” 

To insist on the historicity of the Christian myth is 
to remove Christ to the sterile distance of an archaeo- 
logical curiosity. Actually, this is a relatively modern 


[ 113 } 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


point of view. It was not until 1700, or later, that 
Christian artists attempted to dress Jesus and his 
apostles with the historical realism of burnooses. 
They were always shown in the dress of the artist’s 
day, or in the ecclesiastical vestments of the day. If 
we were now following the spirit of traditional Chris- 
tian art, we would show Jesus in overalls or a tweed 
suit. It was taken for granted that the Gospels told of 
historical events, but that aspect of the matter was of 
minor importance. The important thing was that 
through the cycle of the Church year, and through 
the daily celebration of the liturgy, these marvelous 
and saving events were constantly relived in the 
present. They were not merely memorialized. They 
were mysteries in which men partook immediately, 
and this is still the basic attitude of Catholic spiritual- 
ity. The notion that Christianity is the uniquely his- 
torical religion, stressing the intervention of God in 
the historical process, hardly occurred to theologians 
before the nineteenth century. But it was just at this 
time that Christianity also began to cultivate a pious 
antiquarianism, now culminating in the sentimental- 
ity of building Romanesque churches in steel and 
concrete. And watch out for plastic Baroque. 

It is also in quite modern times that clergy have 
developed the attitude that there is something robust 
and realistic in committing oneself to the belief that, 
say, the virgin birth was a “hard, historical fact.” This 
kind of commitment is contrasted with the alleged 
wooliness and feeble-mindedness of understanding it 
in the “impoverished” sense of “mere” myth or sym- 
bol. Obviously, such attitudes are a form of profes- 
sional posturing which attempt to justify obscuran- 


[ 114 ] 


Who Is Who? 


tism and intellectual barbarism. It is in the same kind 
of spirit that some people acquire a sense of prag- 
matic manliness by adopting fascistic and “damn-it- 
shoot-’em-all” attitudes in politics. 

We return, then, to the original question: in what 
sense is Jesus Christ “the answer” to our human pre- 
dicament today? What relevance has this mighty 
mythos to men who feel themselves alone in an alien 
universe, trapped by their own ingenuity into being 
compelled to control a situation which thereby gets 
more and more out of hand? Clearly, he has no rele- 
vance as a practical preacher, giving straightforward, 
down-to-earth instructions which we have simply to 
put into practice. Still less is he relevant as a deus ex 
machina, a supernatural escape from all these prob- 
lems, who, if we trust him to do so, will restore us to 
perfection and happiness after we are dead. 

In the first place, the figure of Jesus—as passed 
down to us by orthodox tradition—is a challenge that 
no Westerner can simply dismiss, especially if he was 
exposed to it in childhood, and, quite as especially, if 
he was brought up as a Jew.” Directly or indirectly, 
the traditional image of Jesus has formed the person- 
ality, the sense of identity, and the scale of values of 
every member of Western culture. Even those of us 
who are downright irreligious find that there is still 
enough magic in his Name for effective cursing. 

The difficulty is, however, that the Christian and 
Western style of personality is still half-baked, for it 
* A major part of the Western Jew’s problem is that he has to 
live with Christians, and thus cannot simply ignore the crucial 
differences between Christianity and judaien. His tradition is 


still repressing the question of why Jesus was handed over to 
Pilate, and there can be no peace for him until he faces it. 


[ 115 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


expresses the unsolved problem which Christ himself 
posed in the double-bind commandment, “Thou shalt 
love the Lord thy God.” You must be free. You are 
responsible for the deliberate cultivation of genuine 
concern and love for other people. We are thus trying 
to be human on purpose, as if we felt it necessary to 
go around making great efforts to have heads. Still 
more embarrassing, Jesus is saying, “I have suffered 
the agonies of the Cross because I loved you, and 
died to save you from your sins. Now what are you 
going to do for me?” Every Good Friday our parish 
clergy used to hand each one of us a colored picture 
of a very sad Jesus on the Cross, saying: 


This I have done for thee. 

What doest thou for Me? 
Because of the Fall, you are guilty just for existing. 
But now that you have been redeemed at so great a 
price, you should be feeling absolutely terrible. And 
thus our parents, too, learned to make a play for our 
love by. harping on the great sacrifices they made for 
us. 

(“It’s not enough to say that you're sorry. Are you 
really sorry? No, don't try to tell me anything; we'll 
see clearly enough from your actions. And I don't 
mean from an outburst of penitence during the next 
few days. We'll have to see how you behave over a 
considerable period of time. . . .”) 


O my people, what have I done unto thee? 
or in what have I afflicted thee? answer me. 

Because I led thee out of the land of Egypt, 
thou hast prepared a Cross for thy Savior. 

I gave thee a royal scepter, and thou hast 
given me a crown of thoms. 


[ 116 } 


Who Is Who? 


Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? 
behold, and see if there be any sorrow like unto 
my sorrow. 

The God-Man on the Cross sums up in one image 
all the cruelty we inflict by being alive, all the rav- 
ages of human selfishness and thoughtlessness. This 
is why Jesus cannot be overlooked or dismissed. But 
what is anyone to do? I can weep and beat my breast, 
and devote the rest of my life to working as a medical 
missionary, accepting contributions from stockholders 
in missile factories, and using drugs supplied by firms 
that fleece the public with dubious or dangerous pills. 
Will it be all right if I don’t know about it? I can look 
on with a sort of passive despair, regretfully recogniz- 
ing that I can never meet the challenge, and must 
just muddle along as harmlessly as possible. Or I can 
tell the Lord off, and say, “Listen, don’t pull that stuff 
on me! After all, you're supposed to be God. You 
made me and you made the world this way, and if 
you don't like the way I act it’s up to you to change 
it.” 

But, again, if I am sensitive and concerned, and if 
I have a critical intellect, none of these responses will 
do. I begin slowly to see that the challenge and the 
problem of the God-Man on the Cross is not simply 
something that I am looking at, out there. The more 
conscious of myself I become, the more I realize that 
I too am hanging on that same Cross. It will be just 
as painful as crucifixion to die of stomach cancer, or 
to be the helpless cause of suffering to people I love, 
or to become all-too-vividly aware of my complicity 
in the collective deviltries of our society. Crucifixion 
is acute consciousness. At this level of understanding, 


[ 117 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


Jesus begins to disappear as a conventional image. 
There is no more the earnest young man with a beard 
and a white robe, or even the twisted body nailed to 
the beams. This image vanishes into the experience of 
suffering as such—not only physical pain, but also the 
empty aridity of “My God, my God, why hast thou 
forsaken me?” I see the crucifix when I swat a mos- 
quito or eat an oyster, and how much more in all en- 
counters with human pain. Yet the most problematic 
form of this crucifixion is in the insistent question, 
“What am I to do about it?” 

Every response I can imagine is phony—even to 
confess that I am phony all the way through. As 
Groddeck once pointed out, there is still something a 
little bit pharisaical about the publican in the parable 
who creeps into the back of the temple and, beating 
his breast, cries, “God be merciful to me a sinner!” 
Once the story has been told and set up as an ex- 
ample, it becomes simply impossible to follow the 
example without falling into ever deeper entangle- 
ments of hypocrisy. Which is surely why Jesus told 
it. For once even the most genuine humility is held 
up for our emulation, its following is as hollow as the 
most perfunctory ritual.8 So what am I to do? 


I said to my soul, be still, and wait without hope 

For hope would be hope for the wrong thing; wait 
without love 

For love would be love of the wrong thing; there is yet 
faith 

*Compare also the precept-shattering precept, “You have 

leamed that they were told, ‘Do not commit adultery.’ But 

what I tell Pa is this: If a man looks on a woman with a 


lustful eye, he has already committed adultery with her in his 
heart.” (Matthew 5: 27-28. NEB.) 


[ 118 ] 


Who Is Who? 


But the faith and the love and the hope are all in the 
waiting. 

Wait without thought, for you are not yet ready for 
thought: 

So the darkness shall be light, and the stillness the 
dancing. (13) 


But can I even wait, can I even not do, without being 
just as much of a sham as ever? 

The tradition of Western mysticism is that con- 
templative prayer, the highest knowledge of God at- 
tainable in this life, is the mute enduring of this 
humiliating incapacity to hope for or to love the right 
thing. Contemplative prayer is simply the faith that 
this sense of incapacity is an interior crucifixion 
whereby we come most immediately into union with 
God. The vision of God in light and face-to-face must 
wait until after death. Until then, the most perfect 
knowledge of God is in the way of the Cross—in 
knowing that one does not know God, in desolation of 
spirit, in aridity, in feeling perfectly ordinary and 
boringly everyday—in the faith that just this darkness 
is the veiled Godhead. “Had I a God whom I could 
understand,” said Eckhart, “I would no longer hold 
him for God.” To quote Dom John Chapman again: 


Your prayer will consist in passing the time as 
best you can—as far as possible by simply belong- 
ing to God, without acts [i.e., specific acts of devo- 
tion]—[or] using acts to avoid distractions. At the 
end (and all through) you will be thanking God for 
giving you this particular prayer and no other; it 
will probably consist of (i) only distractions and 
worrying; or (ii) nothing at all; or (iii) utter mis- 
ery, and feelings of despair; or (iv) that there is no 
God; or (v) that it is all dreadful, and waste of time 


[ 119 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


and pain. And you will then (not at once) feel—in 
a higher part of the soul than you have realized be- 
fore—how much better this is than what you used 
to have; and that you would rather suffer like this, 
as it is God’s will, than to have the most spiritual of 
pleasures. (14) 


It is here, as Dom Aelred Graham (another Bene- 
dictine) has suggested, that Western mysticism has a 
certain affinity with Zen Buddhism, for Zen discovers 
the highest illuminantion, not in visions and ecstasies, 
but in the immediate here and now, as when the 
meaning of the universe is realized in “the clatter of 
a broken tile.” It was in reference to this boring 
everydayness that the Zen master Bokuju was asked, 
“We have to dress and eat every day, and how do we 
escape from these chores?” He answered, “We dress; 
we eat.” But the inquirer replied, “I don’t get the 
point.” “If you don’t get it,” said Bokuju, “put on your 
clothes and eat your food.” Was this what George 
Herbert had in mind? 


All may of thee partake; 
Nothing can be so mean, 

Which with this tincture, “for thy sake,” 
Will not grow bright and clean. 


A servant with this clause 
Makes drudgery divine: 

Who sweeps a room, as for thy laws, 
Makes that and the action fine. 


Not quite. There is in both Dom John’s and Her- 
bert’s feeling a touch of spiritual masochism, not, by 
auy means, as something to be deplored, but as some- 
thing on the verge of a still greater understanding. 


[ 120 ] 


Who 's Wh P 


How very good all this suffeting is for me! There is 
a certain wonderfully inverted security in being able 
to feel that, come what may, I am all right so long as 
I hurt. 
Oh! I bless the good Lord for my Boils, 
For my mental an‘1 hodily pains, 
For without them my Faith all congeals 
And I’m doomed to Hell’s ne’er-ending Flames. (15) 


A person in this state should soon see that he chooses 
a false security, that this comfort in suffering is the 
last resort of the hopelessly trapped ego, trying des- 
perately to find a way of DOING THE RIGHT 
THING. Desperate it is. Not only is activism wrong: 
there is no right thing to do. Quietism is also wrong: 
there is nothing not to do, for not doing is just as 
much in the trap as doing. 

If, at this extreme point, “Jesus Christ” is still “the 
answer,” what can that mean? What does it mean to 
be at this point? What have I found out about myself 
when I see that neither my doing nor my not-doing 
is the answer? If I have found out that I cannot do 
the one and only thing that really needs to be done, 
what then? 

To repeat the problem: I cannot avoid the chal- 
lenge of the Crucifixion, for it means that just in be- 
ing alive I am unavoidably responsible for untold 
misery and pain. Apologies are hollow. Attempts at 
improvement create new entanglements. Passivity is 
simple evasion. 

The meaning is that what I thought was myself 
was a phantom. My ego was never an effective agent. 
My supposed controlling of the world and of myself 


{ 121 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


was a Big Act—like a child sitting beside the driver 
of a car, getting the feel of guiding it himself with a 
toy steering-wheel. But then, who or what am I? If I 
can neither do nor not do, still, at least, I know. I am 
aware. Am I simply some sort of passive mirror which 
merely reflects experience? Who is it that knows? 
Look as I may, I find no knower—only knowing; no 
doer—only doing. Yet all this is somehow encom- 
passed in that odd sensation of centrality which I 
call “I.” And I know that you feel just as central and 
just as much “J” as I myself. I know, too, that when 
in sleep or in death the centrality which I presume 
to call mine vanishes, there remain myriads of other 
centralities, all of whom are as much “I” as I am. 
Thus when I die, there is no positive nonexistence to 
be experienced and endured, no state of being shut 
up in darkness forever. That is quite the most absurd 
bugbear that ever oppressed man’s imagination. Be- 
yond every death there is simply “I” again somewhere 
else, as there was when I was bom. For “I am the 
vine, and you are the branches.” “I am the way and 
the truth and the life.” “Before Abraham was, I am.” 


“I and the Father are one!” Again the Jews 
picked up stones to stone him. Jesus answered them, 
“I have shown you many good works from the Fa- 
ther. For which of these works do you stone me?” 
The Jews replied to him, “We do not stone you for 
a good work but for blasphemy, and because you, 
being a man, make yourself God.” Jesus answered 
them, “Isn’t it written in your Law that ‘I have said: 
you are gods’? If he called those [people] gods to 
whom the word of God came (and the scripture 
cannot be broken), how can you say to him whom 
the Father has made holy and sent into the world, 


[ 122 ] 


Who Is Who? 


‘You blasphemel!’ because I said, ‘I am a son of 

God’?” (John 10: 30—-36.)4 

The point is that identity is God. The expression 
“son of” means “of the nature of” or “of the essence 
of,” as also, derogatively, in “son of a dog,” “son of 
Belial,” or “son of perdition.” In this sense also we 
can understand Isaiah II’s, “That they may know 
from the rising of the sun, and from the West, that 
there is none beside me. I am the Lord, and there is 
none else.” So, too, the Islamic Sufis say of Allah, “As 
there is no Deity but he, so there is no Heity but he.” 
This is likewise the point of St. Paul’s, “I am crucified 
with Christ. Nevertheless I live; yet no more I, but 
Christ lives in me.” And St. Catherine of Genoa, “My 
me is my God: nor do I know any selfhood except in 
God.” The ultimate shock of realizing Who is who 
comes only at the point where my supposed personal 
self is seen to be nothing. (Not bad nothing, but a 
marvelous mirage.) Then, on the principle of St. 
Paul's “as having nothing but possessing all things,” 
the nothing is seen to be the same as the All, the void 
the same as the Plenum. God emptying himself to the 
limit is man, and man emptied to the limit is God. 
Thus to be in Christ, to be One Body with him, to 
be in union with the Word made flesh, and to be 
partakers of his flesh and blood, is just to realize one 
identity with him who is “I am” before Abraham was. 
“This is as literal a translation of the Greek as I can make of 
this crucial passage. The quotation from the Law is Psalm 82, 
“T have said, -You [are] gods; and all of you [are] children of 
the Most High. But you shall die like men, and fall like one 
of the princes.” The AV, without justification in the Greek, 
translates the final phrase, “I am the Son of God,” the italic 


the signifying interpolation by the translators. The NEB skips 
the issue with, “I am God’s son.” 


[ 123 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


(Now, in introducing what follows, may I say that 
I write in the first person because there is no fairer 
way of being direct. The stilted “one feels” lacks 
commitment, and the editorial “we” evokes a false 
authority. “It would seem that” is impossibly pedan- 
tic. Also, I am using the conventional phrases of 
scripture and liturgy to speak a common language 
with those who inherit the Christian tradition. ) 

Having thought this question of identity through 
for years and years, I see no better way to make sense 
of it. The more I plumb the depths of myself, the 
more they seem to be beyond me, if “me” is no more 
than my superficial consciousness. But those depths 
are a dimension of myself not usually recognized. 
I can think and think about the mortality of my sep- 
arate organism: what will it be like to go to sleep 
and never wake up? Yet this inevitably makes me 
think of my birth, of waking up after having never 
gone to sleep! Who would I have been as my mother’s 
child by some other father? Of course, it is so star- 
tlingly obvious: I could have been anyone, but the 
only way to be anyone is to be someone. I am always 
someone, but “I” is ordinarily experienced only as 
being some-one-at-a-time. All sentient beings, where- 
soever located in our multitudes of galaxies, are each 
“1” 

Whatever there is of “I” beyond, beneath, or above 
the small spotlit circle of the ego goes its own way 
like the circulation of the blood and the formation of 
the bones. It is all done without conscious attention; 
and so, in exactly the same way, the everlasting recur- 
rence of the I-feeling is maintained through the 
whole body of the universe. For as flocks of birds and 


[ 124 ] 


Who Is WhoP 


clusters of cells or molecules move as if they had a 
single mind, so the conscious ego belongs in a uni- 
versal Self. My centrality and identity is always a 
special case (a spotlit circle) of the centrality and 
identity of that Self. And it—the universal Self—can 
appear as “I” after “I” without the least need for any 
conscious memory of continuity, just as we need no 
conscious memory of how to breathe. Being all that 
there is, there is no standpoint outside this Self from 
which it can be observed. It has no more need to be 
a known object than a finger to touch itself or an eye 
to see itself. 

Simply, then, the real “I” both in and beyond the 
spotlit circle, both in consciousness and beyond con- 
sciousness, is nothing less than all that there is. Obvi- 
ously, I exist only in relation to everything else, but 
I did not come into that relation from somewhere 
outside—in such a way that “everything else” would 
be foreign to or other than myself. I did not alight in 
this universe like a bird arriving upon a branch from 
some alien limbo. I grew upon that branch like a leaf. 
For I am something which everything is doing; I am 
the whole process waving a flag named me, and call- 
ing out, “Yoo-hool” 

I have, then, no further need to be anxious for my- 
self. (Not, at any rate, far deep down.) For in the 
cosmological game of hide-and-seek I am “It.” So I 
am let go: there can be endless appearances, re- 
appearances, forgettings, vanishings, annihilations, 
transformations, total blackouts, and sudden. ex- 
plosions into light out of nowhere. There is no need 
to remember, for, in whatever form, it is always “I” 
who am there, the mercy of death delivering me 


[ 125 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


again and again from the tedium of immortality. 
Equally, there is no need to cling to or believe in this 
fundamental and eternal “I am.” For it is what there 
is: before it, there is no before; after it, no after; and 
outside it, no outside. 

In slightly differing forms, this is one of the world’s 
most ancient and perennial intuitions. It is madness 
and megalomania only if the Self of all selves is con- 
ceived in the image of a Chaldean or Iranian King of 
kings who deliberately rules the kingdom with armed 
and conscious might. For centuries Western man has 
thought upon God in this regal image, and has there- 
fore come to feel himself a subject and serf, an alien 
and outsider in the universe. When, therefore, we 
arrive in the world as children, we are not given a 
frank and open welcome. We are not treated as if we, 
also, were people—handicapped, it may be, with in- 
fancy, but with the right to a fair explanation of the 
rules of the game as adults play it. On the contrary, 
the child is treated as if the limitations of infancy 
were a sin, as if childhood were an obsequious noviti- 
ate, a state of petitioning for human nature, of evolu- 
tionary probation and sufferance. Raised in this at- 
mosphere, children never cease to feel that this is a 
world in which they do not really belong. Thus edu- 
cated, men go through life on tiptoe, ever fearing to 
offend the mysterious Authority behind things, and 
the claim to be one Self with the eternal Ground of 
the world is felt to be the ultimate impertinence and 
effrontery. 

Christianity does not have to remain in this nursery 
and boarding-school atmosphere. But it is not as if we 
were all grown up enough to be disagreeably author- 


{ 126 ] 


Who Is Who? 


itarian in our own right, as if we were entering into 
a New Age in which all Christians were entitled to 
assume the manners of an archbishop. It is rather 
that we are in a position to see that this whole image 
of the universe as an imperial and monarchical state 
is a joke. The Lord putting on crowns and beards and 
suits of celestial armor and panoplies of spiritual war 
to impress himself in the mirror. The ultimate iden- 
tity of man with God is not identity with this Com- 
mander-in-Chief of the universe. 

Serious theologians do not, of course, take such 
royal and military symbolism literally, though it prob- 
ably influences their emotional attitudes more than 
they suspect. On the one hand, they can speak of God 
as an entirely beardless Spirit “without body, parts, 
or passions,” as the “Circle whose center is every- 
where and whose circumference is nowhere,” and as 
“the love that moves the sun and other stars.” Yet on 
the other hand they will also cluck about how griev- 
ously “our very dear Lord” is offended by fornication 
and profane language, as if the kingdom of heaven 
were something like the court of Queen Victoria. It 
is a complex type of mind that reads Jacques 
Maritain or William Temple, and gets a heart-throb 
from singing “Onward Christian Soldiers” in proces- 
sion. 

Theology balks at the proposition “identity is God” 
because it stresses the value of a multitude of unique 
and irreducible identities, that is, of persons under 
the rule and.judgment of a Lord who is ultrapersonal 
and who constitutes a unique integrity in its double 
sense of individual unity and inflexible righteousness. 
Theology emphasizes the God who takes a clear 


[ 127 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


stand, who will not be bribed or wheedled, and 
whose outlines—or principles—will not be blurred by 
any pantheistic merging with the universe. Any fuzz- 
ing of the distinction between God’s identity and all 
other identities makes God an accessory to the mani- 
fest sinfulness of the human world. This God is God 
just because he cannot be manipulated and pushed 
around. He stands for his own vision of universal 
order without any compromise, and will make no con- 
cessions for the sake of being a good fellow and get- 
ting along with others. . 

All this is fine so long as we are playing the Chris- 
tian game in which the primal conspiracy between 
the Lord and the Devil is suppressed. The trouble is 
that it gets suppressed completely, because the the- 
ology of the righteous God does not seem to be able 
to have its way without having to have it all the way. 
It must maintain the distinction between Creator and 
creature, as between good and evil, right down to the 
bitter end—which is, indeed, very bitter. But it 
should surely be possible to hold that a distinction is 
most important without having to make it absolutely 
important. A song is not worthless because it comes 
to an end, and a difference between the Creator and 
the creature is not negligible if it is not continued 
down to the root and ground of Being. Are the differ- 
ences between a tree’s branches annulled because 
they join in the trunk? Are my fingers less agile for 
being one with the hand? . . . It should be possible, 
too, to accept and follow the rules of a game (e.g., 
language or banking) without identifying them with 
the laws of either heaven or nature, and, likewise, to 
have decent and law-abiding behavior in any given 


[ 128 ] 


Who Is Who? 


community without having to invoke the authority 
and the sanctions of Infinity. 

To carry the problems of morality before the Court 
of Heaven is not unlike trying to settle international 
disputes with nuclear bombs. The apocalyptic vio- 
lence of Hell-fire is a threat which has done little or 
nothing to promote righteousness and diminish wick- 
edness, for, like the H-bomb, it is inconceivable and 
unthinkable, and tends, as do judicial torture and 
capital punishment, to bring authority into disrespect. 
(It will be jolly, won’t it, to be sitting around making 
music with the angels, knowing that your daughter 
is meanwhile screaming in the everlasting dun- 
geons?) It makes no difference to say that it is not 
God who inflicts this punishment, but the individual 
forcing it upon himself in willful rejection of God’s 
love; that the fire of Hell is the Light of Glory as 
apprehended by one who willfully spurns it. The 
point is that a universe involving this as a serious 
possibility is a monstrous misconstruction from the 
beginning. 

Yet once we have reached the point of view at 
which all identity is God (tat tvam asi), we can see 
that behind this theological nightmare there is the 
fascination of a supernal masochism. Behind the 
facade of the terror and guilt, the fantasies of orgi- 
astic torture prolonged forever without destroying the 
body, and the emotional convulsions of total despair, 
there is at last man’s eternal preoccupation with 
ecstasy. The fascination, the positive attraction of 
these horrors is—in psychiatric language—uncon- 
scious, or better, unadmitted, as one does not admit 
a secret delight in grief or hatred or in being a pro- 


[ 129 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


fessional failure. All such fascinations are ordinarily 
considered morbid and pathological, though this is 
only to say that in our “normal” consciouness we 
daren’t admit that they are fascinating. Yet it is obvi- 
ous that life, as a self-eating system of organisms, 
“wills” pain as much as it wills pleasure. It follows, 
then, that a master of life is one who admits or be- 
comes conscious of his own secret preoccupation with 
ecstasy in the form of pain—but not as self-punish- 
ment, not as the last desperate attempt to placate the 
Father by “doing the right thing.” If, as many of the 
mystics have said, the Cross is the heart of the uni- 
verse, the meaning is not that God loathes himself; 
it is that the Indestructible dares all extremes. Higher 
than, and behind, the groveling masochism of “I bless 
the good Lord for my Boils” and of “How good all 
this suffering is for me,” there is the mysterious point 
where extreme love and extreme pain are identical. 
I say “mysterious” because the ambivalence of pleas- 
ure and pain is one of the least studied problems of 
physiology, psychology, and esthetics. Mysterious, 
also, because it lies in the dangerous and touchy 
realm of all that we know and will not admit, the 
domain of our being that we deny most angrily when 
others point to it. 

The orthodox and conventional Christian has there- 
fore a remarkable choice before him: If he will not 
admit this secret fascination with pain as ecstasy, that 
all outward human agony is inwardly the divine in 
the act of self-abandonment, he must settle for real, 
vindictive, and finally evil hells whose very existence, 
however remote in the outer darknesses, must throw 


[ 130 ] 


Who Is Who? 


gloom into the joy of heaven. Or would he care to 
join a communion of saints who, as I believe even St. 
Thomas suggested, will look over the battlements of 
heaven and lick their lips with satisfaction at the just 
punishments of the damned? 

In sum, then, the inner sense of the faith that sal- 
vation somehow consists in “Jesus Christ and him 
crucified” is that this mighty image shatters and trans- 
forms our sense of identity. So long as we insist on 
our separate, individual identity the Crucifixion is an 
impossibly burdensome scandal about which we can 
do neither something nor nothing. Yet this very frus- 
tration is already being “crucified with Christ,” al- 
ready the realization that our “I’m-just-poor-little-me” 
identity is an illusion. Coupled with the impossible 
commandment, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God,” 
this crucifixion carries the sense of separate individ- 
uality and conscious will-power to a critical, and ab- 
surd, extreme—at which point the illusion explodes 
into the discovery of our original and eternal Iden- 
tity. 

Thereupon it becomes possible to see that our fall, 
our adventure into separate individuality, comes to 
an end in the same way that it began—by the mys- 
tery of Sacrifice, of kenosis or “self-emptying.” It be- 
gan with God emptying his spirit, the ruach Adonai, 
into the nostrils of the first Adam; it ended with the 
sacrifice of the Second Adam on the cross, saying, 
“Into thy hands I commend my spirit.” The Godhead 
is eternal life because it is always letting go of itself 
and throwing itself away. Kenosis is God eternally 
losing himself, and finding again by losing again—the 


[ 131 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


cure of like by like, of Phosphorus vanquished by the 
Morning Star, of the Tree which brought death over- 
come by the death on the Tree. 

The man who has died to his old identity finds, 
however, that not only his own past life, but also the 
lives of all other beings, are marvelously transfigured. 
What before seemed to be suffering and evil is now 
seen to be the playful hide-and-seek of God. From 
the viewpoint of conventional religion this is out- 
rageous folly, as is likewise the attitude of living with- 
wut anxiety for the future. There is, indeed, some 
inalogy between the holy man and the crazy man, 
since both may be said to be “out of their minds,” as 
having “lost themselves,” or as being “thoughtless” or 
“care-less.” In Russian Orthodoxy such a man is some- 
‘imes known as Krista-rady yurodivy or “fool for the 
sake of Christ.” 


The yurodivy sees godliness and spirit shining out 
from all that is lowliest and “worst”; from the dust 
of the highway, the sharp stones that cut his feet, 
the thorns that tear his flesh, the biting winter frost, 
the intolerable heat of summer, the stench of the 
doss house; from the most degraded types of men 
and women. (16) 


Or, as a modern Russian mystic puts it: 


Everybody can, at any time and in any place, see 
the Face of our Lord. Men of today are realistically 
minded, and, when the saints and the mystics come 
and tell them: “We have seen the Lord,” they an- 
swer with Thomas: “Except I shall . . . thrust my 
hand into his side, I will not believe.” Jesus accepts 
this challenge. He allows himself to be seen, and 
touched, and spoken to. Jesus shows us the poor, 
and the sick, and the sinners, and generally all men, 


[ 132 J] 


Who Is Who? 


and tells us: “Behcld my hands and my feet. . . . 
Hane me and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and 
bones, as ye see me have.” (17) 


This vision, this divine folly, this death of the old 
identity does not come from daring. (My independ- 
ent ego is the daring thing.) The vision comes from 
seeing that there really is no other alternative, no 
other way to go... . Here am I with Isaiah in the 
temple, and I see “the Lord sitting upon a throne, 
high and lifted up” and surrounded with the blazing 
wings of seraphim, and I am scared out of my wits. 
The space enlarges until I think that those wings are 
each a thousand miles long, with colossal feathers of 
living brass, and I am a little thing far down on the 
downest floor. And the voice of the Most High, thun- 
dering like “the sound of many waters,” says, “As the 
heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways 
higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your 
thoughts.” What on earth am I to do with someone 
who can stage such a scene as this? I have to say, 
“Yes, Lord! Yes, Lord! Just as you say, Lord! Oh, yes, 
Lord; you are my Father, my support, and my maker, 
and I just don’t have a leg to stand on!” 

Then, joined to the voice of the Lord, I hear the 
voices of the Patriarchs and Prophets, Apostles and 
Martyrs, Popes and Archbishops, Confessors and 
Doctors, weighty with the authority and wisdom of 
two thousand years, telling me that there is no com- 
mon ground between God and myself; that he is Be- 
ing and I am nothing; that he is the all-loving and the 
all-righteous, and that I am just a contemptible little 
jerk who doesn’t even deserve the privilege of frying 
in hell. By now, though flat on my face, I wish like 


[ 133 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


anything that I could get one look at those Eyes. If 
only I had the rubber necks of the people in the 
hymn who aspire 


Prostrate before thy Throne to lie, 
And gaze and gave on thee! 


At the same instant I become aware of those Eyes 
watching me right through the back of my head— 
Eyes that bore implacably into the most tender and 
disreputable centers of my soul, that soon appear to 
surround me in all directions, to watch from the out- 
side and from the inside, until everything is just One 
Eye. And because there is no brow, no face, I cannot 
tell what expression that Eye has. It just looks, and I 
can’t stand it. I start running, running in blind panic 
down the corridors of the temple; but every way I 
turn I am running straight into that Eye. I drop to 
the floor, curl up, shut my eyes, and cover my head. 
Yet the Eye comes at me from deep inside me— 
vaster than ever, filling all thinkable space. 

There is nowhere—nowhere at all—left to go. 
There isn’t an inch for me to stand upon or to hide in; 
the only shred of myself that I can find is just the 
terror, the running away from that Eye. There re- 
mains nothing whatever to be done except for that 
Eye to look. There is nowhere for terror to go, no one 
to answer the screams, no darkness to cover me, no 
place to bury the body. And, just then, I am the Eye. 
For “the eye with which I see God,” said Eckhart, “is 
the same eye with which God sees me.” 


[ 134 ] 


VI 


This Is My Body 


To those nurtured in the culture of Europe and the 
Mediterranean, bread and wine are among the most 
beautiful gifts of life. I am thinking of real bread, not 
the edible foam-rubber of America. Real bread that 
is good to eat without butter, or even cheese; bread 
that still has flavor when dry. When I break open 
such a loaf there is just the faintest whiff of an old 
wooden flour mill, reflected in a weir-pond of the 
River Stour in Kent and standing before a tall cluster 
of beech trees. The harsh sighing of crows through 
the hot afternoon, and moss on the stone wall along 
the water. It is even more so with wine—this mys- 
tery of evocation, this magic of being able to bottle 
memories, and to ferment an essence of sun, and 


[ 135 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


hills, and quiet villages, and the lazy days of late 
summer. 

Some years ago I was the dean of an experimental 
graduate schvol where our faculty and students came 
from many different countries, and where the domi- 
nating interest was the study of comparative reli- 
gions. I had made it a custom that, for those who 
wanted it, wine should always be served with din- 
ner. (Tea and coffee, milk and water were also avail- 
able.) It was never pressed upon anyone, but, to my 
astonishment, I learned that the custom had become 
a source of scandal—that it was a cause of raised 
eyebrows among Muslims and Hindus, and, even 
more so, among the Methodist-minded members of 
our university faculty. I was therefore strongly urged 
by some of my colleagues to discontinue the cus- 
tom. “After all,” they said, “it is really a trivial matter 
whether we have wine or not, and the reputation 
of the school is much more important.” 

Whereupon all my European and ancestral Chris- 
tian hackles were raised, and I said, “Gentlemen, 
this is not a trivial matter. We are not living in Asia 
and eating Peking duck, or tempura, or fagadu, or 
khichri. We are in the West, eating the food of the 
West, and no person of true culture in the West takes 
his food without wine. As an institution of learning 
and culture, we are honor-bound to uphold the high- 
est standards of our civilization!” 

But my colleagues and spiritually minded critics 
were not convinced, for they could not understand 
anyone feeling so strongly about a “merely material” 
matter of food and drink. I soon began to realize 
that in the American bourgeoisie there is, contrary 


[ 136 ] 


This Is My Body 


to general belief, a powerful trend of anti-material- 
ism amounting almost to a hatred of matter. For 
surely a materialist is a person who loves material— 
wood and leather, flax and silk, eggs and fruit, stone 
and glass, fish and bread, olives and wine. Yet, al- 
most without exception, every American town and 
village looks as if it were made by people who 
loathed material, and wanted to convert it as fast as 
possible into heaps of rubbish. (This goes, also, for 
the industrial towns and “subtopias” of Europe and 
the New Asia.) Most of them are two walls of neon- 
lit “fronts” facing the highway, and backed with a 
shambles of shacks and wrecked cars. Even the nice 
residences of the north end of town are somehow 
scrubbed clean of life, as if it were a poisonous 
fungus. The kitchens look like operating rooms and 
everything that comes out of them tastes as if it hud 
been washed in soap, and made by chemists instead 
of cooks. 

The cooking of a culture is the real test of its at- 
titude to the material universe, and by this test the 
Chinese and the French are exemplary materialists. 
The folk-cooking of America ranks, beyond doubt, 
with the worst in the world. Its values are purely 
quantitative, and it is eaten out of a sense of dietetic 
duty rather than love. Now that everything can be 
precooked, and then frozen, and then warmed over 
for serving, it is incomparably worse than ever be- 
fore—worse than when Henry Miller wrote his es- 
say on “The Staff of Life,” which is the definitive. 
critique of American cooking and one of the best 
belly-laughs in modern literature. 

All jesting aside, however, I would point to such 


[ 137 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


cooking as the main sign that American culture is 
not only post-Christian but anti-Christian. Proper 
cooking can be done only in the spirit of a sacrament 
and a ritual. It is an act of worship and thanksgiving, 
a celebration of the glory of life, and no one can 
cook well who does not love and respect the raw 
materials he handles: the eggs and onions, the herbs 
and salts, the mushrooms and beans, and, above all, 
the living animals—fish, fowl, and flesh—whose lives 
we take to live. Ritual is not just a symbolism of 
formal gestures. Ritual is, basically, anything done 
with loving awareness and reverence—whether cook- 
ing, carpentry, fishing, writing a letter, performing 
surgery, or making love. The everyday life of the 
modern West is quite startlingly lacking in ritual, as 
in all the style and color that goes with it. 

Now the central mystery, the chief act of Christian 
worship, is a matter of food and drink, the taking of 
bread and wine in communion as the flesh and the 
blood of Christ. By and large, the rite is now deplor- 
ably perfunctory. In the Catholic Church itself the 
bread looks, and tastes, like a plastic medal, and the 
wine isn’t passed around. They are afraid someone 
may offend Jesus by spilling it. But even this is 
better than serving grape juice, like the Methodists. 

The fact that the Eucharist (= Thanksgiving) of 
Bread and Wine is the central rite of Christianity 
represents the most important insight which Chris- 
tianity (thanks in some measure to Judaism) has to 
offer to the sum of wisdom. This is something often 
missed by the Hindus and the Buddhists, and Chris- 
tians themselves have only half-heartedly appreciated 
it. William Temple expressed it by saying that Chris- 


[ 138 ] 


This Is My w dy 


tianity is the only truly materialist religion, the only 
rel gion (hough Judaism and Islan must be in- 
cluded) which asserts unequivocally the goodness 
and glory of the physical universe, and believes that 
its creation was not a divine mistake. The Hindus 
and Buddhists are ambivalent here, for there is a 
strong tendency to feel that the maya of the world is 
to be transcended rather than loved. A minority of 
Hindu and Buddhist schools take an opposite view. 
But the Christian point of view is supposed to be that 
the Lord thoroughly delights in his maya, and that 
the heavens really do “declare the glory of God.” 

The meaning of the Eucharist is based on the fact 
that, in Mediterranean cultures at the time of Jesus, 
bread and wine were the staple food and drink. 
Bread was apparently the main item of food, with 
meat, vegetables and fruit used for a garnishing. In 
those times, wine came from the vineyards in a 
somewhat thicker consistency than now, and, before 
being passed to the individual cups, it was mixed 
with water in a large flat bowl or crater. (Hence the 
the continued custom of mixing water with the wine 
at Mass.) As the staple food and drink, bread and 
wine therefore constituted the material life of man- 
kind, the physical body and blood, in that “man is 
what he eats.” 

Bread and wine are also sacrificial; there is no 
bread without the grinding of wheat and no wine 
without the crushing of grapes. This is the scandal 
of biological existence, that I cannot live without 
killing other creatures. So long as it is firmly felt that 
I am myself alone, and that the creatures of the 
plant and animal worlds are quite other than I, de- 


[ 139 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


stroying them to feed myself cannot be done without 
guilt. This is so strongly sensed by the Hindus and 
Buddhists that they try to overcome the guilt of liv- 
ing-through-eating by ahimsa, the practice of max- 
imal harmlessness by refraining from the destruction. 
of all the higher forms of life, whether insect or bird, 
fish, reptile, or mammal. Yet this does not finally 
come to grips with the problem. Life still agonizes 
for us in the vegetable world. 

Bread and wine are brought to the Mass not only 
as the gifts of nature—that is, as flour and grape 
juice. Our physical existence as men is also our work, 
and thus the flour is baked and the grape juice 
fermented. In short, the bread and wine offered at 
the altar for Mass (brought, in ancient times, by the 
people themselves) represent ourselves, our flesh 
and blood, and the work, the sacrifice, and the guilt 
which they involve. 

The crux of the rite is that the bread and wine, 
which are ourselves, be transformed into the Body 
and Blood of Christ and then consumed by us. Could 
there be a more striking way of celebrating the union 
of Christ and mankind, God and universe? “Noth- 
ing else,” said St. Leo, “is aimed at in our partaking 
of the Body and Blood of Christ than that we change 
into what we consume.” 

But there is more to it than that. For Jesus’ hear- 
ers, the idea of eating his flesh and drinking his 
blood, even metaphorically, was quite startling. 


“I am the bread of life. Your [fore]fathers ate 
manna in the wilderness and are dead. [But] this is 
the bread which comes down from heaven, that 
whoever eats of it should not die. I am that living 


[ 140 ] 


This Is My Body 


bread come down from heaven. If anyone eats this 
bread, he shall live to eternity. For the bread which 
I shall give is my flesh, [given] for the life of the 
world.” 

The Jews began to argue with one another, say- 
ing, “How can this man give us [his] flesh to eat?” 

Jesus said to them, “I mean this: unless you eat 
the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, 
you do not have life in yourselves. The eater of my 
flesh and the drinker of my blood has eternal life, 
and I will raise him up in the last day. For my flesh 
is true food and my blood is true drink. The eater of 
my flesh and the drinker of my blood abides in me, 
and I in him. Even as the living Father has sent me, 
and as I live through the Father, so he that eats me, 
he shall live through me. This is the bread which 
has come down from heaven—not such as your 
[fore]fathers ate, and then died. The eater of this 
bread shall live to eternity.” . . 

Hearing this, many of his disciples said, “This is 
a rough saying; who can understand it?” 

From then, many of his disciples withdrew, and 
no longer went with him. (John 6: 48-58, 60, 66.) 


Remember that one of the main prohibitions of 
the Jewish law was the drinking of blood. Blood was 
felt to be the life-essence of men and animals, and 
thus the property of God alone, so that every animal 
killed for food had to have its throat slit and the 
blood poured upon the ground. Therefore these 
words were as shocking to Jesus’ listeners as if he 
had commanded incest. For the implication is that 
if only God may drink blood, to drink blood—and 
especially the blood of the Son of Man—is to have 
equality with God, and for that reason eternal life. 

The Last Supper—the archetype of the Mass— 
was held under circumstances which had complex 


[ 141 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


symbolical implications. It is clear from all four Gos- 
pels that Jesus went out of his way to challenge the 
Jewish “establishment,” in full knowledge that this 
would bring the death penalty. He therefore brought 
the situation to a crisis at the time of the Passover, 
the feast whereby the Jews have always celebrated 
their deliverance from slavery in Egypt. Central to 
the Passover rite was the sacrifice of a lamb, at 3:00 
P.M. on the Parasceve—that is, the day of preparation 
for the Sabbath (Saturday) upon which the Pass- 
over was held. This sacrifice repeated the original 
Passover sacrifice of the lamb whose blood was 
smeared upon the doorposts of the captive Hebrews 
to ward off the Lord’s Destroying Angel, who, in 
that same night, killed all the first-born sons of the 
Egyptians. This is the origin of the “saving-Blood-of- 
the-Lamb” symbolism. 

Jesus seems to have timed his own death to occur 
on the Parasceve (Friday), and to coincide with the 
sacrifice of the Passover lamb.1 He was putting him- 
self in place of the original lamb, to inaugurate a 
New Covenant (Testament, Dispensation, or Rela- 
tionship) between God and man, a covenant that 
would give a new and vaster dimension of meaning 
to the old Passover symbolism of deliverance from 
Egypt. In this new dimension, captivity in Egypt no 
longer stood merely for the political defeats of the 
Jewish nation, nor the Passover for political libera- 
tion. “My kingdom,” said Jesus, “is not of this world.” 


*The Synoptic Gospels—Matthew, Mark, and Luke—imply 
that the Last Supper was the Passover feast, but most modern 
scholars agree that the account in John has greater chrono- 
logical accuracy, and that the Supper was therefore held on 
the Thursday before the Parasceve. 


[ 142 } 


This Is My Body 


Captivity in Egypt now stood for the whole fallen 
state of mankind, and the New Passover for libera- 
tion from death, which the Fall had brought about. 
There is also the standpoint from which this is still 
a parabolic symbolism, from which “Egypt” is the 
Lord’s maya or kenosis or self-forgetting, and “Pass- 
over” his awakening.” 

The New Covenant has reference not only to the 
deliverance from Egypt, and the subsequent entry 
of the Hebrews into the Promised Land; it also refers 
back to the covenant made between the Lord God 
and Noah after the Flood. 


And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said 
unto them, “Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish 
the earth. And the fear of you and the dread of you 
shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon 
every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the 
earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your 
hand are they delivered. Every moving thing that 
liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb 
have I given you all things. But flesh with the life 
thereof, [which is] the blood thereof, shall yet not 
eat.” (Genesis 9: 1-4, AV.) 


And the commandment is repeated in Deuteronomy: 


Thou mayest eat flesh, whatsoever thy soul lust- 
eth after. . . . Even as the roebuck and the hart is 
eaten, so thou shalt eat them: the unclean and the 


*In this interpretation, the crossing of the Red Sea aligns itself 
with an almost universal symbolism of the Active Door—the 
Symplegades, the Strait Gate, the Needle’s Eye, the Sword of 
Flame which “tums every way,” and all those images of snap- 
ping jaws and whitliag Selves through which the hero must 
leap “in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,” if he is to find 
his way into heaven. It is the old story of “he who hesitates 
is lost,’ hesitation in this context being even the most mo- 
mentary doubt of one’s own eternity. (18) 


[ 143 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


clean shall eat of them aliké. Only be sure that thou 
eat not the blood: for the blood is the life; and thou 
mayest not eat the life with the flesh. Thou shalt not 
eat it; thou shalt pour it upon the earth as water. 
. . . And thou shalt offer thy bumt offerings, the 
flesh and the blood, upon the altar of the Lord thy 
God: and the blood of thy sacrifices shall be poured 
out upon the altar of the Lord thy God, and thou 
shalt eat the flesh. (Deuteronomy 12: 20b, 22-24, 
27. AV.) 


Under the Old Covenant, the sacrifice is a com- 
munion, a common meal, between God and his people 
in which they take the flesh and he takes the blood.’ 
But under the New Covenant, instituted by Jesus, 
the people are to have both the flesh and the blood 
of the sacrificial lamb. This is the condition of eternal 
—that is, divine—life, for God alone is eternal. There 
is no way to inherit eternal life except to be one with 


* See the account in Exodus 24: 4-8 of the ritual sealing of the 
covenant after the delivery of the Law to Moses. The blood of 
the sacrificial animals is Givided into two parts, of which one 
is poured out on the altar and the other sprinkled over the 
people. The learned biblical scholars Oesterley and Robinson 
have the following comment: “The meaning of this ritual is 
not far to seek. The blood is the life, the vital essence. Two 
parties, at present independent one of another, are to be united 
in a single whole, and, to secure the desired union, a third 
party is introduced. Its life is taken from it and made available 
or the other two. Both come under it, both are included in it, 
the same vital essence now covers and embraces the two. They 
are thus no longer independent entities, they are one, fin ng 
their unity with each other in their union with that third party 
whose blood now covers them both. Till this point is reached, 
however near they might have been brought to one another, 
they are merely contiguous; now they are continuous, and form 
parts of a single indivisible whole. We might almost say that 
Yahweh is Himself included in the term Israel; henceforward 
it will connote not merely a human community, but one of 
which He is a member.” (19) 


[ 144 ] 


This Is My Body 


Crd, and, symbolically, this is to drink the blood as 
well as to eat the flesh. 


As they were eating, Jesus took bread, and 
blessed it, and broke it, and gave it to the disciples, 
and said, “Take, eat; this is my body.” And he took 
the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, say- 
ing, “All of you, drink from this; for this is my blood 
of the covenant, which is shed for many for the re- 
mission of sins.” (Matthew 26: 26-28.) 


St. Luke and St. Paul, in their accounts of the Supper, 
add the injunction, “Do this in remembrance of me.” 
One wonders whether, through observing this com- 
mandment, the following generations of Christians 
have nurtured more love or more hatred amongst 
themselves. For was the “remembrance” simply a 
reminder, or was it the “representation,” the making 
present again, of the veritable flesh and blood of the 
Son of God? And was that real presence spiritual, or 
was it sacramental—an actual conversion of the “sub- 
stance” of bread and wine into Jesus himself? Today 
it seems incredible that men killed and tortured each 
other over such questions, or provoked so brutal a 
holocaust as the Thirty Years’ War. 

One reason was simply that they never understood 
the full significance of “remembrance” (in Greek, 
anamnesis). For to remember, especially in such a 
context as this, is not merely to call to mind an event 
that is past, nor merely to recall by naming (in the 
sense of the Aramaic dukrana). To remember is also 
to “re-collect,” to gather together what has been 
scattered or divided. Likewise, to know or realize 
the truth is also to remember, for in Greek alethes 


[ 145 J 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


(= truth) is the “non-lethal”—what is recovered 
from the River Lethe, where the dead forget their 
past. This thought was continued into the Christian 
tradition. At the breaking of the bread in the Eastern 
Orthodox Mass, the priest says, “Broken and divided 
is the Lamb of God; broken, yet not disunited; ever 
eaten, yet never consumed, but sanctifying partak- 
ers.” So also the Didache (first century) gives a eu- 
charistic prayer with the image of the bread as the 
gathering together in unity of the wheat that was 
scattered upon the hills. Thus “in remembrance of 
me” is in recollection of the unity which exists before 
the apparent scattering or breaking of the One into 
the Many, before the entrancement of the Lord in 
his maya. 

What does all this come to but the proclamation 
that man and the universe are an outpouring of love? 
The very being of each creature is God abandoning 
himself, for love is no other than kenosis, and the 
Sacrifice of the Lamb “slain from the foundation of 
the world” is no other than the slaying of all the liv- 
ing creatures by which living creatures live. Jesus is 
saying, in the symbolism of the Supper, that all flesh 
which is eaten is his flesh, and all blood which is 
shed is his blood. Do not, therefore, feel guilt for it 
any more. It is “shed for many for the remission of 
sins,’ remitted in the realization that all the wheat 
ground and the grapes crushed for us, all the steaks 
broiled and the fish grilled for us, are—along with 
the human corpses offered for worms and vultures— 
the innumerable disguises in which the Lord gives 
himself away. 

That the Church has not absorbed this insight is 


[ 146 ] 


This Is My Body 


at once apparent from the form in which the Mass 
is celebrated in East and West alike. In the East, the 
bread and wine have been consecrated in a sanctuary 
closed off from the congregation by the icon screen. 
In the West, the altar was removed to the east end 
of the church and raised high upon steps, and Mass 
celebrated by the priest facing east and away from 
the people. (However, in recent years many Cath- 
olic churches have returned it to the central posi- 
tion.) This removal of the Sacrament to an enclosed 
or exalted position, together with the royal honors 
done to its presence, shows only that it was not as- 
similated. Practically speaking, Christ was treated 
as the juxtaposition instead of the union of the divine 
and the human. The mood of the Church toward the 
Sacrament has thus been that of the marvelous hymn 
in the Liturgy of St. James, Sigisato pasa sarx: 


Let all mortal flesh keep silence, 
and with fear and trembling stand; 
Ponder nothing earthly-minded, 
for with blessing in his hand 
Christ our God to earth descendeth, 
our full homage to demand. 


Rank on rank the host of heaven 
spreads its vanguard on the way, 

As the Light of Light descendeth 
from the realms of endless day, 

That the powers of hell may vanish 
as the darkness clears away. 


The moment of Consecration comes with the warn- 
ing of bells and a gathering of lights, and after the 
Sanctus—the adoration hymn of the angels—the 
priest’s voice fades to an awed whisper. For the 


[ 147 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


words “This is my Body” and “This is my Blood” 
will change bread and wine into the King of the 
Universe. In the mind’s eye of the congregation, the 
Elements upon the altar become a center of light 
so intense that eyes must be lowered and thoughts 
put in order against its all-penetrating clarity. This is 
magnificent, but it is not yet the point. These are 
people who have decided to have their cake instead 
of eating it, for there is the reverent comfort of hav- 
ing one’s God in a safe and sure place. In the form 
of the Host, the sacred Bread, he can be sealed away 
in the mysterious shrine of the tabernacle, and hon- 
ored with ever-burning lights—which is why Cath- 
olic churches have an atmosphere of presence hardly 
found elsewhere. On solemn occasions he can be dis- 
played for adoration in the golden sunburst of the 
monstrance, and even carried in the streets in jubi- 
lant procession, as at the feast of Corpus Christi, 
when little girls scatter rose petals before his path. 

The danger of having one’s cake instead of eating 
it is that it may go bad. It was a going bad, a mixed 
accumulation of superstition and mechanical piety, 
which provoked the Protestant revolution against the 
Mass and against altar-centered Christianity. But 
here, if ever, was a case of throwing out the Baby 
with the bath water. Or, to mix our metaphors a 
little, in a misguided enthusiasm for destroying idols, 
the Protestants threw away the egg instead of just 
breaking the shell. 

But the positive contribution of the Reformation 
was its renewal of the impossibility of Christianity, 
by an increase of stress on moral endeavor. In the 
generally sunny atmosphere of Catholicism, the love 


[ 148 ] 


This Is My Body 


of God is handed out rather too freely; the Sacrament 
of Penance gets rid of guilt for a couple of Hail Marys 
(so why bother with your analyst?), and its perva- 
sively festive feeling all too easily encourages danc- 
ing at night in the plaza and being much too familiar 
with Rosa and Geneviéve, Maria and Conchita. Al- 
though Luther insisted that salvation was by faith 
alone (not works), and Calvin by predestination 
alone, the theological theory—as is quite usual—had 
nothing to do with the practice. All through its his- 
tory the effectual stress of Protestantism has been 
upon works—not the symbolic works of piety, but 
the practical works of industry and frugality, and 
the development of strong inhibitions against lust 
and luxury. And, after the middle of the nineteenth 
century, Protestants began seriously to acquire a 
social conscience. 

Catholicism and Protestantism work in a curious 
alliance to intensify the individual's sense of separa- 
tion from God. The former brings the divine into 
the closest physical proximity through the sacra- 
ments, and yet holds it off by the very intensity of 
adoration.* The latter aggravates the sense of in- 
dividual responsibility, inculcates a permanent sense 
of guilt as a form of virtue, and, by esthetic mortifica- 


“ The Sacrament of Penance (i.e., “Confession” ) which so easily 
and kindly absolves one of sin and guilt, nevertheless most 
subtly reimposes the bond from which it has given freedom. 
For the true effectiveness of absolution depends upon the peni- 
tent’s sincere resolve to amend his way of life. The form of 
confession requires him to say, “For these and all my other 
sins which I cannot now remember, I am heartily sorry, firmly 
purpose amendment, and humbly ask pardon of God,” etc. But 


to say these things at all raises doubt as to whether one really 
means them. 


[ 149 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


tion, fosters a unique atmosphere of spiritual gloom. 
(I am not speaking of modern “liberal Protestant- 
ism,” but of that “old-time Bible religion.” ) 

Yet this intensification of the sense of separation, 
of one’s own guilt and of God’s transcendent other- 
ness, of one’s own nothingness and of God’s regal 
glory, is simply building up pressure behind that 
very dam or block between the human and the di- 
vine which must be broken down. And there is no 
way to hasten its collapse like building up the pres- 
sure, bringing the sense of sin and separateness to a 
festering head, as with a boil. 

From this point of view, then, one must encourage 
and applaud the characteristic attitudes of Catholi- 
cism and Protestantism, rejoicing in the fact that the 
further they are pressed, the nearer is a splendid 
liberation. From this point of view, an entirely new 
light is shed upon the most thorny features of Chris- 
tianity—hair shirts and kneeling upon chains, bloody 
crucifixes and skulls, permanently enclosed nuns and 
ever-silent Trappists, Ignatian meditations on ever- 
lasting damnation and Presbyterian sermons on di- 
vine wrath, the refinements of Spanish prudery and 
the Bible-and-birchrod education of Fundamentalist 
children, the jeweled and brocaded splendor of Sol- 
emn Mass at St. Peter’s and the dark-brown, var- 
nished pitch-pine Gothic of the First Baptist Church 
with that ineffably abominable yellow glass. Looked 
at in the perspective of the Lord’s eternal dance of 
hide-and-seek, these are the writhings which precede 
revelation; they are like the pangs of a woman in 
labor, but here in labor for the birth of a new kind of 


[ 150 J 


This Is My Body 


consciousness and a new apprehension of man’s iden- 
tity. 

It is in this sense that Christianity is, to appropriate 
Karl Barth’s phrase, a theology of crisis. But this 
particular crisis has two dangers. One is that it can 
fizzle out into mere secularism. People can simply 
have enough of the pressure, and give up. To hell 
with it; let’s just live! The other is that one can get 
stuck in crisis for its own sake, not realizing that it 
should lead to something beyond itself. This is the 
danger of modern Christian obscurantism, whether 
it be the grim Jansenism of Irish-American Catholi- 
cism, or the sophisticated Bible-banging of Protestant 
Neo-orthodoxy.6 In both cases, the danger arises 
from the stubborn conceit of spiritual exclusivism 
which the Church (and also Hitler’s National Social- 
ism) seems to have inherited from post-Exilic Juda- 
ism, with its fanatical insistence on racial purity and 


‘Jansenism, named after Bishop Comelius Jansen, was a 
French Catholic movement of the early seventeenth century, 
somewhat akin in spirit to Calvinism, and based on a revival 
of St. Augustine’s theology with its bias toward the theory of 
salvation through predestination rather than free will. As is 
usually the case, Jansen’s reasonably moderate position was 
exaggerated by his followers, and Jansenism followed the para- 
doxical pattern of Calvinism. That is to say, the original em- 
phasis on man’s total dependence upon God’s grace does a 
reverse flip into an emphasis upon rigorous disci ae and pur- 
ism. For many years Irish priests were trained in Jansenist in- 
stitutions on the Continent, and for this reason Irish and, sub- 
sequently, American Catholicism has a strong puritanical 
flavor. Protestant Neo-Orthodoxy is especially associated with 
the work of Karl Barth, Emil Brunner, Reinhold Niebuhr, 
Hendrik Kraemer and others—all theologians of this century, 
stressing the unique and authoritative revelation of God in the 
Bible, though in a far more scholarly and sophisticated manner 
than the nld-fadhioged Fundamentalists. 


[ 151 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


exclusive election to divine favor. It is characteristic 
of these inheritors of Ezra and Nehemiah, whether 
Christian or Islamic, that they are perfectly assured 
of possessing the supreme revelation of God, before 
even deigning to examine any other spiritual tradi- 
tion. This seriously curtails the number of theologians 
capable of looking at Christianity within the context 
of less exclusive views of the universe. There is, then, 
no real working out of a metatheology, and thus no 
framework in terms of which Christianity can find a 
resolution for its own perpetual state of crisis, no 
midwife for its now overprolonged pains of labor. 

I say “overprolonged” because the Christian per- 
sonality lives now in a vastly expanded world, cul- 
turally and technologically, where this special sense 
of identity and of exclusive spiritual privilege can- 
not be maintained without suicidal violence involv- 
ing both other peoples and the natural environment. 
The question is whether the mythos of the Incarna- 
tion, of Godmanhood, of the life-giving Sacrifice of 
the Lord’s Body and Blood, and of the incorporation 
of the world in the Mystical Body has any further 
relevance for this expanded and dangerously ex- 
plosive civilization. Its principal relevance is, of 
course, that it has largely created the crisis, both by 
the force of direct inspiration and by the force of 
the rationalist-secularist revolution against the 
Church. The philosophy of any tyranny determines 
the philosophy of the rebellion! 

In retrospect we can see that the Reformation in- 
tensified the Christian crisis without resolving it. 
We can see also that the same is true of Western 
rationalism and humanism, since they issue in a 


[ 152 ] 


This Is My Body 


sense of man’s identity and of his alienation from 
nature which is an exaggeration of the Christian ego. 
There follows, then, the irresistible question: Is it not 
possible that Christians might accept and assimilate 
the full implications of the Incarnation and of mem- 
bership in the Body of Christ? That they should dis- 
cover what it must finally mean to eat the Lord’s 
Body and to drink his Blood? This does not mean that 
“Christianity” becomes absorbed into some kind of 
“Hinduism’—although, must we really make so much 
fuss about the label on the bottle? The point is 
rather that the “Hindu” myth of the Lord’s maya, 
and of all beings as existing by his atma-yajna or 
self-sacrifice, not only gives the Christian myth a 
new and peculiar profundity; it acts as a catalyst 
through which there can be a full expression of 
Christian materialism. Or, if that sounds too partisan, 
let us call it a way of life in which what have hitherto 
been known as the spiritual and the material are 
brought into one. 

For there has not yet existed a religion or a phi- 
losophy in which there is a true marriage of Heaven 
and Earth. There have been many approximations, 
but never one in which each said to the other, without 
any shadow of reservation, “I love you with all my 
heart!” We have seen the spiritual reduced to the 
material, and the material vaporized in the spiritual. 
We have seen unhappy compromises in which the 
spiritual is always saying to the material, “Yes, but 
. . .” We have seen the material perpetually damned 
with faint praise and always being talked down for 
the odd reason that it constantly changes and flows 
away, as if that were something wrong. Only most 


[ 153 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


occasionally have Hindus had the courage to swing 
fully with the Lord in dancing his maya, and to stop 
insinuating that in some nasty, niggling last analysis 
the physical universe shouldn’t be happening. Chris- 
tian theologians, too, seem to have a commission to 
protect the Deity from full union with his universe, 
as if this would somehow completely subvert his 
morals. Indeed, they allow that the creature may 
participate in, reflect, be adopted into, transfigured 
by, or given unity with his Creator. But always, at 
the end of the line, there is someone wagging his 
finger and saying, “But... never forget, little 
creature, that you are nothing, nothing right down 
to your miserable essence, for your being is not your 
own.” So—my body is God’s, my mind is God’s, my 
being itself is God’s, all on loan to nothing and no 
one. 

But if I’m not here, I know Whois! 

The basic difficulty seems to be that people in 
religious circles always need someone or something 
to blame. I even catch myself doing it when I think 
about Baptist preachers. Religion somehow attracts 
those who like to lay down the law and point the 
finger of accusation, seldom realizing, incidentally, 
that the congregation just adores a colorful scolding. 
So I would like to say this without condemning any- 
one, preachers included. The thing is to see all faces 
as the masks of God, all characters as his roles, 
preachers included. Toward the end of his life that 
extraordinary Hindu-Buddhist-Muslim saint, the poet 
Kabir, used to look around and ask, “To whom shall 
I preach?” He saw the face and the activity of his 
Beloved in every direction. 


[ 154 ] 


This Is My Body 


Obviously, as so many Christians seem to fear, this 
vision of God-as-all might be used as a rationalization 
for indulgence in total wickedness. But fire is not 
untrue, or something to be abolished, because it can 
be used to burn people alive. What they really seem 
to fear is that, if God is all in all, the wicked will not 
get their just deserts; someone may lose the satisfac- 
tion of knowing that evildoers are going to be boiled 
in oil and devoured by spiders forever and ever. At 
this point it becomes more and more difficult to 
separate the wicked from the moralists who want to 
see them properly judged. 

In a larger perspective these theological objections 
are trivial. They are like avoiding broiled salmon 
for fear of the bones, or living for fear of dying. It is 
all a colossal haggling and footling over technicali- 
ties, a metaphysical filibuster subconsciously designed 
to postpone the great moment of awakening. Per- 
haps it is like a woman being interminably difficult 
to woo, so as to build up all that more passion for 
the moment when she finally yields. Enough, how- 
ever, is enough. The moment has arrived when a 
really thoroughgoing spiritual materialism is the in- 
telligent and essential attitude for the management 
of technology, and for helping mankind to be some- 
thing better than the most predatory monster yet 
evolved. 

In fact, it is impossible to be a true materialist 
without being a mystic as well. The would-be ma- 
terialist who renounces mysticism is either a slob or 
a bore. Or both, for there is something profoundly 
dreary about mere sensuality—the unrelieved pan- 
orama of filet mignon, bosoms and bottoms, Cha- 


[ 155 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


teauneuf-du-Pape, Alfa Romeos and Chris-Crafts, dry 
martinis, scrolls by Sesshu, Pro Musica on hi-fi, 
Chanel No. 5, and even, alas, water, clouds, light, 
sand, and mountains beyond. After a while the bot- 
toms feel like plastic. Still more dreary is the sen- 
sible materialism of the practical and provident, who 
will scrounge all their lives to provide themselves 
with leisure when they can no longer enjoy it. Or the 
academic materialist who is, perhaps, a scientific 
empiricist or a logical positivist or a “sound” statis- 
tical psychologist, whose real aim is to demonstrate 
that all nature is perfectly banal and dull. The 
trouble with this fellow is that no one ever mixed 
raven’s blood with his mother’s milk. He is marvel- 
ously and uncannily bereft of any sense that exist- 
ence is odd. 

At the other extreme, the pure mystic is like pure 
alcohol, or like a wine without body. Intense, strongly 
principled, quiet-mannered and unobtrusive, dev- 
astatingly simple in his needs and colorless in his 
tastes—no belly-laugh, no good roll with a girl in the 
hay, no gentle grin of understanding as between 
man and man—this one, with his terrifying sincerity, 
is more of a Euclidean proposition than a human 
being. Spirituality needs a beer and a loud burp, just 
as sensuality needs a bed on the hard ground, a 
rough blanket, and a long look at the utterly im- 
probable stars. 

The difficulty with the material world is that it 
collapses when you lean on it and tums to a fine 
powder when you clutch it. Material pleasure, even 
of the most refined order, is never enough, if 
“enough” is what you are seeking. If there is that 


[ 156 ] 


This Is My Body 


strange, deep longing in the heart for something 
that is “the answer’—the gorgeous, golden glory 
you have always wanted but have never been able 
to find or define, the thing that is finally for real and 
for keeps, the eternal home—then anything in the 
physical or intellectual universe that is asked to be 
that will collapse. But it is sour grapes to despise 
the material world for that reason. 

The answer, the eternal home, will never, never 
be found so long as you are seeking it, for the simple 
reason that it is yourself—not the self that you are 
aware of and that you can love or hate, but the one 
that always vanishes when you look for it. As soon 
as you realize that you are the Center, you have no 
further need to see it, to try to make it an object or 
an experience. This is why the mystics call the high- 
est knowledge unknowing. 


That which is not seen by the eye, but by which 
the eyes see; that, understand truly, is Brahman 
and not what the world worships. (20) 


When the material world is no longer asked to pro- 
vide the eternal home it is suddenly and amazingly 
transfigured. Its impermanence becomes a dance in- 
stead of a mockery—and when it no longer mocks us 
there is no need to hate it, with hair shirts and flag- 
ellations on the one hand, or with bulldozers and 
barbarous cooking on the other. 

The material world so seen is “the new heaven 
and the new earth” which, according to the Apoc- 
alypse, are to be created in the Last Day. It is like- 
wise the body resurrected and the Paradise Garden. 
For death and the Last Day are when our conven- 


[ 157 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


tional identity comes to the end of its tether and 
we “give up the ghost” of the isolated ego. We must 
not confuse the transfigured universe of eternity, the 
“life of the world to come,” with the monstrous no- 
tion of a physical universe containing the risen 
bodies of all our friends and relations permanently 
pickled in Spirit. Innumerable accounts of this trans- 
figured vision of the material world are to be found 
in the literature of mystical experience and para- 
normal states of consciousness, and it is surely 
through the transformation of consciousness rather 
than through the gate of literal death that we should 
expect to find the entrance to Heaven. 


The angels keep their ancient places;— 

Tum but a stone, and start a wingl 

Tis ye, ’tis your estrangéd faces, 

That miss the many-splendoured thing. 

For there are sudden “slips” of consciousness into 

a wave length or dimension of this everyday world 
which impress those who see them as being more 
real than the normal vision. These “slips” are rela- 
tively common and must have been so throughout 
human history, and it seems to me unquestionable 
that they are the actual basis for doctrines of Paradise 
and of an ultimate transfiguration of the world. Thus, 
in a grimy railroad station: 

Suddenly, I was aware of some mysterious cur- 
rent of force, subtle, yet of unimagined potency, 
which seemed to sweep through that small drab 
waiting-room. A kind of glory descended upon the 
gathered company—or so it seemed to me. I looked 
at the faces of those around me and they seemed to 
be suffused with an inner radiance. I experienced in 
that moment a sense of profoundest kinship with 


[ 158 ] 


This Is My Body 


each and every person there. I loved them all!—but 
with a kind of love I had never felt before. It was an 
all-embracing emotion, which bound us together in- 
dissolubly in a deep unity of being. I lost all sense 
of personal identity then. These people were no 
longer strangers to me. I knew them all. We were 
no longer separate individuals, each enclosed in his 
own private world, divided by all the barriers of so- 
cial convention and personal exclusiveness. We were 
one with each other and with the Life which we all 
lived in common. (21) 


In its earlier ages the Church was in constant ex- 
pectation of the Parousia, the Second Coming of the 
Lord, not in the obscurity of the manger but in the 
full panoply of the King of Heaven, in the midst of 
his angelic hosts. As the centuries have passed with- 
out Gabriel’s trumpet rending the skies, this expecta- 
tion has largely fizzled out, except in the lunatic 
fringe of Protestantism. Obviously, the Church has 
been looking for the Parousia in the wrong direction 
—in the outward skies and not in the realm of hea- 
ven which is “within.” The true Parousia comes at 
the moment of crisis in consciousness, not in the 
world of newspaper reality. 


If anyone says to you, “Look, here is the Mes- 
siah”, or, “There he is”, do not believe it. Impostors 
will come claiming to be messiahs or prophets, and 
they will produce great signs and wonders to mis- 
lead even God’s chosen, if such a thing were pos- 
sible. See, I have forewarned you. If they tell you, 
“He is in the wilderness”, do not go out; or if they 
say, “He is there in the inner room”, do not believe 
it. Like lightning from the east, flashing as far as the 
west, will be the coming of the Son of Man. (Mat- 
thew 24: 23-27. NEB.) 


{ 159 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


The great flash of lightning which, sensibly or meta- 
phorically, comes with these openings of conscious- 
ness is one of their most usual features. 

It is possible, therefore, to envision a Church, a 
Christianity, in which Godmanhood is fully realized, 
in which the Incarnation has been assimilated, and 
which—in this everyday world—is already living 
beyond the Parousia in the glory of Heaven. This will 
not be a preaching Church, not a finger-wagging, 
Bible-banging, breast-thumping, floor-licking Church. 
It will be the Church of All Fools, laughing like 
Dante’s angels. Laughing because it has just seen 
through the enormous trick that the Lord has played 
on himself in pretending to be us—scaring the Liv- 
ing Daylight out of himself by acting the lonely ego 
tormented by sin, with death and hell at last. Laugh- 
ing itself to tears because the whole world has been 
completely misunderstood: for it has been looked at 
with a spotlight called consciousness so narrow in 
scope that it was all but impossible to see how things 
are actually related. But only in that relationship do 
things have their meaning and their beauty, as well 
as their existence. Ex divina pulchritudine esse om- 
nium derivatur. 

It may come to such a pass that churches, in the 
sense of buildings and ecclesiastical organizations, 
will fall into irrelevance—but only, I think, in that 
they will drop the conceit of being absolutely nec- 
essary, of being medicinally good for people. For 
ritual is really the same sort of expression as music, 
poetry, dancing, sculpture and painting, besides 
being an integrative art employing many other arts. 
Protestants and secularists are as starved for ritual 


[ 160 ] 


This Is My Body 


as auto salesmen for poetry. These things are nec- 
essary, but only when done in the spirit of not being 
necessary. It is healthy to play, but you are not play- 
ing when you do it as a duty 

When I was a university chaplain I used to tell the 
students that they must not come to church out of a 
sense of duty. If that was why they came, we didn’t 
want them, because they would be skeletons at the 
banquet. Worship, I told them, was making “celestial 
whoopee,” and if they felt no urge to make it, it was 
better that they stayed in bed or went for a swim. I 
was speaking not of rousing gospel hymns and hearty 
handshakes at the door, but of pure glee in Solemn 
Mass with Gregorian chant. 

The marvelously basic ritual of the Mass will 
doubtless remain. For centuries it has had the flavor 
of a court ceremonial, and, indeed, many of its par- 
ticular ceremonies were derived from the courtly 
manners of Byzantium and Rome, and the ancient 
design of the church building is called basilica— 
the court of a king. All that is highly appropriate so 
long as we are down here and God is up there. At 
that stage both the cosmology and the worship of 
Christianity are political—a product of the culture 
of cities, projecting upon the cosmos the political 
concept of order-by-imposition from above. 

But should not the imagery of membership in the 
Body of Christ, as of “I am the Vine and you are the 
branches,” suggest a style of order that is not pol- 
itical but organic? ® Whereas political order is main- 


* See the much fuller discussion of this problem in my Nature, 
Man and Woman, Part I, Ch. I, “Urbanism and Paganism.” 
Pantheon Books. New York, 1958. 


[ 161 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


tained by force from above, being imposed, organic 
order arises through the mutual and reciprocal inter- 
play of forces within a field. Armies and machines 
are ordered politically. But human bodies, forests, 
ocean-floor communities, biological and botanical 
regions, planetary biospheres, and, probably, stellar 
galaxies are ordered organically. 

In the Mass of the basilica the altar is the throne, 
and it puts Christ with his back to the wall like a 
monarch, flanked with his guards and fearful of at- 
tack from behind. In the Mass of the Body, or of the 
Vine, the altar is central, and the action of the Mass 
is not oriented, not facing eastward to some end out 
there, beyond, exalted, far in the future; the action 
is radial, for the kingdom is no longer above but 
within, no longer future but present. The Church 
is not, then, where the people come to court (and 
note how the Protestant church is modeled on the 
judicial instead of the monarchical court); the 
Church is where people come to celebrate the pat- 
tern of being One Body with Christ—not to kowtow, 
not to hear a catalogue of oughts and shoulds, but to 
make a ritual expression of the delight and splendor 
of Heaven and Earth in unity. 

Some approximation to the radial Mass is now to 
be found in many Catholic churches under the in- 
fluence of the so-called Liturgical Movement, based 
on the principle that the original meaning of liturgy, 
the act of worship, is a leitos ourgos or “work of the 
people”—a rite in which all present participate and 
not merely a sacerdotal drama witnessed by the peo- 
ple. Yet this is, alas, apt to go hand in hand with a 


[ 162 ] 


This Is My Body 


rationalization, popularization and, thus, vulgariza- 
tion of the liturgy in the superstition that the Mass 
ought to be “intelligible” in the literal, historical 
and theological-seminary sense of intelligibility. The 
Liturgical Movement therefore presses for Mass in 
the vernacular, and for the “dialogue Mass” in which 
the whole congregation joins in the responses. 

But the Roman Catholic Church has no traditional 
feeling for Mass in the vernacular as compared, for 
example, with the Anglican and Greek Orthodox 
Churches. Translations into the vernacular are made 
by moralists instead of poets, and are then conducted 
in the prayer-wheel style, which, however magical 
and mantric in mumbled Latin, sound in English like 
the rituals of a stock exchange or tobacco auction. 
Latin is a veil of mystery which, when removed, 
reveals the Roman Liturgy in all the nakedness of its 
commercialized poverty. 

The Church cannot celebrate a truly radial Mass 
without a shift in spiritual experience parallel to the 
shift in ritual. It is an empty gesture to move the altar 
to the center of the church without that changed 
sense of identity in which God is found to be the 
center of man. Otherwise, the altar at the center is 
still being treated as the altar at the East, where God 
is approached as an external and imperious power, 
an alien authority who judges and compels us from 
beyond and above. The radial Mass represents an 
entirely different order of creation, the hierarchy of 
the Vine and the branches, in which all terms of the 
“above,” the “exalted,” and the “high-and-mighty” 
are transposed into terms of what is deeply “within,” 


[ 163 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


“essential,” and “ultimately real.” Man and the uni- 
verse become concentric with instead of eccentric to 
God." 

As I am not trying to write a liturgical manual, I 
will not attempt to dwell on the form of a radial Mass 
as it might ideally be celebrated. The traditional 
liturgies have rightly avoided dramatics, such as 
prayers recited with “feeling,” in preference for a 
serenely impersonal style of utterance. The whole 
theory of the liturgy is that true worship is not man 
speaking to God, but God speaking through man. 
Worship is the action in which man is drawn into 
the vortex of love which revolves eternally between 
the Persons of the Trinity. In the Mass, the congre- 
gation becomes God the Son speaking to the Father 
with the words of the Spirit, and therefore the say- 
ing and singing of these words should forbid the 
intrusion of personal idiosyncrasies. This is why the 
Gregorian chant has been the most perfect vehicle 
for the Western liturgy, since it is entirely free of 
military bombast and personalized sentimentality. 
It is pre-eminently the music of contemplation, and 
of a majestic serenity that has no need for pomp. Yet 
even in its most triumphant moods it is profoundly 
and marvelously sad, because it is the music of God 
in exile, and thus of the human ego possessed with a 
longing which is as deep as it is undefined. The ever- 
recurring patterns of brain tissue supporting mem- 


* Several American Catholic bishops have recently (1963) ob- 
jected to the radial Mass on the grounds that when an army 
is on the march or a delegation presents a formal address to a 
superior, all members face in one direction. .. . In Tokyo 
novelty shops you can buy switch-blade knives disguised as 
crucifixes. 


[ 164 ] 


This Is My Body 


ories billions of years old. Gregorian chant is always 
touched with the metaphysical nostalgia of the Salve 
Regina: 


To thee we exiles, children of Eve, lift our crying. 
To thee we are sighing, as mournful and weeping, 
we pass through this vale of sorrow. . . . Here- 
after, when our earthly exile shall be ended, show 
us Jesus, the blessed fruit of thy womb. O gentle, 
O tender, O gracious Virgin Mary. 


I can only suppose, then, that in a truly post-exilic 
Church the Mass would indeed be a celebration. It 
would be—at last—an expression of being unasham- 
edly glad to exist, of being a community without 
moral humbug and (therefore) mutual mistrust, and 
of knowing that, though our individual forms come 
and go like the waves, we are each and all the eternal 
ocean. As things are, we do not have the nerve to 
celebrate in this way without feeling vaguely guilty 
and ill at ease. Won't the gods be jealous of our hap- 
piness and take it as an affront? Won't it relax our 
guard against those powers of darkness which, as 
the hymn says, “prowl and prowl around” plotting 
our downfall? 

As there is not yet a religion in which Heaven says 
to Earth, “I love you with all my heart,” so there is 
not yet a ritual which embodies metaphysical joie 
de vivre. Now, there is a tendency in ritualism to be 
too symbolic. Ceremonies tend to represent or to 
memorialize or to prefigure something that actually 
takes place elsewhere. Marriage is not consummated 
at the altar, and at Holy Communion there is neither 
substantial eating or drinking nor expression of love 


[ 165 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


between the participants. Some Early Christian 
literature suggests that at one time the Communion 
and the Agape (i.e., the “love feast” now moldered 
into the parish breakfast) were held at the same time, 
or were even the same event. But apparently things 
got out of hand: the drinking became drunkenness 
and the loving became too amorous. 

For the problem is that when Heaven says to 
Earth, “I love you with all my heart,” it follows that 
this love must include and accept the Earth’s delight 
in sexuality. Thus there was apparently a tendency 
in the primitive Church for the eucharistic feast to 
“revert” to the ritual orgy in which men and women 
acted out, in community, the marriage of Heaven 
and Earth. But this was exactly the abominable 
Baal-cult of Canaan and the worship of Ishtar against 
which the Hebrew prophets had so fervently ful- 
minated. This was, too, the very nadir of the spirit’s 
entrapment in the sucking quicksand of the flesh 
from which both the Orphic and Neo-Platonic tradi- 
tions of Greek wisdom sought deliverance. In Chris- 
tianity these Hebrew and Greek associations of the 
orgiastic with the loathsome came together as Bib- 
lical myth and Greek philosophy coalesced into 
Christian theology. Therefore as a religion uniquely 
preoccupied with the negative fascination of sex, the 
last thing that the Church could tolerate would be 
any expression of physical love (be it polymorphous 
or genital) in its corporate worship. 

Accordingly, the Mass has become the non-Com- 
munion of Saints—an exercise in which the partici- 
pants appear dressed from neck to sole in the full 
panoply of their social role and status, to parade 


[ 166 ] 


This Is My Body 


stiffly before the altar with eyes to the front and each 
in his own private devotional scene with the Lord. 
At best, the Church overwhelms this parade of masks 
with temples in which the worshipers become rus- 
tling and veiled shadows, individually and collec- 
tively lost in huge, dim spaces of stone—spaces 
where the rite is centered among the lights in the 
high distance, and the arches murmur and call to 
each other above the sanctuary, where priests and 
acolytes move as tiny figures beneath the vastness 
of heaven. The individual Christian can creep quietly 
into this scene, unnoticed by any but God, and feel 
himself lifted for a time into the transcendental 
world. 

But he cannot stay there without becoming a 
churchmouse—or perhaps a clergyman, and pay for 
it by spending the rest of his life in black serge and 
starched linen. As a child in an English village, I 
remember the pious little ladies whose cottages hud- 
dled close to the parish church—the faithful core of 
the congregation, who attended Mass every morn- 
ing and were constantly in and out of the church like 
the jackdaws in the belfry, in the attempt to stay as 
permanently as possible in the Lord’s house. Moths 
around the fire of ecclesiastical magic, tantalized by 
vague glimpses of the Beatific Vision, flickering mo- 
mentarily from highlights on the altar candlesticks 
and the golden chalice, but all demurely muffled in 
cassocks and surplices, the upholstery on the people 
instead of the furniture, and everyone meekly shep- 
herded into stalls and pens and pews. 


O how lovely are thy dwellings, thou Lord of hostsl 
My soul hath a desire and longing to enter into the 


[ 167 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh rejoice 
in the living God. 

Yea, the sparrow hath found her an house, and the 
swallow a nest where she may lay her young: 
even thy altars, O Lord of hosts, my King and my 
God. 

Blessed are they that dwell in thy house; they will 
be always praising thee. . . . 

For one day in thy courts is better than a thousand. 

(Psalm 84: 1-4, 10. BCP mod.) 


Somehow the psalmist’s aspiration for the rejoicing 
of his flesh in the living God doesn’t quite come off 
in churchly circles. The Word becomes flesh, but 
only as far down as the neck. 


[ 168 ] 


VI 


‘The Sacred Taboo 


Is it, then, possible to celebrate the union of Heaven 
and Earth in a religion which has consistently held 
that sexual love is disgusting? Not only disgusting, 
but profoundly sinful except between married cou- 
ples for the sole purpose of reproduction. 

One must be most careful of jumping to superficial 
conclusions in trying to understand Christian at- 
titudes to sex. For there is a sense in which Chris- 
tianity is the religion about sex, and in which sex 
plays a more important role even than in Priapism 
or Tantric Yoga. In any Christian milieu the subject 
of sex is extremely touchy; it is what embarrasses 
most easily, what is surrounded with the most rigid 
rules of conduct, and what arouses the most unin- 


[ 169 } 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


telligent emotions. This indicates not only a deep 
preoccupation with sex, but also the direction in 
which we must look for basic understanding of Chris- 
tianity as a whole and of the mystery that lies at its 
heart. 

On the surface, almost all forms of Christianity 
seem to be militantly prudish, even though, in quite 
recent times, there has arisen the practice of damn- 
ing sexuality with faint praise. I was not merely 
joking when I said that, today, the churches function 
mainly as societies for regulating familial ties and 
sexual mores. There is a practical test. One has simply 
to ask: For what principal reason are people excom- 
municated, and priests or ministers defrocked? For 
pride, vainglory and hypocrisy? For envy, hatred, 
malice and all uncharitablenessP For gluttony or 
sloth? For ownership of slums or of shares in shady 
loan companies? For coldness of heart or a cruel 
tongue? Not on your life. You can live openly in 
such sins and hold a bishopric. 

But once it is discovered that you have an irregular 
marriage, that you consort with a mistress or a lover, 
that you take pleasure in unconventional modes of 
intercourse, or, worse, that you are actively homosex- 
ual, you are in real trouble. You must stop it at once 
or get out. The only other sin that seriously bothers 
the Church is open heresy, and then only in the 
more conservative denominations. This overwhelm- 
ing preoccupation with the sins of sex is reflected in 
popular speech, where “immorality” almost always 
means sexual immorality, and “living in sin” means 
irregular cohabitation. 

There have been times, and there still are places, 


[ 170 ] 


The Sacred Taboo 


where the Church simply winks at sacerdotal concu- 
binage and canon lawyers arrange easy annulments 
of marriage. But such attitudes usually go hand in 
hand with a general atmosphere of skepticism and 
cynicism, when the ecclesiastical authorities have 
lost interest in religion and are simply going through 
the motions. Generally speaking, where and when- 
ever the Church takes itself seriously, there are no 
such concessions, and the zealous priest has beside 
him his manual of moral theology, arranged accord- 
ing to the Ten Commandments, wherein the discus- 
sion of “Thou shalt not commit adultery” occupies at 
least two thirds of the volume. 

Many theologians recognize that this is a serious 
distortion of Christian ethics, pointing out that Jesus 
was lenient and compassionate toward those who 
had “sinned in the flesh,” as contrasted with his rage 
against hypocrisy and exploitation of the poor. They 
also try to make a case for the idea that sex within 
the bonds of Holy Matrimony is a sacred and beau- 
tiful thing because it is no longer “depersonalized,” 
no longer “cheapened” by being a pleasure taken 
with any congenial partner, but ennobled in becom- 
ing the seal of a life-long and total commitment to a 
single person. 

For some reason these (quite modern) attempts to 
say a good word for erotic love sound curiously 
throttled and lacking in conviction. The reason is, of 
course, that they are plain humbug. A Christian may 
write poetry about mountains and quiet forests and 
all the “beauties of nature” as expressions of the 
beauty of nature’s Lord. He may adorn the church 
and the altar with images of flowers and birds, fishes 


[ 171 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


and stars. But what if the Christian poet should have 
something to say about the revelation of divine glory 
in the image of a naked girl, upon her marriage bed, 
squirming with bliss in the arms of her man? Imagine 
the screens and niches of St. Peter’s adored with 
Baroque equivalents of the tantric sculptures that 
embellish Hindu temples! Or what if the “young 
married” group should meet at the First Presbyterian 
on Wednesday evenings for the sacrament of “prayer 
through sex”? 

Such expressions of piety are totally inconceivable 
within the present temper of Christendom. God may 
be seen and worshiped in nature just so long as sex 
is left out of it. Thus it is perfectly acceptable to sing: 


For the beauty of each hour 
Of the day and of the night, 
Hill and vale, and tree and flower, 
Sun and moon, and stars of light, 
Lord of all, to thee we raise 
This our hymn of grateful praise. 


Yet what if the choir were to burst into an anthem 
as follows? 


How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O prince’s 
daughter! the joints of thy thighs are like jewels, 
the work of the hands of a cunning workman. 

Thy navel is like a round goblet, which wanteth not 
liquor: thy belly is like an heap of wheat set 
about with lilies. 

Thy two breasts are like young roes that are twins. 

Thy neck is as a tower of ivory; 
thine eyes like the fishpools in Heshbon, by the 
gate of Bath-rabbim: 
thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon which look- 
eth toward Damascus. 


[ 172 J 


The Sacred Taboo 


Thine head upon thee is like Carmel, and the hair 
of thine head like purple. . . . 

How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for 
delights! 

This thy stature is like to a palm tree, 

and thy breasts to clusters of grapes. 

said, “I will go up to the palm tree, I will take 

hold of the boughs thereof: 

now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the 


— 


vine, 
and the smell of thy nose like apples; 

And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine for my 
beloved, that goeth down sweetly, causing the 
lips of those that are asleep to speak.” 


I know of no denomination of the Church in which 
this song would be formally inadmissible, seeing that 
it is taken from the Holy Scriptures themselves (Song 
of Songs 7: 1-9, AV.), and the explanatory gloss in 
my copy of the Bible says of this section, “The 
Church professeth her faith in Christ,” though I 
think it should read, “Christ professeth his love for 
the Church.” Nevertheless, who would be so rash as 
to take up the precedent? 

But the very fact that sexual love and overt sexual 
imagery is the principal Christian taboo points di- 
rectly to what must be, in fact, the mysterium tre- 
mendum, the inner and esoteric core of the religion. 
For whatever is taboo is not just something forbid- 
den as an evil. Christianity forbids murder, but 
stands in no awe of it, and there has never been any 
censorship of the depiction and description of mur- 
der. Strictly speaking, a taboo is something to be 
avoided because it is mighty and holy, something to 
be handled with reverence because it is wonderful 


[ 173 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


and dangerous like fire. Sex is not to be described for 
the same reason that the Name of God, YHVH, is not 
to be uttered, and not to be depicted for the same 
reason that no graven image of God may be made. 
This is not to say that sexual intercourse is itself the 
heart of the matter. It is rather that this act of gen- 
eration and love and self-abandonment is the su- 
preme symbol of God, and may, under certain condi- 
tions, be a direct way of realizing the mystical union. 

Yet how could this be true if the characteristic 
reaction of pious people to sexuality is not so much 
awe as disgust? Furthermore, even those great mys- 
tics who are supposed to represent whatever there 
may be of an esoteric aspect to Christianity seem, 
on the whole, to share this distaste. An obvious ex- 
ception must be made of those few and extremely 
bold female mystics who suggest that the real re- 
ward for their virginity is to be intercourse with Jesus 
himself—for example, St. Margaret Mary Alacoque, 
who was the champion of the cult of the Sacred 
Heart. It is, however, quite obvious that sexual dis- 
gust is usually an emotion misnamed, for it is by no 
means the same disgust that one feels for sewage or 
rotting corpses. As psychopathologists have long 
known, sexual disgust is a “negative fascination.” It 
is the sensation of lust as perceived by those who 
will not recognize it as such, and who interpret it 
as loathing because of the convulsive sensations com- 
mon to both orgasm and nausea. Such misidentifica- 
tion carried out, as it were, behind the back of one’s 
own mind makes it possible to enjoy the things of the 
Devil while taking the side of the Lord, and those 


[ 174 ] 


The Sacred Taboo 


who make much of their distaste for sex lose few op- 
portunities for exercising it.1 

The question has often been raised as to whether 
Christianity (and in particular Catholicism) has an 
esoteric aspect, since it seems almost incredible that 
the highly intelligent and cultured individuals whom 
one finds at the top of the Roman hierarchy can swal- 
low the plain superstitions of the Catechism. Out- 
siders often wonder, therefore, whether such high 
ecclesiastics are just cynical purveyors of the “opiate 
of the people,” following the philosophy of Dostoev- 
sky’s Grand Inquisitor to placate their conscience, or 
whether they are initiates to a higher interpretation 
of the crude dogmatic forms. It has even been sug- 
gested that the visible and official Pope in Rome is 
a Black or Shadow Pope who takes his orders from a 
White Pope completely unknown to the public, and 
that the latter presides over an inner Church with a 
secret discipline and doctrine. 

Such notions are doubtless romances of the same 
kind as H. P. Blavatsky’s theosophical fantasy of an 
organized fraternity of high initiates in the spiritual 
and occult sciences, distributed throughout the 
world, and subtly inspiring and directing every form 
of positive growth in religion and science. The much 
less melodramatic truth is probably that within the 
Roman hierarchy there are a few individuals whose 
* At least one reason why the religio-sexual orgy (as distinct 
from a mere rutting rout) is almost wholly impracticable in 
our culture is that it is virtually impossible to exclude people 
whose emotional wires are so crossed that they cannot distin- 
guish between the sexy and the dirty. For example, the “dirty- 


old-man” type who leers and giggles about sex because it fas- 
cinates and arouses guilt at the same time. 


[ 175 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


private opinions about religion would accord approx- 
imately with the ideas I have been suggesting all 
along. However, there would be no sort of organized 
fellowship between these individuals, and still less 
would they constitute an official elite in the hierarchy 
itself. Otherwise, the crudities of the Catechism are 
acceptable to highly intelligent clergy and laymen 
because they can be rationalized by extremely so- 
phisticated theological arguments. The trouble is 
that just the same sort of argumentation can be used 
to rationalize any proposition whatsoever. One might 
write—and someone may well have written—a de- 
fense of the proposition that insects are the highest 
manifestation of the divine principle, and that the 
destiny of man is to evolve into an insect or to be sub- 
ject to insects, and set it forward in the style of Mgr. 
Ronald Knox or Fr. M. C. d’Arcy. How else do well- 
educated people swallow the fantasies of Mormon- 
ism or of Swedenborg? 

Speculations as to the nature of an esoteric Ca- 
tholicism, which might claim Meister Eckhart or 
John Scotus Erigena as its spokesmen, are usually 
constructed along the lines of Gnosticism, with its 
heavy emphasis upon the gulf between the spiritual 
and the material, upon the sole reality of the former, 
and upon disciplines which lead to release from ma- 
terial existence. This is the rationale whereby, say, 
the doctrines of the Virgin Birth and the Resurrection 
of Christ’s Body can be understood spiritually rather 
than physically, and it was from such a standpoint 
that Origen rationalized the mythology of the Old 
Testament. It was his frank opinion that, taken liter- 
ally, much of the Old Testament was simply “puerile.” 


[ 176 ] 


The Sacred Taboo 


But Gnosticism is, by and large, far more other- 
worldly than official Catholicism, and will have no 
truck whatever with the marriage of spirit and flesh. 

Christianity does not, like Hinduism or Buddhism, 
have an “orthodox” esotericism—a body of tradi- 
tional doctrine and discipline handed down from 
master to student, but not disclosed to the general 
multitude of devotees. There is, perhaps, something 
approaching this in the art and in the manuals of 
“spiritual direction.” Pious clergy and laity often seek 
out a particularly holy monk or priests as their “spir- 
itual director,” and the wisdom and experience of 
these directors is set forward in such works as Pou- 
lain’s Graces of Interior Prayer, Scupoli’s Spiritual 
Combat, Chapman’s Spritual Letters, St. Teresa’s 
Interior Castle, or that marvelous anthology of East- 
erm Orthodox spirituality, the Philokalia. But these 
works do not suggest any radical transformation of 
the sense of dogma. They go along with the usual 
theological rationalizations and, indeed, often mani- 
fest some anxiety lest the aspirant to high states of 
prayer should lose faith in the literal sense of the 
Catechism, since the latter is somehow supposed to 
keep him well grounded—especially in intellectual 
humility. 

No, we must look for the “inner sense” of Christi- 
anity in quite other directions. The esoteric aspect 
of Christianity lies in what must be called, paradoxi- 
cally, its “unconscious intent,” or, perhaps less para- 
doxically, its “unconscious direction.” We can assume 
an unconscious intent if we make the experiment of 
looking at Christianity within the context of Hindu- 
ism, and thus regard the predicament of being a 


[ 177 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


Christian as a very adventurous role being “played” 
by the Godhead. Insofar as the Godhead is “lost” in 
his role, the intent in playing it is forgotten and un- 
conscious. We can assume an unconscious direction 
if we ask, “What will be the actual results of follow- 
ing the Christian way consistently?” I have been try- 
ing to show that the Christian way—the challenge of 
Christ—is a double-bind in that it commands the 
deliberate enactment of spontaneous behavior, such 
as love and humility. When this commandment is 
presented to people who believe that they are sepa- 
rate and independent egos, the rigorous attempt to 
obey it will result in a paralysis which reveals the ego 
to be a fiction, and leads on to a new sense of identity. 
This has, in fact, been the experience of innumerable 
devout Christians, though the cultural context in 
which they have lived, together with the Church’s 
official censorship, has forced them to express the 
new sense of identity in terms consistent with official 
theology. Thus the Catholic mystic attempting to de- 
scribe his union with a God who is the transcendent 
and omnipotent King of kings, literally knowing and 
controlling all things, has to split hairs most skillfully. 

What, then, is the unconscious intent or direction 
of the Christian attitude to sex? Perhaps this ques- 
tion may well be introduced by a personal reminis- 
cence—of a boy’s initiation into the English Church 
at no lesser shrine than Canterbury—a reminiscence 
that could be repeated in its essentials by millions of 
initiates into all brands of Christianity except, per- 
haps, the most liberal forms of Protestantism. 

In very many denominations of the Church the 
rite of Confirmation corresponds to the puberty and 


[ 178 ] 


The Sacred Taboo 


initiation-into-manhood ceremonies of other cultures, 
since it normally occurs at about the age of fourteen. 
When it is customary to baptize babies (out of the 
neurotic fear that unbaptized children will go to a 
gloomy limbo if they die), Baptism ceases to be the 
initiation rite, save in potentiality. This potentiality 
is made actual in the sacrament of Chrism or Con- 
firmation, wherein the individual makes his own con- 
scious and responsible profession of being a Chris- 
tian. He is then received into active membership of 
the Church and admitted to the Holy Communion, 
and this new status is traditionally conferred by a 
bishop, who anoints the candidate with holy oil and 
lays hands upon his head. 

Confirmation is therefore preceded by some weeks 
of instruction concerning the doctrines and disci- 
plines of the Church, and in my own experience this 
was largely taken up with Bible stories and, above 
all, Church history, for the religion of the British is 
in some ways a sort of pious archaeology. There is 
a sense of continuity with a glorious and hallowed 
past almost unknown in the New World, of compan- 
ionship with St. Augustine of Canterbury, St. Alban, 
St. Wilfrid, Edward the Confessor, the Venerable 
Bede, St. Anselm, St. Thomas 4 Becket, Edward the 
Black Prince, Richard Coeur de Lion, and St. Charles 
the Martyr—a heraldic litany of ringing names whom 
one comes to regard as one’s elder brothers. And the 
monuments of this past still stand in almost every 
town and village: cathedrals, abbeys, priories, parish 
churches and oratories in the enchanted stone of 
Romanesque (Norman) and Gothic masons. Initia- 
tion into the Church is, therefore, a coming into 


[ 179 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


membership with all that these sacred names and 
monuments represent; and in the background of the 
English Church there is always the faintly glowing 
glamour of King Arthur and his Knights, of the mys- 
teries of Chivalry, and of the High Quest of the Holy 
Grail. In Glastonbury, Wells, Exeter and Tintern it 
is an almost tangible presence. 

Even as a child one would have expected that, be- 
yond this historical pageantry, the core of one’s initia- 
tory instructions would have been the revelation of 
some deep mystery about the nature of God, for, 
sure enough, every boy to be confirmed was taken 
apart for a very serious private talk with the school 
chaplain. Emotionally and dramatically, this was ob- 
viously the climax of one’s preparation, the moment 
in which the real secret meaning of the initiation was 
to be revealed. Naturally, no one kept the secret, and 
it was well known in advance that the VERY SERI- 
OUS TALK was a grave warning against the evils of 
masturbation—an act which some of us at that age 
did not even know how to perform! In addition, 
then, to some uncertainty as to what we were being 
warned against, its dire results were defined so vaguely 
as to give infinite range to the imagination. Thus it 
was rumored among us that boys who “abused” them- 
selves might shortly contract syphilis, gonorrhea, 
epilepsy, creeping paralysis, bubonic plague, or the 
Great Siberian Itch. Boys who thus “played with 
themselves” were always recognizable by the bags 
under their eyes, pimples on the chin, and boils on 
the crotch, and it was expected that their brains 
would eventually rot and come dripping through 
their noses, 


[ 180 ] 


The Sacred Taboo 


The timing and the serious atmosphere of this talk 
left no doubt as to what was really the most impor- 
tant thing in the Christian religion. Since no one was 
likely to get married for at least ten years, the high 
and heroic task of Christian life was to take the ut- 
most pains (including cold showers ) to avoid paying 
attention to the little devil between one’s legs. One’s 
soul was clean and pure for the Holy Communion, 
and one was a true and dedicated Knight of the Grail, 
if one had kept oneself clean—i.e., not masturbated. 
As simple as that. 

Having once been boys themselves, our ecclesias- 
tical and academic superiors were perfectly well 
aware of the chief and unacknowledged rule of all 
educational institutions for adolescents. The rule is 
that one proves and asserts manhood not so much by 
consistent defiance of authority as by certain acts of 
ritual defiance to which one is “dared” by one’s 
peers. There is a conspiracy to protect all such acts 
by silence, and anyone who breaks silence and re- 
ports the offense to the authorities is a sneak, tattle- 
tale, goody-goody, spoilsport, and, by any name, defi- 
nitely not one of the boys. What, then, is more per- 
fectly suited for a ritual assertion of manhood than 
masturbation? It is against the rules. It is the male 
generative act. It is immense fun. And if you half 
believe the authorities, you can have the most won- 
derful spasms of guilt and penitence after you have 
done it. 

Since all this was well known to the authorities, 
why did they go on connecting Confirmation with 
talks against sexP Of course, in the front of their 
minds they didn’t think about it—and how easy it is 


[ 181 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


to forget one’s own childhood! They knew only that 
this was what their elders and betters had done for 
them as boys, and that it was their duty to carry on 
the tradition. But what could have been in the back 
of their minds? 

Let us suppose an entirely different approach. 
What if the whole matter of sex had been handed 
over to the school physician, that he had prescribed 
masturbation once a week as a general health meas- 
ure, and had explained the entire mechanisms of sex 
with the aid of plastic models? What if boys and 
girls were taught to perform intercourse in class, just 
as they learn dancing? What if such classes were com- 
pulsory, and if it were the rule to change partners 
each time to facilitate adaptibility in sexual adjust- 
ment? What if such a program in sexual hygiene 
were held in a nudist camp, so that all the details of 
male and female bodies were as familiar as hands 
and feet? Naturally, this would be the highway to 
clean, healthy, honest, open, free, guiltless, and per- 
fectly boring sexuality. 

It has always been known that “forbidden fruit is 
sweetest,” though the idea that the pleasure of sex 
is in proportion to its supposed sinfulness is rather 
too simple to explain the problem. This is indeed part 
of the picture, and it has often been noted that the 
repression of sex in Christian cultures has fostered 
the feeling that nothing in the world is more to be 
desired than venery. Nowhere else has it struck peo- 
ple to advertise beer, cigarettes, soda water, air travel 
and undertaking services with the aid of naked or 
half-naked girls. Nowhere else would the doctrines of 
Freud have seemed peculiarly significant. As Keyser- 


[ 182 ] 


The Sacred Taboo 


ling once observed, the Christian West has thought 
up refinements of lascivious dress without parallel, 
and has learned how to protect the private parts of 
women with a complexity of corsets, girdles and gar- 
ter belts with their marvelous block-and-tackle ar- 
rangements for securing silk stockings, frilly panties 
and petticoats, bloomers, tights, and chemises—all 
of which become thereby sexual fetishes. The more 
modest, the more immodest. Repression works on the 
principle that the tighter the channel, the stronger 
the jet. 

All this is obvious enough. Far more important, 
however, is the fact that the whole conflict between 
prudery and license is a game of “let not your left 
hand know what your right hand doeth.” In this re- 
spect it is an analogue and an aspect of the cosmic 
game of hide-and-seek in which the Godhead forgets 
itself to seek itself. For when God created the world 
what he really said was not, “Let there be light!” 
but, “You must draw the line somewhere.” This was 
the dividing of the light from the darkness, the upper 
waters from the nether waters, and the heavens from 
the earth. It is also the creation of identity, the line 
of boundary between this and that, yours and mine, 
the ins and the outs, the good guys and the bad guys, 
the fair and the foul. At a more complex level, it is 
the question of where we draw the line in class dis- 
tinctions, in etiquette and manners, in color of skin, 
in girth of body, in length of skirts, in area of nudity, 
and, above all, in degree of intimacy. 

How far will we go with each other? First names? 
Holding hands? Kissing? Tongue kissing? Where do 
we draw the line as to how far your body may be 


[ 183 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


familiar with my body? And under what conditions? 
A hundred dollars a night? Just friends? Going 
steady? Marriage and babies? Swear to be true to me 
for always? You must draw the line somewhere. As 
the seducer plays to lift the lady’s skirt higher and 
higher, so the progressive liberal tries to extend the 
areas of sexual freedom, to push the line of taboo 
back and back—and sometimes it seems as if he 
wanted to get rid of the line altogether. Contrari- 
wise, the reactionary conservative, the square, 
stuffed-shirt, bluenose, and hidebound traditionalist 
want, to lower the skirt down to the ground like a 
nun’s habit, and to restrict the area of intimacy to the 
utmost. Between husband and wife only. For repro- 
duction only. And only in the face-to-face position 
with the lady beneath, as befits her sex. No divorce 
allowed. (Seriously, that is the rule of Catholic moral 
theology. ) 

Certainly the progressive liberal must not be al- 
lowed to have his way entirely. If no lines are drawn 
there is no creation, no form—only a mass of feature- 
less goo. And, secretly, the liberal does not want there 
to be no line. No one is more unhappy when the op- 
position collapses and there are no more squares to 
be shocked. Equally, the reactionary must not have 
his way entirely, for he will end up by calling on all 
of us to be virgins. But, like the liberal, the reaction- 
ary does not really want this to happen, because he, 
too, feels quite at a loss when there is nothing to be 
shocked about and there are no more sinners to con- 
demn. He has to invent new degrees and minutiae of 
sin, just as the profligate has to resort to bizarre forms 
of erotic stimulation. 


[ 184 ] 


The Sacred Taboo 


We do not want a stalemate, a fixed balance be- 
tween the two sides, for the line of creation is a living 
line which constantly pulsates and throbs, since all 
being is plus/minus, up/down, and come/go. Each 
side must therefore be perpetually winning a little 
and losing a little, bearing in mind that to win even a 
little it may be necessary to try to win all. This is ap- 
proximately how clear forms are produced: the form 
of a hard surface is a restrained agitation of atoms, 
just as a fast electric fan seems to merge its blades 
into a disc. A clear tone is an evenly vibrating tube 
or string, for there is only a line of sound (repre- 
sented in notation by the stave line) if there is a 
steady vibration. The line must be alive. A constant 
give-and-take between the areas or volumes on ei- 
ther side of it. A steel beam is strong because of the 
intense rapidity with which it goes in and out of ex- 
istence. 

The world of forms so produced is a maya—a trick 
or illusion in the positive, Hindu sense of these 
words—because the mutual opposition of sides 
whereby the line is drawn must seem to be serious. 
The continuance of life is an energy evoked by the 
notion that death would be a disaster. I can play 
chess with myself to the degree that, when I am 
playing the white side, I can pretend that I am not 
the same person who plays the black. And so plays 
the universe. 

Thus the squares and prudes firmly believe that 
they are quite a different kind of people from the 
profligates and sensualists, having quite other values 
and motivations. Contrariwise, the profligates see 
themselves totally opposed to the prudes—as warm, 


[ 185 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


generous, easy-going and human-hearted, in contrast 
to that thin-lipped, cold-blooded, anal-retentive atti- 
tude. To the degree, then, that these two become 
conscious only of their differences, forgetting alto- 
gether that there is some sort of tacit conspiracy be- 
tween them, the dividing line begins to be danger- 
ously unstable, swinging so violently from pro to 
con that the form which it has outlined starts to dis- 
integrate. On the other hand, if the prudes and the 
profligates begin to be excessively open-minded and 
tolerant of each other, the dividing line becomes 
flaccid and mushy. In terms of sexual mores, this 
would be the puritanism of the nudist colony: nice, 
clean, healthy physical relationships. No black lace 
underwear nor frilly nighties. Just a sensible diet of 
corned beef and cold, boiled potatoes. 

A fruitful interplay or contest of opposites always 
depends on a tacit understanding between the two 
sides. That which we all recognize but do not men- 
tion, publish, or make official, because to do so would 
be spoiling the sport and giving away the show. Un- 
der our clothes we are all naked, but there is no need 
to insist on it unless it has been altogether forgotten. 

In writing this book, I am to some extent letting the 
cat out of the bag by publishing things which should 
be communicated in secret. But the show will be 
saved because it is the simplest thing for officialdom 
(i.e, the Church and the Academy) to shrug the 
whole thing off as unscholarly, beatnik, disreputable, 
and pseudo-Buddhistic. Nevertheless, those who 
shrug it off in the classroom will read it in the bath- 
room. 

The truly esoteric is not, therefore, guarded and 


[ 186 ] 


The Sacred Taboo 


“top secret” information. The esoteric is the tacit. It 
is what we know in common but do not admit in 
common, and what we communicate with winks 
rather than words. At a deeper level, it is also 
what we know but dare not acknowledge even to 
ourselves. It must not be admitted that the forces on 
either side of the line are actually working together; 
that they need and support each other; that their 
apparent conflict and independent operation is in 
fact a single movement seen from opposite points of 
view. Yet though it must not be explicitly admitted, 
it must be implicitly understood, just as the differen- 
tiation of the spokes at the rim of a wheel is sup- 
ported by their union in the hub. 

It is thus that the Church’s intensely negative fas- 
cination with sexuality acts as the context and stim- 
ulus for a prolific erotic life. It provokes it in the “op- 
position,” in those who rebel deliberately and even 
more in those who resist temptation to the point 
where they are at last compelled to give in. It pro- 
vokes it as much in professing churchmen as in their 
agnostic and atheistic neighbors, giving Christians 
a sexual ambivalence which is something far more 
subtle than mere hypocrisy. Hypocrisy is simply 
using a mask of righteousness to conceal shameless 
ill-doing. But sexual ambivalence is an admixture of 
lust and guilt to the mutual stimulation of both, and 
it issues in the style of eroticism that we call prurient. 
For churchly chastity is the obverse of which the in- 
separable reverse is eroticism with black chiffon 
panties—salacious, lascivious, lewd and libidinous. 
The erotic equivalent of a Nightmare Sundae with 
chocolate fudge, butterscotch, whipped cream, 


[ 187 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


chopped walnuts, marshmallow, and maraschino 
cherries. 

Truly, it is a rather formidable achievement, 
though as one becomes wiser and more discriminat- 
ing one looks for the erotic equivalent of a finely 
grilled trout with chablis. 

Here, as in other respects, the Christian situation 
is an extremity, for just as the Christian soul is the 
Godhead playing most convincingly that it is not 
God, so in the sexual sphere there is almost complete 
repression (in prude and profligate alike) of the 
sense that asceticism and eroticism are mutually 
fructifying. Hence the extreme shock and _ horror 
when it is found out that some particularly holy and 
respected prelate has been leading a “double life.” 
It seems to reduce him to a pious fraud, but it usu- 
ally escapes both the tormented cleric and his out- 
raged flock that fraud is something quite different 
from ambivalence. Fraud may be used to conceal 
ambivalence when the existence of the latter has 
been clearly recognized. But our cleric has not been 
wearing the cloth to conceal his lascivious proclivi- 
ties; he really believes in all that he preaches, but 
finds that it is overwhelmingly impossible to practice 
because the legs of one of his secretaries just refuse 
to be wiped out of consciousness. Actually, they are 
quite ordinary legs, but they are (a) possibly attain- 
able, and (b) forbidden by God. Therefore Helen of 
Troy was not more shapely, and by such magic a 
passably pretty girl is transformed into a goddess. 

If there was any fraud, both the cleric and his flock 
have defrauded themselves in the sense of falling for 
the maya that sexual desire and ascetic continence 


[ 188 ] 


The Sacred Taboo 


are separate and opposed forces. As well expect 
pruning the trees to dry up the fruit. But they fall for 
it as we all fall for the trick which our over-reliance 
on conscious attention plays upon us: that the figure 
moves independently of the background and the or- 
ganism of the environment. It is difficult indeed for 
us to see and feel the two sides moving together as 
aspects of a single process. We have seen that the 
false identity of myself as something quite other 
than the world (environment) may be dispelled if 
one attempts to act upon it consistently, how, when 
faced with the challenge of “Thou shalt love,” the 
Christian ego is reduced to absurdity. The same kind 
of absurdity should be apparent in the fact that pruri- 
ent eroticism increases with the restriction of prud- 
ery (and anyone who doubts it should acquaint him- 
self with Victorian pornography). 

What happens when we see through the trick? Of 
course, if you have a penchant for that style of eroti- 
cism, you keep quiet and ride the situation for all it’s 
worth. But it will never again be quite so lurid, for 
the guilt connected with sex vanishes just as soon as 
you understand the secret connection between lust 
and chastity. In its unconscious “let-not-your-left- 
hand-know” form, the Christian sex-game gets out 
of hand to the point where the price for luscious 
eroticism is not only a posture of prudery but a vast 
amount of mere misery and of warped lives. The 
game is just too far-out. But it should be obvious that 
if Christianity really means what it says about the 
union of the Word and the Flesh, the resolution of 
the problem must be the divinization of sexuality— 
foreshadowed (one is tempted to say “parodied”) 


[ 189 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


in the idea of Holy Matrimony, and in the idea of the 
Mystical Marriage between Christ and the Church. 

Freud, who was essentially a puritan, interpreted 
religious symbolism as an unconscious manifestation 
of libido, which is, as the choice of the word sug- 
gests, dirty sex. “Freud,” wrote Philip Rieff, “comes 
to the tacit understanding that sex really is nasty, an 
ignoble slavery to nature.” (22) Theologians have 
countered with the thought that living for sexual 
satisfaction as the highest good is a result of re- 
pressed religion, that erotic delight is a poor substi- 
tute for the ineffable joy of the knowledge of God. 
Sexual pleasure, they say, is like salt water, quench- 
ing thirst only to inflame it the more. In the end it 
comes to nothing, for man is made so that only the 
vision of God can satisfy him. 

But the proper response would be to tum the ta- 
bles on Freud: to admit with delight that the church 
spire is, indeed, a rampant penis; that vescial win- 
dows are vaginas; that the font is the womb—divini 
fontis utero, as the Missal says; that the Church’s atti- 
tude of self-surrender to the Lord is feminine delight 
in being ravished; that “Thy will, not mine, O Lord” 
is “and yes I said yes I will Yes!” 

Consider what self-immolation and submission to 
the divine will must be if it is not that. Instead of the 
melting warmth of sexual surrender, there is the shiv- 
ering child under the lash—the loving lash—for 
“whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth,” saying, “This 
hurts me more than it’s going to hurt you.” Surrender 
of the will is then what happens when the -child’s 
spirit is broken. . . . “Stop pouting! Take that look 
off your face! Don’t be a slobbering cry-baby!” 


[ 190 J 


The Sacred Taboo 


The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a bro- 
ken and contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not de- 
spise. 

With all the rebellion whipped out of it, the whim- 
pering brat kisses the hand that flogs—but far, far 
inside rages implacably at this indignity and affront 
to nature. Wasn’t it Madame Acarie, that celebrated 
holy woman of seventeenth-century Paris, who used 
to make her daughter kneel down and say the “Our 
Father” while. bending over to be thrashed? 

It is easy for us to forget the compassionate con- 
cern with which the tortures of the Inquisition were 
administered. Isn’t one justified in going to any 
length to protect someone from those everlasting fires 
beside which the stake is nothing? After all, the doc- 
tors of those times took hell-fire as seriously as they 
now take cancer. They lay awake at night shudder- 
ing at the post-mortem horrors in store for the unre- 
pentant heretic.? But of course it cannot be con- 
sciously admitted that the writhings of a “witch” at 
the stake, of a heretic on the rack, or of a child under 
the lash are a vicarious orgasm. The alternative to 
open and loving sexuality is secret and brutal sex- 
uality. So long as we cannot see love on the screen, 
we must see violence. 

There is no way of being non-sexual. The Church 
reeks of sexuality because it is the one thing inten- 
tionally and obviously absent, the one thing definitely 
concealed, and thus the one thing really important. 
* An idea for so e dramatist: a play about the Holy Inquisi- 
tion in modern dress, with the inquisitors in white coats dis- 


cussing heresy in the jargon of roan The torture (called 


“therapy”) is the strait-jacket, lobotomy and electro-shock 
treatment. 


[ 191 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


Nothing draws attention to’ the sexuality of a statue 
more effectively than the improbable growth of a fig 
leaf from the midst of the pubic hair. The religions 
of the world either worship sex or repress it; both at- 
titudes proclaim its centrality. To understand the 
mysteries, always look for what is veiled. 

However, the divinization of sex is obviously some- 
thing very much more than the philosophy that the 
best thing in life is sexual intercourse, considered as 
a physiological action. Our difficulty with sexuality is 
that we regard it as something “merely” physical, the 
isolated interplay of two organs, culminating in a 
pleasurable sensation of convulsive detumescence. 
We have defined, classified and contextualized the 
sexual relationship in such a way that all our associa- 
tions with it are confused. We see it as a somewhat 
grotesque, undignified, more-animal-than-human 
spasm, which doesn’t fit at all well with our image of 
ourselves as ladies and gentlemen, yet which is none- 
theless ungovernably attractive. But all this grotes- 
querie. is “in the mind,” in the system of symbolic, 
artificial and stylized postures which we have been 
taught to associate with dignity and decency. The 
constant reiteration of the attitude of “Ugh!” toward 
sexual matters by parents, teachers, elders and bet- 
ers, builds this reaction into the nervous system, so 
that it is taken for natural and normal feeling. By 
such negative hypnosis even honey can be made to 
taste of rotten eggs. 

Our attitudes toward that most blatant sexual 
organ, the flower, are just the opposite. Flowers call 
to mind a world of innocence and light, transparency 
and joy. They may adorn the altar, be held as exem- 


[ 192 } 


The Sacred Yahoo 


plars of faith (“Consider the lilies”), be symbols of 
the Holy Virgin (“I am the Rose of Sharon”), who is 
said, moreover, to cultivate a rose garden in Para- 
dise, and even be the image of the transfigured cos- 
mos in that day when it shall reflect the full glory of 
its Maker. 


Thus, in the semblance of a snow-white rose, 

There was displayed to me the saintly throng 

That Christ, with his own blood, had made his bride. 

(Paradiso, 31.) 
Yet the flower is the lust of the plant, opening itself 
with the allure of scent and color as if to say, “and 
yes I said yes I will Yes!” 

If man is supposed to be made in the image of 
God, it should follow that human generation has its 
archetypal pattern in the divine act of creation. The 
Hindus portray this quite openly in images of Shiva 
or Krishna with his shakti or feminine aspect, em- 
bracing him with her legs around his loins. The 
shakti is, of course, the maya—the world-illusion and 
the cosmic play to which the Lord has abandoned 
himself, and together the masculine and feminine as- 
pects signify the eternal oscillation of in/out, lost/ 
found, and yes/no. And this oscillation is also the 
vac, the primordial sound or word, AUM, whereby 
all things are brought into manifestation, and thus the 
equivalent of the Word in Christianity with its two 
aspects, Logos, reason, and Sophia, wisdom. 

If we can see through the bewitchment of the lust/ 
guilt, prudery/prurience sex-game, it becomes obvi- 
ous that the sexual intercourse of human beings 
should evoke the same kind of “cosmic wonder” that 
we feel for the stars, for mountains, and for all the 


[ 193 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


timeless marvels of nature, myth and art. Here we 
step out of the costumes which designate our tempo- 
ral roles to become again Adam and Eve, Shiva and 
Parvati, and—why not?—Logos and Sophia, Christ 
and his Church. The pattern and posture of our bod- 
ily union is, after all, essentially the same as the helix 
form of the spiral nebulae; and, if you really look, 
human flesh is no less full of light and transparency 
than petals and shells and alabaster, for “the joints of 
thy thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a 
cunning workman.” 

Yet how can sex be thus divinized when our bodies 
grow old, dry and impotent, when some of us are 
compelled to be gross, scraggy, or deformed, and 
when the flesh is ever prone to disease? This is, of 
course, the most ancient of all complaints about the 
delights of love. But it goes hand in hand with the 
identification of the Self with the separate body, so 
that, when the prime of life has passed, I must say 
farewell forever to these embraces. The lament about 
the transiency of fleshly beauty is a half-truth, for 
the other side of the matter is that love and beauty 
are always and always returning—every situation 
of love being the reincarnation of the Primal Pair, 
somewhat as a particular sonata may be played again 
and again upon thousands of instruments. We forget 
that the Self, the identity, is in the pattern, not in the 
delusive “body” that bears it, and that this is equally 
true of the very thing that we call the body. For all 
that we recognize as constant and consistent in any 
physical body is a repeated pattern of behavior, re- 
curring exactly like the characteristic phenomena of 
spring, or like the logarithmic’spiral in every cham- 


[ 194 ] 


The Sacred Taboo 


bered nautilus. Any permanent material that could 
bear the imprint of these patterns, so as to be the 
medium in which they are wrought, has never been 
discovered. Indeed, if there were some ground or 
primal substance in and of which all these patterns 
are formed, it would correspond far more closely to 
our ideas of God than to our ideas of matter. 

All peoples feel a certain sadness with the passing 
of youth into age—the autumnal mood which the 
Japanese call aware, the mood of the sigh. To the 
extent, however, that we imagine our very self to be 
this body alone, once and for all, aging can bring on 
a furious resentment of physical existence. It is for 
this reason, then, that the peculiarly isolated situa- 
tion of the Christian ego gives us an attitude to the 
physical body that veers between resentful disillusion 
and frantic attempts to “gather rosebuds while ye 
may.” But as the awareness of oneself goes in and in 
and in to the Heart behind the heart, it is ever more 
clear that the core of the Self is held in common be- 
tween oneself and all others, and that without need 
for conscious memory to bridge the intervals, our 
multiform incarations emerge again and again, like 
fruits in season, each one, like the sun through a 
lens, a focus of the One-and-Only. 

To know this is, in the terms of the hide-and-seek- 
game, to have found “home,” the “our eternal home” 
of the Christians, and the liberation or moksha of 
the Hindus. Neither should be taken literally, as, on 
the one hand, an everlasting church service after 
death, or, on the other, permanent disappearance 
from the world of form and manifestation. For the 
“death” which must be undergone to behold the vi- 


[ 195 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


sion of God is the death of a false identity, and the 
withdrawal from the world which is required for 
liberation is withdrawal from the game that this par- 
ticular person, so-and-so, is my one and only self. 
For the rest, the vast and splendid electrical fantasy 
of the universe may go on and on, the same old story 
repeated with inexhaustible genius for variety—color, 
music, intricacy of pattern, beauty and terror, love 
and tragedy, ducks on the dawn water, gulls sailing 
the gale, horned flames of the fire, and the wonder- 
jewel of the witnessing eye, all woven out of the end- 
less possibilities of yes-and-no. 


[ 196 ] 


VIII 


Is It True? 


We have been looking at Christianity in the context 
of the world-view of the Hindus, which is a dramatic, 
mythological presentation of the cosmos as the hide- 
and-seek game of the Self. The presupposition is that 
originally and fundamentally there is but one Self 
common to us all (and what else is the Common 
Man?), which is at once reality, what there is and all 
that there is, and one’s own being at its deepest level. 
Just because the Self is the foundation of the uni- 
verse, and has nothing beyond or outside it, the Self 
can never be an object of knowledge, nor can there 
be an accurate conception of its nature expressed in 
positive and descriptive language. It is much too 
close for vision. However, the “game” or lila of the 


[ 197 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


Self is, rhythmically and regularly, to forget itself in 
the creative illusion (maya) that it is all these sepa- 
rate beings, things and events which we call the cos- 
mos, in such a way that in and as each being it seems 
to itself to be that one only. When the game has run 
its course, the Self awakens to its original identity. 

The Christian and theistic world-view, shared to 
some extent by Jews and Muslims, is that all beings 
and things are evoked or created by the will of God 
“out of nothing,” which is to say that they are noth- 
ing apart from his will that they be. However, they 
exist on their own in the sense that they are not dis- 
guises of the Divine Self, not parts or aspects or mani- 
festations of God, not roles that he is playing. For 
between the Creator and the creature there is an in- 
finite difference, even though a union between the 
two may become so intimate that the creature ap- 
pears to be divinized. But because the creature is 
fundamentally and absolutely other than the Creator, 
the creature is always in peril of the final and irre- 
mediable disaster of going off on its own way so far as 
to lose fellowship with its Creator forever. For in the 
Christian view the angelic and human creatures have 
the freedom to choose between the love of God and 
the love of themselves, since love is not love at all un- 
less freely given. (But the Lord says, “You must love 
me!” ) 

We have seen that if the Christian view of the 
world is true, the Hindu cannot be true. On the other 
hand, if the Hindu view is true, the Christian can also 
be true—in the sense that the situation of seeming to 
be a lonely soul other than God and in peril of dam- 
nation could be one of the most extreme and adven- 


[ 198 ] 


Is It True? 


turous roles of the Self. Thus the intense seriousness 
of Christianity represents that moment in the drama 
of existence at which we are persuaded that this is 
not drama at all but “the real thing.” But this is, from 
at least one point of view, the best moment—the mo- 
ment when the actor’s art deceives the audience, and 
even, perhaps, himself. 

This “Chinese box” inclusion of the Christian myth 
within the Hindu seems to me more fruitful and sug- 
gestive than the alternative of taking the Christian 
myth to be true, to the exclusion of the Hindu. It is 
also more complimentary to the Christian position, 
because it makes it a dramatic triumph instead of a 
feat of pure dogmatic stubbornness. One realizes that 
the latter has nicer names: total commitment, the sac- 
rifice of the intellect, unreserved love and obedience 
to our Lord, etc. But the presupposition that one’s 
own religion is, even without examining others, the 
best and truest of all is, however named, stupidity. 

Having, then, seen what happens to Christianity in 
this larger context, one will finally ask, “Is it true? Is 
this the actual situation of man in this universe?” 

Throughout this discussion I have spoken of both 
the Hindu and the Christian cosmologies as “myths,” 
because the form in which they are stated is plainly 
naive and anthropomorphic. But Hindu and Chris- 
tian philosophers alike have far more sophisticated 
and abstract ways of presenting their doctrines. If we 
are going to discuss their relative truth, they must 
bear comparison with yet another sophisticated view 
of the universe—the vague consensus of scientists. 
And science, too, has a mythological level, which is 
the fiercely held position that the physical universe 


[ 199 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


(outside man) is dead and stupid. Man, in this 
mythology, is the pure fluke of a sensitive intelligence 
arising in a world that is simply mechanism, and not 
very efficient mechanism at that. Some would go so 
far as to say that all the laws and orders of nature are 
simply tools, like saws and knives and rulers, which 
the human mind employs to bend the world to its 
will. We invent the laws of nature as we invent lines 
of latitude and longitude to determine position upon 
the chaotic face of land and sea. 

In our present intellectual climate, it seems to me 
simply inept and boorish to claim that a certain philo- 
sophical or theological position is “the Truth,” and 
still more so to attempt to prove it. We know enough, 
today, about logic, about the history of ideas, about 
the human mind, and about the physical world to 
know that we know very little for certain. In the do- 
main of immediate spiritual experience we may have 
had transformations of consciousness and of the sense 
of identity that are accompanied with a feeling of 
total certainty. But when such experiences are formu- 
lated in language that purports to describe the way 
things are, we must use great caution. It is one thing 
to have an authentic vision of the stars, but quite an- 
other to deliver an accurate description of their rela- 
tive positions. 

My own feeling is that the most that should be 
claimed for any metaphysic, theology or cosmology 
which is trying to say something about the way things 
are, about how the universe really works, is plausi- 
bility. For what one needs in this universe is not cer- 
tainty but the courage and nerve of the gambler; not 
fixed convictions but adaptability; not firm ground 


[ 200 ] 


Is It True? 


whereon to stand but skill in swimming. Certainty 
might well be desirable in a universe where everlast- 
ing damnation is a real possibility. But, seriously, is it 
plausible to conceive our universe as something run 
on the lines of Egyptian, Persian and Byzantine mon- 
archies, with their thrones and judgments, their dun- 
geons, torture chambers and scaffolds? 

To say that the traditional Christian imagery of 
God as the heavenly King is to be understood as 
myth rather than fact is not to say that modern sci- 
ence has disproved the existence of such a being. It is 
only to say that the general climate of twentieth- 
century knowledge and thought has made it thor- 
oughly implausible and slightly comic. And so long 
as we are exhorted in church services to address our- 
selves (for example) “with a pure heart and a hum- 
ble voice unto the throne of the heavenly grace,” the 
very idea of God will be contaminated with this 
(now) ridiculous image. It is simply unimaginable 
that the universe of moder astronomy and physics, 
biology and chemistry, should be the creation of any 
such pompous potentate; our world is much too as- 
tonishing for any explanation of that kind to be mean- 
ingful. As the Bishop of Woolwich has said in his 
forceful manifesto Honest to God (23), the image 
of a “supranatural” Being “out there,” who is in some 
sense (metaphysical and moral if not spatial) outside 
his universe, has become a serious liability to Chris- 
tianity. 

To sophisticated theologians it may seem some- 
what naive on the part of a bishop to whip such a 
dead horse. Centuries ago men like St. Albert and St. 
Bonaventure, St. Thomas and Nicolas Cusanus (all 


[ 201 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


oddly unquoted by the Bishop) had abandoned any 
crudely external image of God, insisting that the in- 
finite Being of God is present in its entirety at every 
point of space and time, and that all such character- 
izations of God as sitting on a throne, shining with 
light, feeling wrath or dwelling on high are meta- 
phorical or analogical (cataphatic, to be technical). 
If we are to go beyond metaphor, they maintained, 
we can speak of God only in negative terms, for, as 
St. Thomas said, “the divine essence by its immensity 
surpasses every form to which our intellect reaches; 
and thus we cannot apprehend it by knowing what 
it is.” (24) The highest knowledge now accessible to 
us is to know what it is not. It is therefore said (in 
apophatic terms ) that God is infinite, eternal, bound- 
less, formless, bodiless. 

Yet the Bishop of Woolwich is right in feeling that 
such rarefied notions of God are far from having 
penetrated the minds of most Christians, for he rec- 
ognizes that the image is far more powerful than the 
concept, and that, to all intents and purposes, the 
forms of Christianity and the attitudes of Christians 
suggest that their God is still the Old Gentleman 
in the sky. Furthermore, setting aside such quasi- 
heretics as Erigena and Eckhart, even the most rare- 
fied orthodox ideas of God insist to the end that there 
is some sort of ultimate gulf between the divine Be- 
ing and the deepest center of one’s own being. Even 
the Bishop wants to keep this gap open. 


The Biblical affirmation that is built into the very 
structure of our relationship to the ground of our 
being [i.e., God] is an indestructible element of per- 
sonal freedom. We are not like rays to the sun or 


{ 202 ] 


Is It True? 


leaves to the tree: we are united to the source, sus- 
tainer and goal of our life in a relationship whose 
only analogy is that of I to Thou—except that the 
freedom in which we are held is one of utter de- 
pendence. (25) 


Is this the ultimate consolation—to know that reality 
is Someone Else who cares? Is the alternative the 
nightmare of Chesterton’s Mirror of Madmen? 


I dreamed a dream of heaven, white as frost, 
The splendid stillness of a living host; 

Vast choirs of upturned faces, line o’er line. 
Then my blood froze; for every face was mine. 


Spirits with sunset plumage throng and pass, 
Glassed darkly in the sea of gold and glass. 
But still on every side, in every spot, 

I saw a million selves, who saw me not. 


I fled to quiet wastes, where on a stone, 
Perchance, I found a saint, who sat alone; 

I came behind: he turned with slow, sweet grace, 
And faced me with my happy, hateful face. 


I cowered like one that in a tower doth bide, 
Shut in by mirrors upon every side; 

Then I saw, islanded in skies alone 

And silent, one that sat upon a throne. 


His robe was bordered with rich rose and gold, 
Green, purple, silver out of sunsets old; 

But o’er his face a great cloud edged with fire, 
Because it covereth a world’s desire. 


But as I gazed, a silent worshipper, 

Methought the cloud began to faintly stir; 

Then I fell flat, and screamed with grovelling head, 
‘If thou hast any lightning, strike me dead] 


‘But spare a brow where the clean sunlight fell, 
The crown of a new sin that sickens hell. 


[ 203 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


Let me not look aloft and see mine own 
Feature and form upon the Judgment-throne.’ 


Then my dream snapped: and with a heart that leapt 
I saw across the tavern where I slept, 

The sight of all my life most full of grace, 

A gin-damned drunkard’s wan half-witted face. (26) 


Indeed, if the Face upon the Throne turns out to be 
no more than the mask of one’s own personality, and 
if the knowledge behind it were to amount to no 
more than the contents of one’s own conscious ego, 
one might perhaps scream, “If thou hast any light- 
ning, strike me dead!” 

But I have always felt that the real root of the 
Christian concern that God should be other (Thou) 
lies in a confusion about what is oneself (I). The 
more we are accustomed to restrict the self to the 
faculty and the contents of conscious attention, the 
more it must seem that there are whole areas in me 
that are beyond me, because the conscious ego does 
not control, let alone understand or produce, all those 
psycho-physical processes upon which it depends. It 
is thus that they seem other and the workmanship of 
another, and, as the psalmist sang, “It will praise 
thee; for I am fearfully and wonderfully made.” Yet 
if the definition of the self can include areas outside 
nomnal consciousness and its control, it would not be 
necessary to jump to the conclusion that the fearful 
and wonderful processes of my inmost being are the 
work of Someone Else. 

Centuries before Western psychology invented the 
idea of the unconscious aspect of one’s “own” mind, 
Indian and Chinese philosophers devised experi- 


[ 204 ] 


Is It True? 


ments whereby consciousness could be expanded or 
deepened so as to include vast areas of experience en- 
tirely ignored (or “screened out”) by conscious atten- 
tion, as we are normally taught to use it. While it is 
true that Jewish, Islamic and Christian mystics had 
their own spiritual exercises and their own experi- 
ences of expanded consciousness, they never really 
began to work out a “geography” of the inner man 
comparable to the very careful and detailed studies 
of Hindu and Buddhist philosophers. On the con- 
trary, Western theology is quite remarkably taciturn 
about the nature of man’s soul and spirit. 

It was from such experiments that the Indians and 
the Chinese derived their sense of unity and continu- 
ity between the depths of man (atman) and the 
depths of the universe (Brahman). On the other 
hand, the Jewish-Christian-Islamic world lacked this 
experimental approach, and, indeed, violently re- 
sisted its emergence.! It is thus that the world-view 
of Western theology is based, not on experimental 
inquiry, but on scriptural revelation. Even today, 
some of the most liberal Protestant theologians have 
a curious, nostalgic way of equating the true with the 
“Biblical”—as if, during the times when these books 
were written, men had a surer contact with the divine 
than at other times, and other places. In tum, the Bib- 
lical view of the world seems to be based on an anal- 
ogy between the order of nature and the order of 
government according to the style of patrist monar- 


*See Joseph Needham (27) on the alliance of Western mysti- 
cism and the experimental methods of natural philosophy as 
against the purely scriptural authority of orthodox theology. 


[ 205 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


chies. Obviously, the more plausible of these world- 
views in the intellectual climate of today will be that 
which is based on experiment. 

However, it must be noted that a considerable 
number of Christian intellectuals make the Bible or 
the Church their point of departure by a “leap of 
faith” that seems to absolve them from any intellec- 
tual responsibility for examining the basic premises 
of their views. I think of an extremely devout and in- 
telligent priest who insisted that it was quite wrong 
to hold any sort of class or meeting for the free dis- 
cussion of Christianity, since this would obviously 
imply that Christianity “might not be true.” Or the 
learned and sophisticated German Lutheran minister 
who wangled himself into the position that the utter- 
ance of God’s Word in the Bible had to be taken as a 
sort of axiom, as a primal judgment which, like the 
very existence of the brain, necessarily precedes all 
thinking and judging whatsoever. What is the differ- 
ence between such positions and the notion that the 
Authorized or King James version of the Bible, com- 
plete with marginal notes, descended with an angel 
from heaven in 1611? I had the most amazing Funda- 
mentalist uncle who not only took all the marginal 
notes to be the veritable words of Jehovah, but even- 
tually rejected the Bible because he found a naughty 
word in it. (Isaiah 36:12.) 

Such weird feats of intelligence would, however, 
be rationally comprehensible (by current standards ) 
if the acceptance of some such fundamentalist view 
of the universe could be taken as the same thing as 
the acceptance of the rules of a game. To play a 
game, one must not keep questioning the rules. Mani- 


[ 206 ] 


Is It True? 


festly, it is quite possible to get along in the world 
and lead a meaningful life as a Three-Seed-in-the- 
Spirit Baptist, but in just the same way as one might 
be a professional golfer or bridge player. For just as 
every game requires some rules, life itself requires 
such rules as the grammar of language, civil laws, 
conventional weights and measures, and a common 
calendar. But we do not ask whether the dollar- 
decimal measure of money is more or less true than 
the measure of pounds, shillings and pence. We ask 
whether it is more or less convenient. There is, of 
course, the very special game of making the best of 
the most inconvenient rules: how much can one say 
in the strict form of the sonnet, or how marvelous a 
carving can be made with a penknife? Yet the idea 
of convenience is slippery, since it really means no 
more than the conveniens, the coming-together or 
agreement about certain ends. Convenience is hardly 
ever the merely utilitarian, the consensus as to what 
is more or less conducive to survival. We do not want 
to survive merely, or to survive so as to be tormented 
forever in hell. We want to survive interestingly, even 
elegantly. 

Therefore, all questions of religion and ethics are 
really questions as to what are optimal game rules. 
For this is also the question about the very forms and 
species of life, as to the respective merits of the dino- 
saur-game, the bee-game, and the man-game. All 
these variations of life are games and are, in tum, 
sub-games in a game that includes the rule that “va- 
riety is the spice of life.” If this is at first objection- 
able, try the experiment of looking at ferns, angel- 
fish, giraffes, spiders, radiolaria, butterflies, lemons 


[ 207 } 


RBREYOND THEOLOGY 


and tadpoles as different dances—waltz, minuet, 
charleston, rumba and twist, and then you can see 
them as plays of the same kind as whist, chess, back- 
gammon, solitaire, crossword puzzles and, even, Rus- 
sian roulette. “Did you ever see a lady go this way, 
go that way?” That is why the Buddhists call a truly 
enlightened man a tathagata, which means one who 
comes, or goes, thus. “He went thataway.” 


This is the way we go to school, 
Go to school, go to schooll 


To be a Tathagata is to dance the day instead of 
working it. The “curse of work” that came with the 
Fall was the supposition that one must live. The con- 
strictions and spasms of dying are felt as a frightful 
agony and a dreadfully serious occasion to the degree 
that one has been persuaded (a) that you arise in this 
world once and once only, and (b) that to live is a 
moral compulsion and duty as well as an ingrained 
and ineradicable instinct. 

Aunt Bessie dying of cancer: not a simple matter at 
all—not an allowed and lovingly accepted or socially 
respected series of convulsions, but a ghastly denial 
of Aunt Bessie as a complicated clotheshorse, earnest 
churchwoman and dignified fuddy-duddy, hushed 
into death in a horrible nursing home where the 
grave demeanor of doctors and nurses and the sen- 
sible, clean ugliness of the rooms, and the thought of 
the Lord waiting as the kindly but ever-so-honestly 
just Judge at the end of the line, all add up to a 
death as grotesquely contrived as the emplattered 
lips of Ubangi women. Leaves may get cold and 
brown; cats may mun into the woods and curl up ina 


[ 208 ] 


Is It True? 


hole; birds may drop into the grass. But when people 
die, it’s you—the amazing accumulation of memo- 
ries, attitudes, postures, possessions and proprieties— 
that’s now going to fall apart, swell, burst or rot in 
flat contradiction to the image of a person that has 
been foisted upon you, with your connivance. You 
must not rot naturally, like a fallen apple. 

The community based on mutual assistance makes 
for a richer and more elegant game than the com- 
munity based on mutual competition; indeed, with- 
out the undergirding of the former, the latter game 
will not work because it has self-contradictory rules. 
The Ptolemaic cosmology, and the theology that goes 
with it, won’t work well as a game for the same kind 
of reason that a top-heavy building won’t stand. For 
the Ptolemaic cosmology envisions the universe as a 
star tured inside-out, with its rays coming from a 
nowhere all around to the center. The middle of 
things is the finite, created world; and—in Dante’s 
version—the center of that world is Hell, and Satan 
himself is the worm that penetrates the world at the 
“point to which all weights are drawn from every- 
where.” The world which is created out of nothing, 
which comes into Being, as distinct from manifesting 
Being, looks like this: 


1. Coming into Being 
[ 209 } 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


Instead of this: Or this: 
2. Manifestation 3. Manifestation 
of Being (figure 2) 
involuted 


Intelligent Christians no longer hold to the Ptole- 
maic cosmology; and, thus, as the Bishop of Wool- 
wich points out, we have become accustomed to 
transposing all references to God and Heaven as “up” 
and “above” into some sense of “beyond.” It may be 
that the divine is present in the same space that we 
inhabit, but upon some immeasurably higher level of 
vibration. Yet God will remain somehow remote and 
“out there” unless, as Tillich suggests, there is a com- 
plete turnabout in which all references to the high 
and the beyond are translated into terms of depth. 


The name of this infinite and inexhaustible depth 
and ground of all being is God. That depth is what 
the word God means. And if that word has not 
much meaning for you, translate it, and speak of the 
depths of your life, of the source of your being, of 
your ultimate concer, of what you take seriously 
without any reservation. . . . For if you know that 
God means depth, you know much about him. You 
cannot then call yourself an atheist or unbeliever. 
For you cannot think or say: Life has no depth! Life 


[ 210 ] 


Is It True? 


is shallow. Being itself is surface only. If you could 
say this in complete seriousness, you would be an 
atheist; but otherwise you are not. He who knows 


about depth knows about God. (28) 


But why is the idea of God as the deep more plau- 
sible, more acceptable to a modern way of thinking, 
than the idea of God as the Most High? We are ac- 
customed, also, nowadays to speaking of ingenious 
and interesting conceptions as “profound” and “deep” 
rather than “lofty” and “elevated.” 

On the one hand, Tillich is associating the deep 
with the weighty and the grave in thinking of God as 
“what you take seriously without any reservation.” 
The domain of God is the domain of “ultimate con- 
cern,” since the dimension of depth is where we ad- 
dress ourselves to what really matters, to what is “no 
laughing matter,” and also confront (though that 
doesn’t seem to be the right way of approach to 
the deep) the mysterium tremendum—the interior 
strangeness of Being that makes us shudder and 
wonder. 

I am afraid Tillich’s God is, for all the transposition 
into depth, still—morally speaking—the old God “out 
there,” the Protestant-Biblical Jehovah who lacks real 
depth to the extent that he lacks humor. Does anyone 
really want the End, the Final Ground of all things, 
to be completely serious? No twinkle? No gaiety? 
Something rigid and overwhelming and ponderously 
real? Such a profound seriousness might be the ante- 
room, but not the presence chamber. 

On the other hand, the real force of Tillich’s insist- 
ence on depth is surely that it makes God central to 
the universe. The image of creatures radiating from 


. [ 211 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


God is more elegant and more organic than the image 
of their crawling around beneath his surveillance. 
This is why the Indian image of the universe as a 
manifestation or emanation of the divine is such a 
simple and plausible game-form, especially because it 
includes all the noble and wonderful possibilities of 
tragedy, limitation and differentiation without, how- 
ever, allowing them to overwhelm the ultimate and 
basic unity. It permits gut-shaking seriousness up to 
the very last micro-second—to the bullet in the brain, 
or to the twist of some demon’s red-hot trident in the 
tenderest vitals of a hypocrite in hell, so that just be- 
yond the point when everything reaches final and 
perfect evil, the scream turns suddenly into the ring- 
ing voice that says, “I am Alpha and Omega, the Be- 
ginning and the End!” 

The theistic image of creatures coming into being, 
coming into relation to the world out of nowhere at 
all is, if you really think it through, a freak of imag- 
ination without any parallel in nature. Even though 
two persons or two things may be said to be “poles 
apart,” the very fact that they are poles implies fun- 
damental and original relationship. Nature is always 
differentiated unity, not unified differences. The uni- 
verse is not a huge collection of cosmic flotsam and 
jetsam that came from somewhere else altogether. 
Such notions are simply against the brain, and defy 
the pattern of all known physical processes. Theism 
regards the world as an immense orphanage in which 
we are only “sons by adoption and grace,” and then 
only if one is lucky enough to get the grace. Thought 
and imagery cannot actually express the thing that 
many theologians are trying to say: that we exist 


[ 212 ] 


Is It True? 


solely by the divine will and are yet something quite 
other than that will. If you say it cleverly enough, it 
sounds like a very profound paradox. And there is 
nothing to show that it is any more than that. It is 
the perfectly schizophrenic idea of the cosmos— 
brave, but not ultimately plausible. Also not quite 
brave enough, for how many Christians will dare, at 
the last gasp, to omit the insurance premium of “God 
be merciful to me, a sinner!” 

People who think in terms of biological forms, 
organism-environment relationships, electromagnetic 
fields, and structures of space will naturally be biased 
to unitary, interrelational or transactional images of 
the cosmos. It is quite against the grain of their rea- 
son to look for models of the universe in the arts of 
pottery and carpentry, to imagine the world as a mass 
of inert material, like clay, which requires an external 
force and intelligence to mold it into form and to 
drive it into motion. “Remember, O man, that thou 
art dust, and unto dust thou shalt return!” The Chris- 
tian tat tvuam asi. The problem for theology has al- 
ways been to construct a universe which does not 
make God responsible for sin, but it solves the Prob- 
lem of Evil by replacing it with the still more for- 
midable problem of creating the world out of noth- 
ing, and of a sinless God who does not take respon- 
sibility for the separate centers of responsibility 
which he himself has created. It attempts to affirm 
the freedom and the value of each individual person 
by the desperate expedient of souls everlastingly 
other than God—as if there could be no real and 
meaningful music unless the individual notes in a 
melody were to sound all the time. Christian theology 


{ 213 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


has, in short, been using a model of the universe 
which makes an enthrallingly dramatic game, but 
when one tries to make out that this is really and 
finally the way things are, reason must be tortured to 
the limit to hold the position. Read any first-rate apol- 
ogist—Maritain, Gilson, C. S. Lewis, Ferré, Barth, 
Niebuhr—and see with what labored intricacy they 
leap through the hoops. 

Admittedly, a unitary, relational and emanationist 
model of the cosmos may be more plausible today 
than that of a constructed artifact. But what of the 
God or Godhead at the root of things? Any kind of 
God—the personal, supracosmic ego of the theists, 
or the impersonal being-consciousness-bliss ( sat-cit- 
ananda) of the Hindus? It is no longer of much force 
to object to an idea of God because it is either anthro- 
pomorphic or “man-made.” All ideas of the universe 
are anthropomorphic, because they are representa- 
tions of the world in terms of the human mind. Fur- 
thermore, a universe which grows human beings is as 
much a human, or humaning, universe as a tree 
which grows apples is an apple tree. “Do figs grow 
on thistles or grapes on thors?” is also asking 
whether people grow on blind mechanism. There is 
still much to be said for the old theistic argument that 
the materialist-mechanistic athetist is declaring his 
own intelligence to be no more than a special form of 
unintelligence. Uncomplimentary remarks about the 
universe return like boomerangs to the parts of the 
universe that make them. 

To construct a God in the human image is objec- 
tionable only to the extent that we have a poor image 
of ourselves, for example, as egos in bags of skin. But 


[ 214 J 


Is It True? 


as we can begin to visualize man as the behavior of a 
unified field—immensely complex and comprising the 
whole universe—there is less and less reason against 
conceiving God in that image. To go deeper and 
deeper into oneself is also to-go farther and farther 
out into the universe, until, as the physicist well 
knows, we reach the domain where three-dimen- 
sional, sensory images are no longer valid. (These 
are, of course, graven images.) For the three-dimen- 
sional world seems to appear in a matrix as different 
from it in form as tones from the flute, as ideas from 
brain structure, or as a broadcast concert from the 
electronic apparatus of the radio. Nothing in the in- 
formation conveyed in the ordinary run of television 
programs tells us anything about the mechanisms of 
television. These are almost deliberately concealed. 
We do not televise through camera 2 a picture of 
camera 1 televising the show! For what, in the mean- 
time, would be happening to the picture on cam- 
era 1? 

Thus the idea of an invisible and intangible 
Ground underlying and producing everything that 
we sense directly is a situation of just the same kind 
as that the structure of one’s own retina and optic 
nerves is not in the contents of vision. It is really no 
problem for an intelligent human being of the twen- 
tieth century to conceive that all his experience of the 
world, together with the world itself, subsists in some 
kind of unifying and intelligent continuum. (Think 
of the vast variety of sound—voice, string, wood- 
wind, drum, brass—reproducible on the diaphragm 
of a loud-speaker. ) 

The real theological problem for today is that it is, 


[ 215 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


first of all, utterly implausible to think of this Ground 
as having the monarchical and paternal character of 
the Biblical Lord God. But, secondly, there is the 
much more serious difficulty of freeing oneself from 
the insidious plausibility of the mythology of nine- 
teenth-century scientism, from the notion that the 
universe is gyrating stupidity in which the mind of 
man is nothing but a chemical fantasy doomed to 
frustration. It is insufficiently recognized that this is 
a vision of the world inspired by the revolt against 
the Lord God of those who had formerly held the role 
of his slaves. This reductionist, nothing-but-ist view 
of the universe with its muscular claims to realism 
and facing-factuality is at root a proletarian and 
servile resentment against quality, genius, imagina- 
tion, poetry, fantasy, inventiveness and gaiety.? 
Within twenty or thirty years it will seem as super- 
stitious as flat-earthism. 

Actually, the sense of being an intelligent and sen- 
sitive accident in a doltish universe is an attitude that 
could arise only in the ruins of theism. For if one 
begins by looking at the world, not as the form of 
God, but as some non-divine object, some mechanism 
made by God, what happens when God dies? The 
world is felt as mechanism without mechanic. When 
God is dead, man, who was always defined as a crea- 
ture other than God, begins to feel himself as other 
than reality—a sentimental irregularity in a dog-eat- 


2A proletarian and a poor man,” writes Josef Pieper, “are not 
the same. A man may be poor without being a proletarian: a 
beggar in mediaeval society was certainly not a proletarian. 
Equally, a proletarian is not necessarily poor: a mechanic, a 
‘specialist’ or a ‘technician’ in a ‘totalitarian work state’ is cer- 
tainly a proletarian. . . . The proletarian is the man who is 
fettered to the process of work.” (29) 


[ 216 ] 


Is It True? 


dog system that might have been contrived by the 
Devil, if Devil there were. Men so at odds with t>eir 
environment must either bulldoze it into obedience or 
destroy it. The two choices come to the same thing. 

But a superior religion goes beyond theology. It 
turns toward the center; it investigates and feels out 
the inmost depths of man himself, since it is here that 
we are in most intimate contact, or rather, in identity 
with existence itself. Dependence on theological ideas 
and symbols is replaced by direct, non-conceptual 
touch with a level of being which is simultaneously 
one’s own and the being of all others. For at the point 
where I am most myself I am most beyond myself. 
At root I am one with all the other branches. Yet this 
level of being is not something to be grasped and 
categorized, to be inspected, analyzed or made an 
object of knowledge—not because it is taboo or sacro- 
sanct, but because it is the point from which one ra- 
diates, the light not before but within the eyes. 

If this is that theological bugbear, pantheism, what 
of it? One is not equating omniscience with conscious 
attention or the Godhead with the ego. It is simply an 
assertion of the perennial intuition of the mystics 
everywhere in the world that man has not dropped 
into being from nowhere, but that his feeling of “I” 
is a dim and distorted sensation of That which eter- 
nally IS. In the wake of so many centuries of theo- 
logical monarchism, plus the recent and persuasive 
nihilism of certain scientists, it may take some cour- 
age to accept so bold an assurance. This is not, how- 
ever, the mere acceptance of a new belief. It could 
be that, if that is all one can manage. But I have been 
trying to suggest all along that this is what one must 


[ 217 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


come to by following the Christian way intently and 
consistently until one realizes the full absurdity of its 
(and one’s own) basic assumptions about personal 
identit¥ and responsibility. 

Nevertheless, I have already suggested that the 
way in which we interpret mystical experience must 
be plausible. That is to say, it must fit in with and/or 
throw light upon the best available knowledge about 
life and the universe. As we enter the latter half of 
the twentieth century, there seem to me to be three 
main trends in scientific thought which are at once 
three ways of expressing the same idea, and three 
ways of describing the identity of things or events 
as the mystic feels them. 

The first is the growing recognition that causally 
connected or related events are not separate events, 
but aspects of a single event. To describe a causal 
relation is a fumbling way of recognizing that cause 
A and effect B go together in the same way as the 
head and the tail of a cat. This implies that earlier 
events may often depend in some way upon later 
events, somewhat as an electric impulse will not de- 
part from the positive pole until the negative pole is 
established or connected, or as the meaning of a word 
in a sentence is determined by words that follow. 
Compare, “That is the bark of a tree,” with, “That 
is the bark of a dog.” The sentence as a whole is the 
event which determines the function and meaning of 
the “separate” words. Perhaps the best illustration of 
this way of understanding causality is that the event 
rainbow does not occur without the simultaneous 
presence of sun, atmospheric moisture, and an ob- 
server—all in a certain angular configuration. If any 


[ 218 ] 


Is It TrueP 


one of the three is absent, there is no rainbow. This 
may be difficult to understand in the case of the ab- 
sence of an observer unless one remembers that every 
observer sees the rainbow in a different place. Where, 
then, is the rainbow? A little consideration will show 
that something of the same kind must be true of all 
experiences, not only of flimsy and transparent lumi- 
nescences, but also of such apparently solid things as 
mountains. 

The second is the tendency to think of the behavior 
of things and objects as the behavior of fields—spa- 
tial, gravitational, magnetic or social. The reason is 
that careful and detailed description of the behavior 
or movement of a body must also involve description 
of the behavior of its environment or surrounding 
space. Where, then, does the behavior start? Inside 
the body, or outside it in the surrounding space? The 
answer is in both and neither, because it is best to 
abandon the body and the space for a new descrip- 
tive unit, the body-space, the organism-environment, 
the figure-ground. It is important to distinguish this 
way of looking at things from old-fashioned environ- 
mental determinism, which describes the organism as 
moved by the environment rather than moving with 
it. 

The third, long familiar to biologists, is what Lud- 
wig von Bertelannfy has called Systems Theory. This 
is approximately that the structure and behavior of 
any system is only partially accounted for by analysis 
and description of the smaller units that allegedly 
“compose” it. For what any of these units is and does 
depends upon its place in and its relation to the sys- 
tem as a whole. Thus blood in a test tube is not the 


[ 219 ] 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


same thing as blood flowing in veins. For an organism 
disposes itself in and as various parts; it is not com- 
posed of them as one puts together tubes, wires, dials 
and condensers to make a radio. 

These are, then, three ways of approaching the 
world as a unitary and relational system which are 
highly useful in the sciences but strangely unfamiliar 
to common sense. For the latter derives from politi- 
cal, constructionist and mechanical models of nature 
which, in turn, strongly influence our sensation of the 
person as an enclosed unit of life excluded from the 
world outside. But these unitary, relational, and 
“fieldish” ways of thinking in the sciences give im- 
-mense plausibility to non-dualist or pantheist (to be 
frightfully exact, “panentheist”) types of metaphysic, 
and to theories of the self more-or-less akin to the 
“multisolipsism” of the Hindu atman-is-Brahman doc- 
trine. 

When, for example, we consider the full implica- 
tions of the way in which we see the rainbow, and 
realize that this is also the way in which we perceive 
the clouds, the sun, the earth and the stars, we find 
ourselves strangely close to the “idealism” of Maha- 
yana Buddhism, Berkeley, and Bradley—but with the 
great advantage of being able to describe the situa- 
tion in physical and neurological terms, and no gob- 
bledy-gook about “minds” and “souls” to offend the 
prejudices of the tough-minded or (should I say?) 
hard-headed. And to such as these the subjective ex- 
periences of the mystics are always suspect, for might 
they not be distortions of consciousness brought 
about by stress, self-hypnosis, fasting, hyperoxygena- 
tion or drugs? There is, then, a more structural and 


[ 220 ] 


Is It True? 


objective foundation for that leap of faith in which 
a man may dare to think that he is not a stranger in 
the universe, nor a solitary and tragic flash of aware- 
ness in endless and overwhelming darkness. For in 
the light of what we now know in physical terms, it 
is not unreasonable to wager that deep down at the 
center “I myself” is “It”—as in “as it was in the be- 
ginning, is now and ever shall be, world without 
end.” 

If this is a hope, or a fervent belief, Krishnamurti 
is right in saying that it should be challenged and 
tested with the question, “Why do you want to be- 
lieve that? Is it because you are afraid of dying, of 
coming to an end? Is this identification with the cos- 
mic Self the last desperate resort of your ego to con- 
tinue its game?” Indeed, if this Supreme Identity is, 
for me, a belief to which I am clinging, I am in total 
self-contradiction. Not only is there no sense in cling- 
ing to what I am; the very act of clinging also implies 
that I do not really know that I am it! Such belief is 
merely doubt dressed up. The final meaning of nega- 
tive theology, of knowing God by unknowing, of the 
abandonment of idols both sensible and conceptual, 
is that ultimate faith is not in or upon anything at all. 
It is complete letting go. Not only is it beyond theol- 
ogy; it is also beyond atheism and nihilism. Such 
letting go cannot be attained. It cannot be acquired 
or developed through perseverance and exercises, ex- 
cept insofar as such efforts prove the impossibility of 
acquiring it. Letting go comes only through despera- 
tion. When you know that it is beyond you—beyond 
your powers of action as beyond your powers of re- 
laxation. When you give up every last trick and de- 


[ 221 } 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


vice for getting it, including this “giving up” as some- 
thing that one might do, say, at ten o'clock tonight. 
That you cannot by any means do it—that IS itl 
That is the mighty self-abandonment which gives 
birth to the stars. 


[ 222 ] 


11. 


12, 


REFERENCES 


. Evelyn Underhill, Worship. Harper. New York, 1936. 


p- 38. 


. From “Five-Finger Exercises” in T. S. Eliot, The 


Complete Poems and Plays, 1909-1950. Harcourt, 
Brace. New York, 1958. p. 93. 


. Shankara, commentary on Kena Upanishad. In René 


Guénon, Man and His Becoming. Luzac. London, 
1945. p. 114. 


. See my Two Hands of God. Braziller. New York, 


1963. pp. 37-41. Plates 6-11. 


. D. T. Suzuki (trans.), Lankavatara Sutra. Routledge. 


London, 1932. p. 223. [Ch. 9, 260.] 


. Heinrich Zimmer, Myths and Symbols in Indian Art 


and Civilization. Pantheon Books. New York, 1946. 
p. 15. 


. St. Thomas, Opusc. lxviii, in libr. Boetii de Hebdom. 
. R. M. French (trans.), The Way of a Pilgrim & the 


Pilgrim Continues His Way. Harper. New York, n.d. 
[1952+]. p. 160. 


. Martin Luther, Werke Allgemeine, Vol. I, p. 105. In 


A. Nygren, Agape and Eros, Part II, Vol. II. London, 
1939. p. 476n. 


. Dom John Chapman, Spiritual Letters. Sheed and 


Ward. London, 1944. p. 145. 

An excellent introduction to ecological problems is 
S. P. R. Charter, Man on Earth. The Tides. Sausalito, 
Cal., 1962. 

“Before the Anaesthetic or A Real Fright” in John 
Betjeman, Selected Poems. John Murray. London, 
1948. p. 95. 


[ 223 ] 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 


18. 


19. 


20. 
21. 
22. 


23. 


24. 
25. 


26. 


27. 


BEYOND THEOLOGY 


“Four Quartets: East Coker, III” in T. S. Eliot, The 
Complete Poems and Plays. pp. 126-7 (See above, 
reference 2. ) 

Dom John Chapman, Spiritual Letters. pp. 143-4. 
(See above, reference 10.) 

“An Eighteenth-Century Calvinistic Hymn” in John 
Betjeman, Continual Dew. John Murray. London, 
1937. P. 29. 

Iulia de Beausobre, Creative Suffering. Dacre Press. 
London, 1940. p. 35. 

Anonymous Monk of the Easten Church, On the In- 
vocation of the Name of Jesus. Fellowship of Ss, 
Alban and Sergius. London, 1953. pp. 17-20. 

For a full discussion of this theme see A. K. Cooma- 
raswamy, “Symplegades” in M. F. Ashley Montagu 
(ed.), Studies Offered in Homage to George Sarton. 
New York, 1947. 

W. O. E. Oesterley and Theodore H. Robinson, He- 
brew Religion. S. P. C. K. London, 1940. Macmillan. 
New York, 1940. pp. 156-7. 

Kena Upanishad, 1.7. 

Quoted in Raynor C. Johnson, Watcher on the Hills. 
Harper. New York, 1959. pp. 84-5. 

Philip Rieff, Freud: The Mind of the Moralist. Viking. 
New York, 1959. p. 154. 

J. A. T. Robinson, Honest to God. SCM Press. Lon- 
don, 1963. 

St. Thomas, Summa Contra Gentiles, I. xiv. 

Robinson, Honest to God. (See above, reference 23.) 
Pp. 130-1. 

“The Mirror of Madmen” in G. K. Chesterton, Col- 
lected Poems. Dodd, Mead & Co. New York, 1944. 
pp. 32778. 

Joseph Needham, Science and Civilization in China, 
Vol. II. Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1956. pp. 89-98. See 
also Walter Pagel, “Religious Motives in the Medical 
Biology of the Seventeenth Century,” Bulletin of the 
(Johns Hopkins) Institute of the History of Medicine, 


1935: PP. 3, 97: 
[ 224 ] 


References 


28. Paul Tillich, The Shaking of the Foundations. Peli- 


can. London, 1962. pp. 63-4. 
2g. Josef Pieper, Leisure: the Basis of Culture. Pantheon, 


New York, 1952. Revised edition, 1963. p. 37. 


[ 225 ] 


INDEX 


Adam 68, 75, 96, 194 

First and Second 84, 88, 

131 

Agape, the 166 
Ahimsa 140 
Anamnesis 145 
Angels 51 
Anglican Church 29, 50n 
Anthropomorphism 26, 214 
Anti-materialism 137 
Apophatic theology 13, 202 
Art, Christian 114 
Asceticism 188 
Athanasian Creed 104-105 
Athanasius, St. 88 
Atman 205, 220 
Atonement 88 
Augustine of Hippo, St. 151n 


Baal-cult 166 
Baptism 179 
Barth, Karl 151 and n 
Basilica 161 
Berdyaev, N. xi 
Betjeman, J. 98, 121 
Bhagavad-Gita 16 
Bible 56, 86, 111, 206 
Bibliolatry 205 
Blake, William 41, 96 
Blood symbol 141 
Body of Christ 90, 109, 140, 
161 
Brahma 21, 48 


Brahman 17n, 23, 157, 205, 
220 
Bread symbol 135, 139 
Buber, Martin 8 
Buddhism xi, 8, 13, 38, 42, 
52, 58, 82, 139, 140, 
177, 205, 208, 220 
Zen 108, 120 
Bultmann, Rudolph 111 


Calvin 149, 151n 
Canterbury 29, 178 
Capuchin cemetery 94 
Cataphatic theology 202 
Catherine of Genoa, St. 123 
Catholicism 50 and n, 138, 
148-9, 151, 175 
Causality 218 
Celibacy 59 
Chapman, Dom John 93, 
119, 120, 177 
Chesterton, G. K. 51, 203 
Church (definition), 90 
Classification 62, 73° 
Clement of Alexandria 27 
Confimnation 178-9 
Consciousness 71, 85, 204, 
220 
attention 39, 62, 64, 160, 
188 
Contemplative prayer 119 
Coomaraswamy, A. K. xi, 93 
Copermican cosmos 37 


[ 227] 


INDEX 


Creation 60 

Crisis, theology of 151 

Cross, Way if 116 

Crucifixion 81, 88, 109, 111, 
113, 116, 121, 131 


Damnation, everlasting xil, 
19, 22, 33, 81, 86, 129, 
198, 201 

Dante 54, 94, 193, 209 

Death 42, 47, 64, 65, 97, 
195, 208 

De Chardin, T. 50 

D mythologization 111 

De Nobili, Robert 16 

Depth, dimension of 210 

Devil 32, 52, 53, 72, 128, 
209 

Didache 146 

Differentiation, value of 17 

Dionysius, St. 13 

Discipline 101-2 

Disgust 174 

Double-bind 95, 102, 116, 
131, 178, 189 

Drama 7, 17, 32, 72, 199 


Eastern Orthodox Church 
30, 50n 

Eckhart 50, 119, 134, 176, 
202 

Ecology 9, 97, 99 

Ecstasy 41 

Edwards, Jonathan 34 

Ego 9, 39, 46, 61, 78, 100, 
102, 121, 133, 153, 158, 
178, 204, 217 

Eliot, T. S. 18, 118-9 

Erigena 50, 176, 202 

Eroticism 187 

Esotericism 175, 186-7 

Eternal life 144 

Eucharist 138, 139 

Everlastingness 21 

Evil, problem of xii, 32, 132, 
213 

Ezra 152 


" Faith ch. iv, 110 


Fall, the 64, 68, 75, 84-5, 
95, 96, 116, 208 

Father, God the 73, 89, 95 

Field theory 213, 219, 220 

Flower symbol 192 

Fool for Christ 132 

Forgiveness 51 

Freud, S. 183, 190 

Fundamentalism 206 


Gambling 19 

Game rules 206, 209 

Gnosticism 177 

Godmanhood xi, 152, 160 

Grace 53, 60, 90, 92,94, 101 

Graham, Dom Aelred 120 

Graham, Billy 107-8 

Grail, Holy 30, 180 

Gregorian chant 164 

Groddeck, G. 118 

Ground, the Divine 215 

Guilt 64, 77, 81, 85, 116, 
150, 189 

Guru 53, 68 


Heaven 40 

Herbert, George 120 

Heresy 170, 191 and n 

Hinduism xi, xi, 7, 8, 16, 
28, 48, 52, 53, 58, 65, 138, 
140, 153, 177, 193, 197; 
205, 212, 220 

Historicism 14, 20, 112, 179 

Holiness 51, 92, 132 

Holy Communion 82, 138, 
144, 165, 179 (see also 
Mass ) 

Holy Spirit 59 

Honest to God 201 

Humor 6, 54, 79, 93, 211 

Hypostasis go 


Idealism, subjective 220 

Identity 4, 10, 39, 46, 64, 
100, 122, 131, 153, 197; 
204, 217, 221 


[ 228 ] 


Index 


Idolatry 27, 108 

Immortality 47 

Impulse, living by 61, 63 

Incarnation xii, 14, 15, 80, 

85, 88, 97, 104, 152, 153 

creation as 58 

Inquisition 191 

Isaiah II 87, 111-2, 112n, 
123 

Ishtar 166 


Jansenism 151 and n 
Jesus 31, 70, 104, 115 
divinity of xi, 14, 15, 88, 
100, 111-2, 112n 
Judaism 15, 58, 86, 91, 115 
and n, 138, 142, 151, 205 
Juggler, the Cosmic 20 


Kabir 154 

Kali yuga 48 

Kalpa 21, 48 

Karma 38 

Kenosis 89, 143, 146 
Keyserling, H. von 182-3 
King of kings image 126 
Knowing 3, 25, 64, 122 
Korzybski, Alfred 62 
Krishna 193 
Krishnamurti, J. 221 


Language 57, 61 

Lamb symbol 142, 146 

Last Judgment 97, 98 

Last Supper 113, 141, 146 

Laughter 54 

Law of Moses 66, 86, 91, 92, 
94, 97 

Laws of nature 56, 200 

Leo, St. 140 

Lethe 146 

Lila 17, 33, 197 (see also 
Play) 

Liturgical Movement 162 

Logos 51, 61, 193 

Love 37-8 


Luke, St. 145 
Luther 27n, 87, 110, 149 


Manhood, substance of 105 
Mantra 163 


_ Margaret Mary Alacoque, St. 


174 

Mark Podvizhnik, St. 51 

Mary the Virgin, St. 193 

Masochism, spiritual 120, 
129 


Mass 109, 113, 139, 141, 


146, 161 
Latin and vernacular 162 
Masturbation 180 
Materialism 136, 153, 155 
Mathematics 36 
Matrimony, Holy 165, 171, 
190 
Maya 17, 19, 20, 31, 33, 34, 
39, 44, 48, 68, 75, 139, 
143, 146, 153, 185, 193, 
198 
Mechanism 200, 214, 216 
Messiah 111, 112n 
Metaphor 202 
Metatheology xi, 15, 25, 72, 
152, 217 
Miller, Henry 137 
Miracles 112 
Monotony 42 
Moral theology 171, 184 
Morality 129 
Mystical experience 13, 49, 
158, 200, 218 
diabolical 34-5 
Jesus and 112 and n 
Mysticism 156, 178 
Myth, 9, 13-4, 26, 48, 84, 
152, 199 


Nagarjuna 13 

Nature 58, 60, 171. 
Needham, Joseph 205n 
Nefesh 16 

Neo-orthodoxy 151 and n 
New Covenant 142 


[ 229 ] 


INDEX 


Nicolas Cusanus 50, 201 
Notation 62 


Omnipotence 25 

Opposites, pairs of 41 

Order 43, 49, 56 

Organism/environment 9, 
162, 189 

Origen 27, 176 

Otherness 44 


Pantheism, 7, 128, 217, 220 

Paradise 4, 39, 40, 79, 157 

Parasceve 142 

Parousia 159 

Passover 142 

Patmore, Coventry 30 

Paul, St. 66, 86, 88, 91, 92, 
101, 123, 145 

Penance, Sacrament of 149 
and n 

Person(ality) 5, 46, 90, 105, 
115, 122, 127, 204 

Pharisee and publican 118 

Pharisees 103 

Philokalia 177 

Pieper, Josef 216n 

Play 10, 33, 36, 41, 50, 52, 
72, 132, 161, 185, 198, 
207-8 (see also Lila) 

Poetry 15 

Polarity 41 

Poulain, A. 177 

Pralaya 21 

Prayer 58-9 

Predestination 149 

Priapism 169 

Pride 75-6 

Priesthood 59 

Prophets 86, 87 

Protestantism 30-31, 148, 
205 

Psychoanalysis 11 

Ptolemaic cosmos 37, 209 


Quakers 59, 83 
Quietism 121 


Ramakrishna 19 

Randomness 43 

Reformation, the 148, 152 

Reincarnation 38, 44 

Resurrection 82, 88, 111, 
112, 176 

Rhythm 41 

Rieff, Philip 190 

Riemann, B. 36 

Ritual 138, 161, 165 

Ruach Adonai 16, 68 

Russian Orthodoxy 132 

Ruysbroeck 23 


Sabbath 142 

Sacraments 106 

Sacred Heart 174 

Sado-masochism 190 

Salvation 81, 106 

Science 60, 199 

Scientism 216 

Secularism 34 

Self, the 16, 20, 39, 100, 
121-2, 131, 157, 194, 195; 
197, 217, 221 

Seriousness 52 

Serpent symbol 75 

Sexual ambivalence 187 

Sexuality 75, 83, 84, 166, ch. 


vu 

Shakti 193 

Shankara 13, 23 

Shiva 33, 75, 193 

Sign 57 

Sin 51, 64 
conviction of g2, 149-50 
original 75> 81, 84-5, 87, 

96 


Son, God the 56, 73, 88, 89, 
123 

Song of Songs 172-3 

Sophia 193 

Soul 7, 16, 198, 213 

Space 41, 42 

Spiritual power 59 

Suffering 37-8, 65 


[ 230 ] 


Index 


Suffering Servant, the 87, 
112n 

Sufism 123 

Symbols 57, 62 

Systems theory 219 


Tantrism 169, 172 

Tat tvam asi 7, 16, 129, 213 

Tathagata 215 

Technology 60, 85, 99, 155 

Temple, William 127, 138 

Temporal power 59 

Ten Commandments 86, 91 

Theism, critique of 212 

Thomas Aquinas, St. 13, 50, 
58, 131, 201 

Tillich, Paul 210-11 

Time 20-1, 48-9 

Traditionalists xi 

Transfiguration 60, 158 

Transubstantiation 140, 144, 
148 : 

Tree of Knowledge 69, 75 

Trinity, Holy 18, 59, 164 


Unconscious, the 43 
Underhill, Evelyn 14 


Unknowing 157, 221 
Upanishads 16 
Upaya 52, 68, 87, 92, 94 


Varda, Jean xin 

Vedanta xii, 82 (see also 
Hinduism ) 

Vibration 41 

Virgin Birth 81, 82, 88, 111, 
176 

Von Bertelannfy, 
219 


Ludwig 


Will 61, 106 

Wine 135, 139 

Wisdom (Sophia) 50-1, 193 
Woolwich, Bishop of 201, 


209 
Word 55, 66 (see also Logos) 
Work 41 

curse of 85, 208, 216n 
Worship 58-9, 138, 161, 164 


YHVH 174 
Yuga 48-9 


Zimmer, Heinrich 49n 


[ 231 ] 


ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


Alan Watts, who held both a master’s degree in 
theology and a doctorate of divinity, has earned the 
reputation of being one of the most original and 
“unrutted” philosophers of the century. He is best 
known as an interpreter of Zen Buddhism in par- 
ticular, and of Indian and Chinese philosophy in 
general. He was the author of more than twenty books 
on the philosophy and psychology of religion, in- 
cluding (in Vintage Books) Behold the Spirit; The 
Book; Does It Matter?; The Joyous Cosmology; Na- 
ture, Man and Woman, The Supreme Identity; The 
Way of Zen; The Wisdom of Insecurity; This Is It; 
and Cloud Hidden, Whereabouts Unknown. He died 
in 1973. 


